SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

November, 1983

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .............................................
First District - Boston .......

..............

i

......................................

Second District - New York ........................................ II-1
Third District - Philadelphia ..................................... III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland ..........................

.........

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ....................................... V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta ..................................

....VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ....................................

VII-

Eighth District - St. Louis ..................................... VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis .................................... IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City ...................
Eleventh District - Dallas

.................. X-

......................................

XI-

Twelfth District - San Francisco .............................. XII-1

SUMMARY*

Overview
Economic expansion continued through the early fall in all Federal
Reserve districts.

Generally increasing strength is reported in retail sales,

as consumer confidence improves along with income and employment.

Retailers

in most districts are anticipating excellent Christmas season sales.
Manufacturing activity is growing at a moderate pace, but only
limited improvement is reported for capital goods industries.
generally reported to be weaker.

House sales are

Crop production was restricted by drought

and acreage reductions, but farm income is being supported by higher prices
and federal farm programs.

Nearly all districts report increasing bank loan

demand, while reports on deposit growth are mixed.
Consumer Spending
Continuing and generally increasing strength in retail sales is
reported in all 12 Federal Reserve districts.

Some districts, such as

Cleveland and Kansas City, mentioned the widespread or broad-based nature of
sales increases.

Many other districts noted that sales were especially good

for apparel, and for home furnishings and other household items.

New

automobile sales were also reported as a source of strength in consumer
spending.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

In addition to growth in income and employment, most-often-mentioned

sources of the strength in consumption were a turn to more favorable weather
conditions and a significant improvement in consumer confidence.

While

Philadelphia and St. Louis reported heavy promotional activities by retailers,
Atlanta noted a strong rise in sales with negligible sales promotions.

Retailers in most districts appear optimistic about sales in the fourth
quarter, and are reported to anticipate excellent Christmas season sales.
Retail inventories, described as generally satisfactory to a little
high, are apparently not regarded as troublesome in the light of sales
expectations.

Chicago notes, however, that some retail inventories are tight

enough to lead to sales losses if the Christmas season is as strong as
expected.

Industrial Sector
Overall manufacturing activity continues to grow at a moderate pace
according to most district reports.

Gains in production and orders are

generally reflected in reports of increases in employment and length of work
week, though Boston reports a cautious recalling of production workers only
and San Francisco notes weak manufacturing employment growth in its district.
Manufacturers' inventories are generally reported as stable to accumulating
somewhat, and appear to be generally regarded as satisfactory.

Prices in the

manufacturing sector are reported as ranging from stable to increasing
moderately.
Cleveland and Chicago note that steel orders are continuing to rise,
but emphasize differences among types of steel products.

Cleveland notes the

most improvement in demand for flat-rolled steel, while Chicago reports demand

iii

concentrated in lighter products with plates and structurals very slow.

Cleveland notes some increased demand for steel from capital goods producers.
Both Chicago and Cleveland report only limited improvement in their districts'
capital goods industries.
Construction
Although there may be mixed results within a given district,
residential construction activity is reported by most districts as down from
earlier this year.

Clear exceptions are New York, which reports "Homebuilders

have been quite busy and expect to remain so over the next few months," and
St. Louis, which notes that "construction of homes... continued at a rapid
pace."

House sales are generally reported to be down, except in the Atlanta

district where a recent revival is attributed to the increasing popularity of
adjustable rate mortgages.

In the Chicago district, however, variable rate

mortgages are reported to be "shunned by most home buyers."

Several districts

report increases in nonresidential construction activity, and New York notes
that some state governments in its area have authorized increased spending on
infrastructure restoration.
Agriculture
Drought and reduced acreage cut crop production in a number of
districts, but farm income is being supported by higher product prices and
federal farm programs.
of farm enterprise.

Results varied according to geographical area and type

For example, Minneapolis reports a good year for soybean

farmers in its district, while Atlanta notes that producers of peanuts and
tobacco-not covered by the PIK program--sustained heavy income losses because

of the drought.

Livestock farmers and ranchers are feeling the impact of high

feed costs and low livestock prices.

Meat prices may fall in the short run

due to increased marketings, but are expected to rise again next year.
Financial Developments
Nearly all districts reported increasing bank loan demand, although
Atlanta noted slower recent loan activity following "healthy" growth last
summer.

The picture for business loans is somewhat mixed, but they appear to

have been an important part of total loan growth in a number of districts.
Aggressive seeking of new customers by banks was noted by New York, Richmond,
and Philadelphia.

The latter reports that "consumer credit demands have

responded very positively to new marketing efforts."
Reports on deposit growth also vary among districts and by type of
deposit.

Several districts commented on the actions of banks and customers

with regard to the deregulation of time deposits on October 1. New York noted
that many banks and thrift institutions offered "very attractive rates" but
Cleveland reported that its district banks were not aggressive about the new
deposits.

Richmond and Kansas City agreed that there was little effect on

their financial institutions and little response from customers.

San

Francisco saw some significant early growth in new deposit accounts, but does
not expect them to generate substantial inflows of new funds.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Retailers in the First District are enjoying strong sales gains and
more and more manufacturers are participating in the recovery.

Retail

inventories are a little higher than desired but not so high as to be
troublesome.

Manufacturing inventories are in good shape.

Most of the

manufacturers contacted are cautiously recalling production workers.
Despite the pickup in manufacturing activity, the demand for working
capital is said to be unusually low for this stage in a recovery.
Retail
Retailers in the First District reported strong sales growth in
September and for the year to date.

Inventories may be slightly above

plan, but not at levels that cause concern.

Expectations are for

continuation of recent strength at more moderate levels.
Two chains had sales in recent months 15 to 20 percent ahead of
last year, well ahead of their expectations.

Success was attributed to

long term promotional campaigns and more widespread consumer enthusiasm for
shopping.

However, a third merchant reported only 9 percent growth, which

he called disappointing in comparison to recent growth rates of 25 to 40
percent, although "still quite respectable."

Several of those contacted

mentioned that low rates of inflation make these increases real and
therefore even more substantial than they first appear to be.

No specific

products were cited as especially strong or weak, although one retailer
concentrated in soft goods said he believed hard goods were picking up
faster.

However, another reported sales of furniture less strong than

housewares or paper goods.

Sales of a nationwide chain continued to be

stronger in New England than elsewhere.
Two retailers reported inventories above plan, but both said they
were not so high as to be troublesome.

In one case the increase was

partially due to a change in strategy to provide better customer service.
Projected sales growth over the next few months ranges from 8 to 15
percent.

All respondents mentioned that the Christmas season, beginning

soon, will be critical in

determining overall growth and profits.

Manufacturing
Reports from the manufacturing sector are generally encouraging.
In a September survey of purchasing agents, more than 50 percent of the
respondents reported that orders were up from the previous month and more
than 60 percent reported increases in production.

The survey also showed a

majority of respondents with higher employment levels.

Demand appears to

be strongest for automotive, defense and housing-related products; supplies
and other products related to the general level of industrial activity; and
products purchased by the electronics industry.

The recovery also appears

to be filtering down to the capital goods industries; orders and backlogs
have improved and several respondents are looking forward to a good 1984.
Demand remains depressed for materials used in commercial construction, oil
drilling and power plant equipment, and products purchased by the farm
equipment industry.
The strong dollar is hurting export sales and adversely affecting
the dollar-denominated profits of foreign subsidiaries.
particularly a problem for Latin American operations.

The latter is
Several firms noted

that their Latin American subsidiaries appear to be doing well until one

translates back to dollars.

There seems to be some optimism that

conditions are improving in Mexico.

Sales in Europe are much slower than

in the United States, although some manufacturers see an improvement over a
year ago.
Most of the firms contacted are increasing employment, but they are
proceeding very cautiously.

Only direct production workers are being

recalled, no indirect or office personnel.

The one major exception is a

firm which is aggressively recruiting engineers to support a large research
initiative.
Inventories are generally in good shape.

Prices are holding

steady, except for the price of foreign steel which is increasing.
Manufacturers seem confident that the recovery will continue through 1984.
Commercial Banking
There is considerable turmoil in the First District banking
industry as banks compete to take advantage of recent legislation
permitting interstate mergers and acquisitions within the region.

Consumer

loan demand is strong but commercial loan demand is sluggish for this stage
in the recovery.
have eroded.

The competition for commercial loans is keen and margins

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District continued to show
improvement in recent weeks.
reported

in

late

In comparison to the mixed picture we

summer,

almost

all

Second

indicators now appear to be headed upward.
picked up sharply in
hot weather ended.
remain so
leasing

over

economic

Department store sales

late September when a long period of unusually
Homebuilders have been quite busy and expect to

the next

activity

District

was

few months.

maintained

in

The

brisk pace

New

Jersey

of

and

office

southern

Connecticut and has begun to spread into midtown Manhattan as well.
The

New

Jersey

increased

and

expenditures

Connecticut
on

legislatures

upgrading

roads and

have

authorized

bridges,

and

New

Yorkers will vote on an infrastructure bond referendum in November.
The region's manufacturing activity expanded further, but employment
gains are still slow.

On the financial side, business loan demand

is beginning to pick up.
Consumer Spending
The
shown some
that

pace of retail

spending

in

the

improvement in recent weeks.

Most

hot weather

first

the unusually

depressed sales.

in

the

Second District
respondents
half

of

has

stated

September

However, after the temperature cooled, widespread

sharp gains were registered towards the end of the month.

A New

York State chain, for example, noted overall September sales showed
no improvement over the year-ago level, but activity in the final

II-2

week of the month was seven percent above the corresponding 1982
Another

figure.

retailer

large

a

with

sales

lower-than-planned

increase of five percent in September had a 15 percent gain in early

October, albeit with the help of some special promotions.

Only one

merchant reported a weakening of sales in October, citing

the fact

that the weather had not yet been cold enough to spur sales of warm
Inventories were

clothing.

satisfactory

reported at

levels

only one retailer mentioning that they may be a little high.

with
Sales

at most stores remained at or above planned levels, and the outlook
for the fourth quarter generally is optimistic.
Construction and Real Estate

Residential

construction

throughout the District

and

activity

strong

remained

builders have contracts which should

keep them busy into the spring.

After that, however, the outlook is

October is typically the time when prospective buyers

uncertain.

begin looking for homes to be completed the next summer.

However,

while weekend traffic has picked up in New Jersey, demand thus far
has been sluggish in much of New York.
cited

as

postponed

a

factor.

seeking

In

addition,

contracts

for

Higher mortgage rates were

some
summer

New York
delivery

builders

have

because

of

uncertainty about rising costs of materials and labor availability.
The brisk pace of nonresidential real estate activity was
maintained in recent weeks.

A high volume of leasing transactions

continued in New Jersey, southern Connecticut and various New York
City suburban areas.

Our contacts also noted a definite upswing in

II-3

midtown

Manhattan

as

earlier

negotiations

for

space

are

now

culminating in actual commitments.
State

upgrading

of

governments

roads,

in

the

District

bridges

and

public

plan

a

substantial

transportation.

The

legislatures of New Jersey and Connecticut have already increased
bonding authority for improving transportation infrastructure.

New

Yorkers will vote in early November on a referendum for a $1.25
billion

debt

issue,

but

even

if

that

fails,

the

pace

of

infrastructure renovation will increase in New York.
Business Activity
Business activity continued to expand in the manufacturing
sector, but at a generally moderate pace.

The upturn at automotive

manufacturers and suppliers has been maintained, but a producer of
truck engines reported some

temporary difficulty obtaining parts.

Manufacturers of products such as electrical equipment and optical
supplies have already begun a modest hiring of new employees.

Other

firms anticipate additional hiring when plant expansions which are
currently underway are

completed.

Several high technology

firms

announced plans

to expand and ground was recently broken on Long

Island

high-tech

for

a

industrial

park.

Many

manufacturers

continued a cautious inventory policy, but for the first time in
several months some firms expressed a willingness to begin inventory
accumulation.

A more positive attitude about the continuation of

the recovery was noted throughout most of the District.

II-4

Unemployment

rates

have

recently

fallen

throughout

the

region, but remain above year-ago levels in some areas.
Financial Developments
Second District banks report a pickup in business lending
in recent weeks.
new customers.

Some banks have become more aggressive in seeking
In addition, demand has also

been increasing

as

business financing needs begin to rise and interest rates offered on
loans

remain

relatively

flat.

Business

lending

appears

to

be

comparatively stronger outside the immediate New York City area.
Mortgage

lending

seems

to

be

flat,

but

banks

offering

particularly competitive rates have been able to raise their market
shares.
The

deregulation

of

most

consumer

time

deposits

on

October 1 resulted in many banks and thrifts institutions in New
York City offering very attractive rates, particularily on six-month
certificates where rates were offered as high as 11 percent.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - P HILADELP HIA
Indications from the Third District in October are that the regional economy
is expanding. Local manufacturing conditions have improved again, and retail sales have
pushed even higher.

In the financial sector, loan volume has improved recently, but it

remains mixed. In addition, a dip in mortgage rates has halted the decline in activity in
the local housing market.
Third District contacts expect the expansion to continue over the next six
months.

More gains for area industry are expected and substantial consumer spending

growth is projected. Loan activity is also likely to gain strength by April.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Activity in the Third District housing market has held fairly steady since
early September.

Although sales are

still better than a year ago, they

remain

disappointingly below the pace set this past spring. The steadying influence in, current
sales activity has been a slight dip in mortgage rates, but brokers indicate that many
buyers are hesitant to commit now in anticipation of further declines in rates in the near
future. Traffic through new and older homes is reported to be down, and, because of the
earlier let up in sales, new starts are very slow.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers responding to the October Business Outlook Survey report that
Third District industrial activity is entering the fourth quarter of 1983 with much the
same strength as shown in the previous three quarters of the year. About 45 percent of
participating executives indicate that overall business conditions have improved in
October, and only a very small number of respondents report any drop-off since
September. New orders and shipments continue to display widespread growth in October,
and employment gains remain solid. Many manufacturers say they have added to factory

III-2

payrolls or lengthened working hours since September.

Local producers do, however,

report another marginal decline in inventories this month.
Looking ahead,
expected

general manufacturing

activity in the Third District is

to continue to expand over the next six months, but, as in September,

respondent's forecasts seem to predict a moderation of the recovery. Roughly two thirds
of the businessmen polled forecast better conditions within six months; that is about the
same as a month ago, but noticeably less than earlier in the year. Nevertheless, strong
gains in new orders and shipments are likely to continue and some inventory growth is
projected.

Manufacturers are planning to hire more workers and to expand the average

workweek, but their expenditures for plant and equipment are expected to remain
relatively weak.
Industrial prices continue to reflect the rapid expansion of manufacturing
activity.

The prices of both inputs and final products have risen again in October, and

further escalation is projected over the next six months. More than three quarters of the
participating manufacturers foresee higher raw materials costs by next spring and one
half expect to up their own products' prices over that time.
RETAIL
Department store sales in the Third District have expanded more rapidly in
the last six weeks than merchants had anticipated. According to local retailers, buoyant
consumer attitudes, very favorable weather conditions and heavy promotional activity
have pushed year-over-year sales gains even higher, reaching the mid-teens at most area
stores.

Merchants say apparel, home furnishings and personal computers are among the

big movers in October.

In spite of such hefty sales growth and a low inflation rate,

however, many store owners report that profit margins have remained very slim. They
attribute the squeeze to the costs associated with heavy reliance on promotional activity
in generating current sales.

III-3

Because of the current surge in activity, local retailers have become less
cautious about business in the next six months.

They are now forecasting gains of

between 6 percent and 9 percent over healthy year-earlier levels for spring 1984. If, as
expected, prices rise only slightly, substantial real gains for area merchants are likely.
The outlook for consumer spending is apparently robust enough to warrant
further accumulation of retail inventories. Stocks of consumer goods, which have grown
in recent weeks to levels about 10 percent higher than a year ago, are expected to swell
even more by April.
FINANCIAL
Loan activity at Third District banks has been on the upswing in October.
Local bankers report that C&I loan demand is finally showing some signs of breaking out
of its slump. They indicate, however, that further improvement in the cash flow of many
area businesses has again limited the growth of commercial demand. The result is that,
while slightly better than a month ago, business loan volume, now ranging from 8 percent
below to 20 percent above a year ago, remains mixed. On the other hand, area banks are
still reaping the benefits of their expanded push in retail lending. Lenders say that, with
interest rates relatively steady and the general economy improving rapidly, consumer
credit demands have responded very positively to new marketing efforts. As a result,
retail loan volume in October is between 14 percent and 30 percent ahead on a yearover-year basis, according to contacts.
Third District bankers are projecting even better business for the next six
months.

By April, more substantial gains in C&I lending are anticipated as businesses

begin to look more and more toward external sources for new financing.

Bankers also

plan to keep the push on consumer loans and expect to see further growth by spring.

III-4

The prime rate at major banks in the Third District is unchanged at 11
percent in October.

Financial contacts do not foresee any substantial pressures pushing

rates either up or down in the next six months.

They expect that Fed policy will

counterbalance expanding private credit demands and keep interest rates flat into early
1984.

Contacts noted, however,

that there

is still alot of uncertainty over the

international debt situation, and that poses a threat to continued stability in rates.
Deposit flows have turned mixed in October, according to local bankers.
Demand deposits have slipped below year-earlier levels for the first time in quite awhile,
but time deposits remain strong.

Although growth in the deregulated accounts has

settled down, time and savings balances are now as much as 32 percent ahead of a year
ago.

IV-1
Fourth District - Cleveland

Summary.

Improvement in labor market conditions in the Fourth

District plateaued in September and unemployment remains high.
are improving.

Retail sales

Orders, production, and shipments continue to rise for

District manufacturers.

Demand for steel continues to increase.

New orders

for single-family homes slowed in September because of high interest rates.
Commercial and industrial loan demand increased at commercial banks while
deposit growth stopped.
District Labor Market Conditions.

Improvement in labor market

conditions stalled in September in this District, and high unemployment
continues.

In Ohio, nonagricultural wage and salary employment (nsa) rose

1.8% in September, but total employment fell, unemployment rose, and the
unemployment rate (nsa) increased to 11.1% from 10.8% in August.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate is still below the 12.3% level of
September 1982.

Recovery in District employment has been similar to past

recoveries but still lags the national recovery in both manufacturing and
non-manufacturing.
Food Prices.

A national food retailer expects food price increases in

1984 in a 4-1/2% to 5-1/2% range.

Upward pressures on grain prices from the

drought and PIK programs are being mitigated by huge carryover of grains from
the previous year, and by the dollar's high foreign exchange rate that has
hampered grain exports.

He expects only moderate price increases for fresh

fruits and vegetables, dairy products, and bakery goods.

He expects meat

prices to decline in this year's fourth quarter but to rise by next year's
final quarter.
Retail Sales.

District retailers once again report broad-based sales

gains in September and early October, after a rather unimpressive sales pace

IV-2
in August.

General merchandise sales by major Fourth District retailers in

September were 9% to 12% above year-earlier levels, as they have been during
most of 1983.

Sales of apparel and household furnishings were particularly

strong in recent months.

Sales by District automobile dealers were also well

above year-earlier levels, and have generally accelerated from August as lean
inventories eased with 1984 model deliveries.

Sales of used-cars and import
Most retailers contacted

autos continue to suffer from lack of availability.

expressed optimism over sales prospects for the fourth quarter.
District manufacturing activity continued to expand in

Manufacturing.
September.

A survey of purchasing manufacturers in the Cleveland area reveals

production and new orders continued their strong increases in September.
Inventories of raw materials and finished goods rose slightly, while
employment fell slightly, the first decline since March.

Moderate price

increases were reported.
A survey of purchasing managers in the Cincinnati area indicated
production, new orders, and backlogs rose in September at an increasing pace.
Employment rose

Inventories of finished goods ceased their decline.
substantially.

Price increases continue at the same moderate pace as in

August.
This Bank's survey of Fourth District manufacturers shows shipments,
new orders, and backlogs expanded in September and are expected to increase in
October.

Inventories and prices paid are stable.

Employment rose a bit in

September and is expected to increase substantially in October.
A producer of machine tools reports orders continue to rise, but are
still at a low level.

The industry's order level hit bottom in third quarter

1982 at only 50% of the previous recession's low.

Backlogs are growing, but

from a very low level, and the firm is still operating at well below 50% of

IV-3

capacity and plans very little capital spending.

The firm expects a minimal

profit in 1984 and a good profit in 1985.
A producer of components for capital equipment reports a rising trend
of orders from customers in various sectors of the economy.

Backlogs are

rising, as are production, employment and average hours worked.
increasing its capital spending .

The firm is

Despite the increase in demand, list prices

of its products remain flat, although discounts disappeared in spring and
early summer.

The firm reports prices rising for its purchases of corrugated

boxes and aluminum ingots.
A tire producer reports shipments are up strongly and are expected to
rise further.

Inventories are being built in anticipation of growing demand.

Employment is rising at the plant level but not at the white collar level.
There has been no acceleration of cost increases, and product prices are
rising at about the retail inflation rate.

Capital spending is for cost

reduction but not new capacity in tire production.
Steel.

New orders for steel continue to rise.

Demand improvements

are primarily for flat-rolled steel but are spreading to bars and even pipe,
which has been depressed by excessive inventories.

Most demand is from

producers of consumer goods, but improvement is starting to come from
producers of business capital equipment and agricultural equipment, and from
the construction industry.

Some users are building inventory.

Consequently,

steel production and shipments are expected to continue rising in the fourth
quarter.

Some pressure on short-run production capability is being felt in

certain product lines.

Immediate capability to produce steel is less than

theoretical capacity because the cash squeeze has led to low inventories and
reduced maintenance of mills.

Cash flow is expected to improve substantially

this quarter, so that producers will be less willing to price at or below cost
as they have in recent quarters.

IV-4

Construction Activity.

Builders of single-family homes report little

change in construction activity from September as new orders continue to
decline.

Although the third quarter is typically a slow quarter for new

orders, this year's third quarter new orders were off by about 15% from last
year.

Nevertheless, builders report their earnings are stronger for this

third quarter than a year earlier because they are still working to complete
the order backlog accumulated this past Spring.

Realtors attribute the

September decline in sales to high mortgage rates.

The only bright spot in

the housing sector, according to builders and realtors, is an increase in
traffic - interested buyers - which began near the end of September, and which
may eventually result in actual orders and sales.

Vacancy rates in commercial

buildings remain extremely high with declines contingent on an improved local
economy.

Despite this high vacancy rate, construction is continuing on

several office building projects throughout the District.
Commercial Banking.

Banks in the Fourth District reduced their

holdings of U.S. Treasury securities, state and local government securities
and federal funds in recent weeks.

An increase in loan demand, in conjunction

with a marked slowdown in deposit growth, may explain the reduction in bank
investments.

Virtually all of the increase in loan volume at district banks

was in the commercial and industrial loan category.
deposits were essentially flat.

All categories of

Banks in the District generally have not been

aggressive about the new deregulated time deposits and hence have not
experienced much shifting of deposits and have not attracted new deposits.

COMMENTARY ON ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Economic expansion is continuing across a broad front in the Fifth
District.

In the manufacturing sector shipments and new orders have risen

sharply in recent weeks, while employment and weekly hours have
pace.

almost kept

Inventories are reported to be unchanged and are now nearly in line

with desired levels.

Retail sales also strengthened in recent weeks as both

big ticket items and non-durables made significant gains.

The consensus

around the District appears to be that housing activity has hit a plateau and
should hold near present levels, on balance, until spring.

At the same time,

commercial and industrial construction is expected to pick up slightly by year
end.

Expectations are also positive elsewhere, and overwhelmingly so among

manufacturers.

Manufacturing
Among District manufacturers, shipments and new orders were up
significantly from last month although order backlogs were down.

Inventories

showed virtually no change, either at the finished goods or materials level.
Currently stocks are generally considered appropriate.

Manufacturing employ-

ment and, particularly, the average work week, continued their month-to-month
gains.

There is still some support for the view that current plant and

equipment capacity is inadequate and that existing expansion plans should be
enlarged.

There continue to be only scattered reports of price increases.

A

substantial majority of our contacts report stable prices, including employee
compensation, in recent weeks.

V-2

Widespread optimism is still the prevailing attitude among District
manufacturers.

A large majority now foresee continued economic expansion

nationally and in their respective localities and markets over the next two
quarters.

Almost none believes that activity will slow over that period.

Consumer Spending
Retailers also continue to report expanding activity in most areas
and product lines.

Widespread gains in sales are getting roughly proportional

support from big ticket items.

The brief slowing in durable goods reported

earlier in the fall is now attributed to seasonal or supply conditions in the
automobile sector where activity is once more reported buoyant.

Also, retail

inventories are continuing to accumulate rapidly, but without generating any
particular concern among retailers.

The number and size of outlets is also

generally considered appropriate.
District retailers, while still optimistic, continue to trim their
expectations.

The most commonly held view at this time is that the level of

activity will be little changed over the next six months, but no respondent
expects the level to decline in that period.

Housing and Construction
Housing activity remains something of a mixed bag looking across
parts of the District.

The evidence, however is that in most areas this

activity has regained the levels of mid-summer.

In addition, the most common

expectation is that these levels of activity will be sustained for sometime to
come, at least apart from seasonal influences.

There is little sense that any

problem, even potentially, is posed by big current rates of accumulation of

V-3

new, unsold housing units.

There is very little mention of mortgage rates

these days.
Commercial and industrial construction activity is still picking up
somewhat, but new activity is hardly robust.
tations are generally positive.

Once again, however, expec-

Most respondents foresee continued modest

gains in C&I construction activity in coming months.

It should be noted,

though, that office space remains in excess in some metropolitan areas.

Banking and Finance
Financial institutions have apparently tried very hard to expand
loans recently.

Several respondents have suggested the overall credit quality

of their portfolios has declined as a result of their having sought ever wider
circles of borrowers.

At least partly as a result of these conditions in the

loan markets, recent steps in the deregulation of deposits appear to have had
little effect on either institutions or their customers.

The most widely

expected effect, judging from comments from around the District, is a longer
term restructuring of financial institutions' liabilities.
expectation, however, of any significant short term changes.

There is almost no

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The southeastern economy is showing renewed strength.
most areas and industries continue to strengthen.
manufactured goods is increasing.

Labor markets in

Demand for durable and nondurable

Retail sales in early autumn appear to be sustaining

the momentum attained in late summer, and merchants foresee an excellent holiday
season.

Housing sales, aided by easing mortgage rates, pent-up demand, enhanced

variable-rate mortgages, and government bonds, have revived somewhat after slowing
in August and September.

Deposit growth accelerated in September after rising modestly

during the summer, but the rate of increase in loans, particularly to businesses, slowed
substantially after several months of healthy growth.
continued to expand.

Consumer lending, however,

The tourist trade overall remains ahead of last year, but South

Florida, middle and east Tennessee, and New Orleans have yet to enjoy significant
improvement.

Drought and reduced acreage have cut farm production and sharply

curtailed business volume for farm-related businesses, but most farmers should fare
better than in 1982 because of the Payment-in-Kind (PIK) program.
Employment and Industry.

Employment is rising in a variety of industries,

and jobless rates have fallen significantly in most states.

After a long period of

weakness, Florida's phosphate industry is recalling furloughed workers in response to
apparent stockpiling by farmers who anticipate fertilizer shortages because of sharply
increased crop plantings next year. Textile employment has been growing by a moderate
but steady pace, and hours and earnings in the industry are up sharply from last year.
Carpet shipments from Georgia mills have been quite strong.
further declines in Georgia's unemployment.

These trends portend

Alabama respondents, expecting recovery

to stimulate the coal industry, believe that many closed mines will reopen soon.
Huntsville's high-technology manufacturing base is expanding rapidly:

two computer

VI-2

companies plan to hire a total of 1,500 workers in the near future.

Automobile assembly

plants in Georgia are recalling workers, and two new auto parts plants will soon open
in Tennessee.

The aluminum industry's resurgence has sparked demand for refining and

smelting products, thereby stimulating Louisiana's chemical industry.
Consumer Spending. Consumer spending appears to be maintaining the growth
evidenced by August taxable sales, which were more than 10 percent ahead of August
1982.

According to many retailers, September and early October sales exceeded last

year's levels and surpassed many retailers' projections.

Moreover, unlike last year,

promotional sales are playing a negligible role in current activity.

Some merchants in

Atlanta and north Florida report strong sales and increased profit margins on appliances
and electronics items.

However, most retailers indicate that the strong showing of

fall clothing and back-to-school merchandise accounts for much of the recent surge in
sales.

Merchants anticipate an excellent holiday season.

Despite the reported scarcity

of new vehicles at dealerships, recent car sales figures continue to exceed 1982 levels.
Construction. Housing sales, which fell in August when conventional mortgage
rates approached 14 percent, rose modestly in September.
and stability in the FHA/VA rate helped rekindle sales.

Easing of conventional rates
Realtors cite pent-up demand

and buyer adjustment to higher interest rates as other factors in the quick revival of
housing sales.

Adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) are becoming more popular because

many potential purchasers are unable to qualify for conventional loans at the current
rate and since lenders have incorporated rate ceilings into ARMs, thereby reducing the
risk to buyers.

In Knoxville,

Miami, and Mobile, ARM s have recently outpaced

conventional loans, according to several realtors surveyed.

Home buyers in Alabama

and Knox County, Tennessee, have been aided by special issues of local government
bonds from which proceeds were dedicated to financing housing.
announced a similar measure to assist Jacksonville residents.

Florida recently

VI-3
Commercial construction is on the rise for the third consecutive month.
Nashville and Atlanta lead the Southeast in the development of new commercial projects.
Realtors in those cities expect a continued strong economy to facilitate corporate
relocations and prevent a potential glut of office space.
Financial Services.

After growing slowly in July and August, deposits at

thrifts and large banks escalated sharply in September.

Large denomination, or jumbo,

savings accounts of more than $100,000 sustained the strong performance of August
and, with 2 1/2-year small savers certificates, accounted for most of the growth in
savings capital at S&Ls.

Time deposits and jumbo CDs contributed the largest shares

to September's deposit gains at banks.

In contrast, loan activity at large southeastern

banks slowed significantly in September after advancing throughout the summer. Business
lending, which failed to register a gain from August to September, was the primary
source of this deceleration.

However, consumer lending increased in September for

the seventh consecutive month.
A money center bank is backing Florida legislation to allow out-of-state
financial institutions to establish de novo operations in the state, thereby permitting
out-of-state banks to enter the market without acquiring existing institutions.

The

proposal is a response to a legislative initiative by Florida bankers to limit out-of-state
banking to institutions from regional states with similar reciprocal agreements.
Tourism.

The industry is entering its traditionally slow fall season after a

summer that proved to be generally positive, except in south Florida, middle and east
Tennessee, and New Orleans.

Hotels and motels increased revenues in August even

though occupancy levels were below comparable 1982 levels in many District cities.
Hotel construction in central Florida and the apparently rapid absorption of expensive
resort properties along Florida's north Atlantic coast augur continued growth in these
areas.

Attendance at most national park facilities and many private facilities also rose

VI-4
in the late summer relative to last year's figures; early fall attendance at private
attractions that have added new exhibits, rides, or facilities is up over year-ago levels.
However, heavy rains in August reduced visitation to state parks 5.7 percent below
August 1982 levels, and industry representatives indicate that fewer people visited many
older Florida and Tennessee attractions than last year.
Air travel continues to strengthen from 1982 levels at most of the region's
airports.

Moreover, service to smaller cities continues to expand.

is reportedly rising compared to last year in New Orleans.

Convention trade

The planned opening of

more than 12 non-chain restaurants in the city during the remainder of 1983 betokens
great confidence in the future of its tourism and leisure industry.

The expansion and

upgrading of a major hotel in Nashville should boost convention traffic after a sluggish
summer, but contacts there expect little substantial improvement until 1984.

In Miami

Beach, increased business travel has helped offset the effects of fewer convention
delegates.
Agriculture.

As a result of drought and idled acreage, revenue from major

crops this year is projected to be $5.2 billion, or 7 percent

less than in 1982.

The

impact of the PIK program, however, should result in a 23 percent ($307 million)
increase in net revenue above operating costs.

District soybean production has fallen

42 percent from 1982 levels, but higher prices are likely to generate a 3 percent ($17
million) gain in net revenue above operating costs. Soybeans are the prime cash income
crop in the Southeast.

Most other regionally significant crops suffered similar drought-

related productivity declines, and farm-related businesses are experiencing severe losses
in volume and income.

Producers of peanuts and tobacco, two important crops not

covered by the PIK program, sustained especially heavy income losses because of the
drought.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary--A Better Look.

The economic picture in the Seventh District

brightened significantly in the past six weeks.

Morale has improved and more

consumers and businesses are activating deferred spending plans.

The recent

monthly meeting at the Federal Reserve Bank of a group of economists representing leading District companies was the most positive in at least two and one-half
years.

Most of those present reported gains in demand and there were few new

weaknesses.

Also in October, purchasing managers' associations in Chicago and

Milwaukee reported accelerating orders, output, and employment for September.
Leadtimes on new orders have stretched out further, backlogs are rising, and
more price increases are occurring.
the District than the U.S.

Retail sales are strong, but less so in

Inventories, in all but a few lines, remain lean,

but are increasing in line with activity.
concentrated in the lighter grades.

Steel orders are rising, but still

Residential construction plans have been

dampened by high interest rates, probably more here than in the nation, but
commercial construction has shown new strength.
But Far Short of Prosperity.
should be kept in perspective.

The recent improvement in District activity

This region is still generally depressed.

Its

performance gap relative to the nation probably has widened during the recovery.

Despite increased hirings, jobs are still hard to find.

Where increases

in demand for manufactured goods have been substantial, activity usually remains
far below the peaks of the late 1970s.

Agri-business remains very depressed

despite prospective gains in farm income.

The high value of the dollar con-

tinues as a powerful restraint on exports while encouraging imports.

With the

exception of a boom in truck trailers, orders for capital goods produced in

VII- 2

the District have not improved much from the depression levels reached
earlier in late 1982 or earlier this year.
Improvement in Chicago and Milwaukee.

Monthly reports of purchasing

managers in Chicago and Milwaukee have shown a gradual strengthening
trend this year.

In most respects, reports on September developments were

the most vigorous of the year.

Chicago managers found the area's economy

"forging ahead," with "surging production" and "strong backlogs."

The Mil-

waukee report showed "substantial improvement" with the highest proportion
of respondents reporting higher production and new orders than at any time
since the monthly survey was started in 1969.
from a very low base.

This recent improvement was

Activity is still far short of prosperous levels.

Perhaps the most significant aspect of these reports is the evidence that
badly eroded confidence is rebuilding.
Jobs and Income.

Employment has increased gradually in the District

since last December, but probably not as fast as in the nation.

Total pay-

roll employment in the five-state area is still about 9 percent below the
level of 1978-79.

Manufacturing is off about 22 percent.

Hiring intentions

surveys and help-wanted ad volume indicate further gains for the months ahead.
Unemployment rates are down, but welfare rolls are at record levels.

Many

long-term unemployed who have lost medical insurance are relying on public
health programs.
in the 5

to 6

Nonunion employers are planning wage and salary increases
percent range for 1984, less than in past years, but sur-

prisingly large in view of the weak job market.

A number of long strikes are

in progress in manufacturing, with unions resisting concessions on wages,
benefits, and work rules.

Chicago teachers settled a record 15-day strike on

VII-3

October 24, gaining a 5 percent salary boost, for which funds are not yet
available.

Their average salary is about $26,000 with liberal benefits.

They eventually will be paid for all but one of the strike days.
Autos.

Demand for cars strengthened dramatically in the summer and

continues unabated in October.
popular cars.

Dealers speak of "desperate" shortages of

Stock-outs of large, rear-drive, 8-cylinder cars have caused

dealers to quote three-month delivery times--a situation unknown for many
years.

A similar problem exists for some Japanese models.

not foresee this surge in demand for large cars.

Producers did

They are striving to boost

production, hampered by some "quality problems."
Capital Goods.
capacity well into 1984.

Truck trailer producers are expected to operate at
Mostly, this reflects the new size limits, but

analysts believe that underlying demand also is improving.

Companies re-

port scattered increases in demand for communications equipment, heavy trucks,
materials handling equipment, and a variety of components.

Sales of equip-

ment for mining, rail transport, marine transport, construction, agriculture,
and metalworking have remained poor,
"terrible."

With some exceptions export demand is

Much good used equipment is available at bargain prices.

Capital

expenditures of most firms are concentrated on outlays for replacement and
modernization, including computers and other electronic equipment, rather than
major new facilities.
Steel.

Orders for steel have improved, but demand is still concentrated

in lighter products with plates and structurals very slow.

Order leadtimes

for cold-rolled sheet and coated sheet are out three months, as far as bookings are taken.

Some idle finishing capacity is being activated.

Demand for

VII-4

steel for frames for trucks and large cars is strong.
centers are up "sharply."

Shipments to service

Demand for oil pipe and railroad rails increased

recently from very low levels.

There is no evidence of inventory building

by customers.
Retail Sales.

Colder weather brought immediate gains in sales of

fall and winter apparel.
credit freely.

Consumers are in a confident mood and are using

According to big chains, sales are up less in the Midwest

than in the rest of the nation.

Inventories are tight and some sales may

be lost if the Christmas season is strong, as is generally expected.
over last year's poor performance are likely to be substantial.

Gains

Wholesale

prices of general merchandise are expected to increase somewhat faster in

1984.
Housing.

Residential construction in the District continues well

above last year's extremely depressed level, but has probably declined since
midyear after allowance for seasonal trends.

Rates on fixed-rate, long-term

mortgages are now in the neighborhood of 13.5 percent.

Variable rate mortgages

are offered at about 150 basis points less, but are shunned by most home buyers.
A wide variety of plans are offered.

A general easing of terms probably is

necessary to keep residential construction from declining further.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Economic expansion continued during September and October in the
Eighth District, but the pace of the advance moderated.

Retail sales

continued brisk, and the outlook is for a banner Christmas season.
Factory orders and production crept up, manufacturers' inventories
changed little, and capital spending plans were revised upward at a few
firms.

Total employment increased, but with a rise in the labor force,

the unemployment rate declined only slightly.

Construction activity and

auto sales remained strong.
Consumer Spending
Respondents throughout the District report that retail sales
have continued to rise since August.

Sales at six major department

stores in September averaged 11 percent above the same month a year ago,
and early October receipts continued lively.
even larger year-over-year sales gains.
moved particularly well.
trends

Some smaller stores had

Apparel and home furnishings

Respondents attribute the better spending

to improved shopping weather, rising consumer incomes, increased

job security, and retail promotions.

Merchants anticipate an excellent

Christmas season and are increasing inventories moderately based on these
expectations.
Sales of both new and used automobiles remained favorable in
September and early October.

A major St. Louis dealer sold more than

double the cars sold in the same period last year, and six other dealers
reported year-over-year gains averaging 21 percent.
sales were made with fewer price concessions.

improved.

All reported that

Truck sales also were

VIII-2

Manufacturing
Orders and production at most industrial firms in the District
have risen since August, but the rate of gain was slower than during the
spring and early summer.
reduced pace.

The demand for consumer goods expanded at a

Orders for business equipment inched up slightly after

remaining depressed during most of the economic recovery.
hand, some defense business has ceased increasing.

On the other

Most respondents

anticipate a continued moderate growth in sales in 1984.

Some

manufacturers sought to build inventories selectively, but with the
continued rise in sales, inventories were little changed.

A few firms

revised their capital spending plans upward slightly, and research and
development budgets for 1984 are greater than in 1983.
Employment
Employment in the District rose in September and October, and
the outlook is for further gains in the remainder of the year.

The

unemployment rate, however, decreased only slightly as the labor force
continued to expand.

Since late summer, the major hirings have been in

the automobile and construction industries, but many manufacturing and
transportation firms have added marginally to their work forces.

Two

large District employers announced that they will increase their staffs
significantly in November and December, and retailers are planning to
hire more than they usually do to accommodate the Christmas rush.
Real Estate and Construction
Residential home sales in the District during September and
early October remained below the peaks reached last spring but were still
above year-ago levels.

Construction of homes, however, continued at a

rapid pace in response to the backlog of orders.

Costs of construction

VIII-3

changed little, with lumber prices declining and labor costs rising only
moderately.

Industry spokesmen expect that sales and construction of new

homes in the St. Louis area during 1984 will be 10 percent greater than
in 1983.

Commercial construction has remained strong since August at

about the same pace as earlier in the year.
Finance
Real estate and consumer loans remained about unchanged at large
weekly reporting banks in the District during September and early
October, while commercial and industrial loans rose seasonally.

Demand

deposits jumped 8 percent, but time deposits changed little.
Reports from eight savings and loan associations in the
Louisville and Memphis areas indicate that outstanding real estate loans
rose moderately in September.

Withdrawals of deposit accounts

approximately matched new savings received.
Agriculture
Farmers in the District this summer experienced the worst
drought in 50 years, which reduced drastically the yields of corn,
soybeans, tobacco and cotton.

Because of these lowered yields and the

reduced acreage planted under the PIK program, supplies of agricultural
commodities have been limited, driving up grain prices.

Because of

higher feed costs, many cattle and hog producers have slaughtered more
animals than usual.

This increase in meat supplies has placed some

downward pressure on current meat prices.

With fewer animals for

slaughter in the future, however, red meat prices are expected to rise in
1984 about 15 percent from current levels.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The

recovery

continuing

is

in

longer appears to be gaining momentum.

the

Ninth District,

although

it

no

With the harvest of major cash crops

almost complete, farm earnings seem unlikely to slow the pace of the recovery.

looks good as well, and there is

The employment picture still
news

of expansion

in

and mining.

manufacturing

recovery.

also consistent with continued

The strength of consumer spending is

some scattered

no clear trend

However,

is

evident in district financial activity.
For

Agriculture.

the

most

part,

continue to promise healthy farm earnings.

district

agricultural

conditions

While corn may not contribute to

earnings as much as previously thought, income from soybeans looks better than
expected,

Livestock profits continue

also good.

and the outlook for wheat is

to suffer, but some improvement is anticipated.
The expected yield for corn

in

Minnesota was recently revised

This represents a

ward 9 percent because of corn borer and windstorm damage.
loss of $132 million at current prices.
is

down

about

45

percent

from

down-

Even though Minnesota's corn harvest
level,

last year's

corn

still

ranks

as the

state's largest cash crop and is expected to bring receipts of $1.35 billion.
One

reason

for

the

reduced

harvest,

program, which will swell farm income.

though,

is

the

PIK

(payment-in-kind)

This will partially offset the losses

due to the small harvest.
Soybean yields
and prices

tions,
well

in

director

excess
reports

in

Minnesota and South Dakota are exceeding

remain good.

of the
that

previously
South

Many Minnesota
forecast

Dakota yields

farmers are reporting yields

31 bushels
are

expecta-

around

per

acre,

and a Bank

35

bushels

per acre.

IX-2

Soybean prices are also strong,

in

part due to low crop output in

much of the

rest of the nation.
The wheat crop has been generally
kota.

favorable in

Montana and North Da-

Bank directors report that the yields were good in

last year

in

higher

Wheat prices are generally running a little

excellent around Bozeman.
than

eastern Montana and

Montana.

While

the

Dakota was below the ten-year average,

amount of wheat

its

harvested

in

North

protein content and overall quality

were good.
are continuing to be hurt by high corn

Although livestock operators

costs and low cattle prices, they are expecting some improvement.
for feeder cattle

in

one Bank director.
prices,

our

recent

Montana

"may

But livestock prices are still low.
survey

of

Ninth

pasture and grazing land values fell

and housing

District

rural

according

appears

to

Reflecting these low

bankers

indicates

that

4 percent from March to September.

Consumer spending for general merchandise,

Consumer Spending.
vehicles,

not necessarily be too bad,"

The outlook

to be

maintaining

the

strength

motor
last

evident

month.
Retail sales in
nent

bank

strength,

holding
much

the Ninth District seem to be holding firm.

company

stronger

economist

states

than the nation,"

in

"we've

that

seen

the Twin Cities

A promi-

considerable
retail

scene.

One large Twin Cities retailer reports September sales 23 percent higher than
last September.
for

this

Another big Twin Cities chain reports a 20 percent increase

12-month period,

its

"biggest increase

Bank directors report brisk retail sales in

in

many years."

the rest of the district.

Also,

IX-3

The district's motor vehicle sales are also strong.
domestic

manufacturer,

truck

sales

were 23

percent higher this September than last.

higher

and auto

sales 7

Auto sales in South Dakota were up

Bank directors report that auto sales are

the same period.

15 percent over

percent

For one large

going well in Montana and are up in economically depressed Upper Michigan,
too.
housing activity may have

While
earlier months,

slackened

it remains better than a year ago.

from its torrid pace of
In August, residential

building contracts in Minnesota nearly doubled compared with last August.

The

Minneapolis Board of Realtors reports that 25 percent more housing units were
But many homes have been pulled off the Twin

sold this September than last.

Cities market in recent weeks due to lack of demand.
While the evidence is

Employment.
indicate

that the district

the most recent statistics

mixed,

employment picture

stable.

is

In

August,

Ninth

District employment rose only slightly to a seasonally adjusted 3.12 million,
and the unemployment

However,

rate also rose a bit to 8.15 percent.

a re-

gional economist for a large area bank believes that the strike by 8,000 AT&T
workers

could have

accounted

Minnesota unemployment claims
lyst believes

that the

everything off."

rate

the

smallness

rose substantially

seasonal

adjustment

The unemployment

4.2 percent and 4.3 percent,
unemployment

for

rates

in

respectively.

of 3.2 percent,

which was

was

of the
in

August,

Upper Michigan

recently announced

it

would throw

North and South Dakota were only
The Sioux Falls SMSA recorded an
the nation's

a big layoff,

recovery lags behind the rest of the state's.

increase.

but a state ana-

"so atypical

some parts of the district continue to report problems.
in

employment

lowest.

However,

A large manufacturer

and northern

Minnesota's

IX-4

Manufacturing and Mining.
vital sectors.
increase

There are some signs of expansion in these

The good news in Minnesota is Ford Motor Company's decision to

employment by 270 workers

soon and to spend $250 million expanding

its St. Paul assembly plant, which will create another several hundred permanent jobs.

Also,

printing and writing paper manufacturing

district are currently running at 100 percent capacity.

facilities

in

the

While about half the

plants in northern Minnesota are still inoperative, an iron pellet plant in
that

area

although a

is

hiring back a

large number

of workers

this month.

Finally,

Bank director finds that coal production was a little lower

in

Montana this August than last, he notes that oil and gas activity increased
somewhat.
Finance.
direction.
appear

Financial sector activity is

not moving strongly in

District bank deposits and loans were down in

to be rebounding

bankers indicates that
loans remained

in

in October.

Our recent

the third quarter the

low to normal.

It

also indicates,

September,

survey

of

but they

district

rural

demand for new agricultural
however,

that at the same

time the demand for refinancing of existing ag loans--though still
above normal--dropped sharply.

either

somewhat

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Reports from the Tenth District indicate further moderate

improvement in economic conditions.
generally stable prices.
increases, however.

Retail sales continue to improve, with

Prices of industrial inputs have shown recent

Inventories of industrial inputs and of retail goods are

regarded as satisfactory, except among automobile dealers.

Both housing

starts and house sales have weakened, as have savings inflows to savings and
loan institutions.

Fall crops suffered from drought and other factors, and

livestock prices are falling as marketings increase.

Both bank loan demand

and bank deposits have increased recently.
Retail Trade.

Total dollar sales in the first nine months of 1983

increased up to 7 percent over the same period last year, with widespread
improvement reported for the past three months.

Prices have been generally

stable in 1983 and are expected to remain so through the end of the year.
Inventory levels are reported to vary from satisfactory to a little high.

A

normal seasonal upturn in sales is expected for the rest of 1983, with the
national recovery expected to contribute to further improvement.
Automobile Sales.

Automobile dealers throughout the Tenth District

report improved sales in 1983 from weak year-earlier levels, with the
strongest gains occurring in Missouri, Kansas, and Colorado.

Sales of

domestic and import models are still being suppressed by low inventories.
Easing of automobile credit conditions is evident in more aggressive marketing
of automobile financing by banks.
dealers' floorplanning.

Banks are also soliciting loans to finance

The outlook for the 1984 model year is very good,

especially for mid-size to large-size cars, which is expected to increase the
domestic share of the market.

Purchasing Agents.

Almost half of the purchasing agents contacted

report substantial increases in input prices since October of last year.

In

the past three months, almost all have experienced increases in the prices of
their major inputs.

But on average, little or no further change in input

prices is expected through the end of the year.

Few difficulties are being

experienced in getting materials and none are expected through the remainder
of 1983.

In general, materials inventories are at satisfactory levels.

None

of the respondents are experiencing bottlenecks due to internal shortages of
labor or plant capacity.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Housing starts have been slowed by recent

increases in mortgage rates, and further slowing beyond the usual seasonal
decline is expected in the months ahead.
relatively strong.
year.

The rate of new home sales remains

New home prices have increased by 5 to 10 percent this

Materials prices are slightly higher than a year ago, although lumber

prices have declined somewhat since summer.

Materials price increases are

expected to be modest the remainder of the year.

Savings inflows into savings

and loans have declined from their rapid first half pace and are expected to
be about the same this year as last.

Rates on variable rate mortgages

currently range from 11.5 to 12.5 percent, while fixed rate mortgages carry
rates ranging from 13.75 to 15 percent.

Interest rates are expected to vary

around current levels with no clear trend through yearend 1983.
Agriculture.

Agricultural conditions vary widely across the Tenth

District, but most bankers report that the summer drought has aggravated
conditions in an already depressed farm economy.

Although irrigated crops

throughout the district produced record yields, Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma
were severely affected by the summer drought and experienced large yield

losses in fall harvested crops.

All fall harvested crops were adversely

affected by insect damage.

Furthermore, New Mexico's milo, peanut, and cotton

crops were reported to have been damaged by premature frost and hail.

The

planting of winter wheat is nearly complete in most district states and the
crop is generally reported to be in good condition.

But in isolated parts of

Oklahoma, winter wheat may need to be reseeded due to recent flooding.
Livestock prices continue to fall as marketings have increased due to rising
feed costs and poor pasture conditions.
however, is reported.
abnormally slow.

No widespread liquidation of herds,

Sales of farm equipment and farm inputs continue to be

The expected yearend increase in demand for farm equipment

has not yet materialized, and probably will not.

While some bankers in the

Tenth District are optimistic about agriculture in the coming year because of
high grain prices and fairly good yields, many others report an increasing
number of problem loans and farm foreclosures.
Banking.

Loan demand at Tenth District banks has increased slightly

over the last month.

Half of the respondents report an increase in commercial

and industrial loans and a third report some increase in residential loans.
The volume of consumer loans and agricultural loans has remained essentially
unchanged.

Almost all respondent banks have experienced an increase in total

deposits during the last month.
increase in demand deposits.

In most cases, this has been due to an

Conventional NOW accounts, Super-NOW accounts,

MMDA's, and large CD's show little or no change.

There has been relatively

little response to the October 1 deregulation of small time deposits.

All but

two respondent banks indicate that they are not actively promoting the new,
deregulated deposits.

Most banks are paying about the same interest rates on

the new deposits as they had been paying on the regulated deposits, and only a
few banks have reduced their minimum deposit requirements.

Consumer interest

in the deregulated deposits has been weak, and most of the funds invested in
them has come from the rollover of previously regulated time deposits.

XI-1

ECONOMIC COMMENTARY
ELEVENTH DISTRICT-DALLAS

expansion of the Eleventh District economy is broadening, but

The

the rate of growth is slowing.
advance,

but

slackened.
and

the

growth

Total manufacturing production continues to

in demand at aluminum and electronics firms has

Retail and auto sales are increasing

retailers

expect

Christmas

sales

to

throughout

be

the

the

District

best in three years.

Residential construction is slowing from record levels, but this is
seasonal.

Commercial

construction,

increasing overall, is still slow in

Business loan demand at large banks is

energy-dependent areas.

total loan demand at member banks.

partly

up

as

is

Higher crop prices are maintaining farm

income despite losses by livestock producers.
Orders

Moderate gains in manufacturing production continue.
aluminum

are

still

increasing

but

at

a

decreasing

Electronics

utilization and profit margins are also rising.
that

orders

are

not

increasing

and

prices

are trending up.

Capacity

firms

as fast as they had been.

orders, however, is high enough to increase backlogs.
expanded

rate.

for

report

The level of

Capacity

is

being

Buoyed by strong Christmas orders,

apparel production is still increasing and respondents are optimistic about
the

level

most plants
continuing

of spring orders.
have

now

reopened.

Steel

demand

is

stable

drag from the depressed oil-field equipment sector.

prices at lumber and wood
Inventories

Production at copper mills has picked up and

are

rising,

lower

and

the

Orders and

trending

down.

product

mills

and

response, production is being cut back.

in

are

despite

This production decline is in part seasonal although respondents also

cite

XI-2

the

summer

slowdown

in

residential

construction

resulting from higher

mortgage rates.
The

number

considerably

of

throughout

active

drilling rigs

servicing

the

September and early October.

now substantially above the year-earlier count.
oil-well

in

rigs

also

increased

The

District

rose

Texas' rig count is
utilization

significantly

in

rate

of

the last two

months.

Servicing companies are still experiencing low or negative profits

because

of

intense

price competition in bidding for servicing contracts.

More bankruptcies are expected in this sector of the energy industry.
Department store sales for
figures

continue

to

be

weak,

the

but

an

District

based

on

year-to-date

upward trend has emerged.

figures for the four weeks ended October 15 reveal increasing
the

Border and Gulf areas.

Sales

strength

in

Other areas are registering strong sales gains

both from earlier months and from last year.

Respondents,

citing

renewed

consumer confidence, are very optimistic about Christmas sales.
Auto sales

are

still strong throughout the District.

Dallas posted the best year-to-date sales
sales

in

the

increase

ten

years.

Auto

Houston area are still down on a year-to-date basis, but in

September, sales were up from the year-earlier level.
been

in

Dealers in

attributed to growing consumer confidence.

Recent

gains

have

Current sales and traffic

levels have made dealers optimistic about sales during the final months

of

1983.
Residential construction

is

slowing.

Closings of single-family

homes reached a record in August but sales contracts have
Respondents

since

declined.

indicate that this is largely seasonal, but they also point to

the more permanent effect that higher mortgage rates

are

having

on

home

XI-3

sales.

Home

prices

and input costs are generally stable to up slightly.

Multifamily starts declined further in September and October, but the large
number of permits taken out in the late spring and summer should maintain a
steady rate of

construction

rates

Occupancy

are

activity

during

next

the

several

and rental rates are stable.

declining

months.

Multifamily

starts should continue to slow as concerns about overbuilding increase.
Commercial construction is increasing.

The year-to-date value

These figures do not

permits in Dallas is 18 percent ahead of last year's.
include three major office projects that were
the

last

report,

there

construction market.
office

are

projects

been

has

Some retail
being

very

is

activity

in

change

Since

the Houston

but

occurring,

behind

well

announced.

no

major

year-to date permit value for

The

started.

commercial construction in Houston is

recently

little

of

last

year's.

Most

other District cities are reporting increased activity.
Loan growth at member banks picked up in September from the modest
Large banks had a sharp increase in business loan

pace reported in August.
demand

the

while

rapid

growth

in

real

estate

Nonperforming loans, particularly in the energy sector,
bank

income.

are

moderately,

but

a

sharp

decline

Demand and

continued.

holding

Deposit increases remain small at member banks.

been relying more heavily on borrowed funds.
rose

lending

savings

down

Banks have
deposits

in jumbo CDs at the large weekly

reporting banks reduced time deposits at District banks.

XII -

1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

economic

The
strong

growth

Employment

recovery

in retail

in

sales

the
for

Twelfth
a wide

District

is

range of products

growth was very strong, especially

very

continuing with
in most

in California, where

areas.

September

employment increased by 2 percent (184,000) and the unemployment rate declined
by a full percentage point over August levels even though the labor force grew
by

77,000.

This

employment.
effect

on

than

more

made

up

for

August

California's

decline

in

The deregulation of time deposits has had a modest but significant
balances,

these

shorter-term deposits.

particularly

effect of deregulation on time deposits

is

However,

expected to be much less

the

than on

MMDAs and super NOWs.
Consumer Spending
Respondents throughout the Twelfth District generally report that consumer
spending on a wide range of products continues to grow at a very high rate with
sharp increases

in September.

Sales appear to be higher in most areas of the

Twelfth District across a broad array of consumer goods including home goods,
and autos.

soft goods,

Auto

sales were mentioned by several respondents

being especially strong with shortages
demand

import

and

increasing

in

some

restrictions.
areas

compared to last year.

and

retail

of many Japanese models

Employment
loans

and

in

retail

credit

due to strong

stores

card

as

sales

also
were

was
up

Respondents attribute increases in spending to pent-up

demand, declining unemployment and increasing real income.
Manufacturing and Mining
Although

total

employment

generally

increased

in the

Twelfth

District,

with especially strong growth in California, manufacturing employment growth is

XII -

weak

and

employment

in mining

has

2

actually

been

declining.

In

fact,

the

closure of a copper smelting operation in Ely, Nevada has seriously depressed
local

economic

conditions.

Manufacturing

employment

in

the

lumber-and-wood

products industry increased somewhat, although this industry is far from strong
with

some

plant

transportation

closings

equipment

still

occuring.

sector.

Even

There

though

the

was

improvement

domestic market

in
is

weak,

sales of aircraft on the foreign market has improved, boosting production.
aluminum

industry continues

to

improve,

and

several

companies

the

The

are reopening

smelters.
Construction and Real Estate
Housing starts in the West declined in September over the previous month's
level.

Some

respondents

indicated

that

the

inventory

remained high due to the recent rise in mortgage rates.
be much lower than in previous months.

of

new

housing

also

Sales are reported to

However, commercial real estate sales

and rental activity are reported to be strong.
Agriculture
In general, California

farming has held its own this year with net farm

income up slightly, although there have been problems due to weather with some
crops

such

as

grapes,

cotton

and

almonds.

However,

damage may be partially offset by higher prices.

losses

due

appears

to be

Idaho, where

there

weather

In Oregon, net farm income is

expected to be down by as much as 5% to 10% compared to last year.
spot

to

are record wheat,

A bright

barley, and

almost

record levels of potato crops.
The PIK program was probably a major factor in increasing the incomes of
grain, rice, and cotton producers.

The PIK program along with the Midwestern

XII - 3

however, has

drought,

a negative

probably had

influence

on

beef

and

dairy

producers because of the resulting increase in feed grain prices.
A local Southern Idaho Production Credit Association (PCA) failed due to
loan losses and was taken over by the Farm Credit Administration.

There have

been similar steps taken by the Farm Credit Administration at four other market
associations during the past year.

Some farmers are worried about the effects

of these failures on 1984 crop financing.
Financial Institutions Summary

Competition

for

consumer-type

than that following the

incidence

of

bonuses
(savings

institutions

minimum denomination
Inflows

to

and
and

these accounts

1

introduction of MMDAs and super NOWs.

The

number

of

in particular) have lowered

the

is

loan associations,

However,

low.

a

on various time accounts.

since the beginning of October have been modest in

comparison with the surge in MMDA balances recorded
the

October

less

rates

been

the

considerably

premium

requirements

following

time deposits has

deregulation of small-denomination
intense

deposits

growth in these balances

during the

first

in January.

Nonetheless,

few weeks of October has been

significant, particularly in the shorter maturity range.

This may reflect an

increased desire to hold shorter-term deposits due to uncertainty regarding the
future level of interest rates as well as the lowering of minimum denomination
requirements.

Shifts of funds out of MMDAs do not appear to be the source of

this growth, as the growth in MMDA balances has also resumed after tapering off
during

the

third

observers in the

quarter.

While early growth

industry do not expect

generate substantial inflows of new funds.

these

figures are encouraging, most
newly

deregulated

accounts

to

