SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

June, 1983

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

................................

First District - Boston

..............

...

.................................

Second District - New York

...............................

Third District - Philadelphia

Sixth District - Atlanta

I-i
II-i

............................

III-i

.............................

IV-1

................................

V-1

Fourth District - Cleveland
Fifth District - Richmond

i

.................................

Seventh District - Chicago
Eighth District - St. Louis

VI-1

...............................

VII-1

..............................

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis

.............................

Tenth District - Kansas City

..............................

X-1

...............................

XI-1

Eleventh District - Dallas

Twelfth District - San Francisco

.........................

IX-

XII-1

SUMMARY*
Overview
Economic conditions are improving.

Reports of solid increases in

retail sales are widespread; hard goods such as appliances and home
furnishings are moving particularly well.

In manufacturing, orders and

shipments have increased for consumer products and for the materials and parts
used to fabricate these products.

Demand is also strong for construction

materials.

However, most capital goods industries are still waiting for the

recovery.

Housing sales and construction remain vigorous, but in some areas

the pace has slowed from that set earlier in the year.

Financial institutions

continue to experience deposit growth; inflows to MMDAs have slowed but are
still substantial.

Loan demand remains sluggish.

Retailing
Retail sales are up in almost all Districts, with Boston,
Philadelphia and San Francisco reporting year over year increases in double
digits.

Sales of appliances, furniture and other hard goods are generally

stronger than sales of nondurables, although apparel is selling well in a few
areas.

Auto sales have picked up; bigger cars are in the greatest demand.

Low interest rate programs are an important stimulus to car sales according to
Dallas and San Francisco.
rest of the year.

Retailers are optimistic about prospects for the

Inventories have increased, but for the most part are

considered satisfactory.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Manufacturing and Mining
Manufacturing orders and shipments are increasing.

The demand for

lumber, gypsum and other building materials is especially strong.

Atlanta

reports that cement plants and lumber mills expect to operate near capacity in
the next few months and Chicago finds gypsum board plants already at full
capacity.

Production of consumer products and inputs to consumer products has

also strengthened.

The improved outlook for auto sales is having a broad

impact, with Boston, New York, Cleveland, Chicago, Minneapolis and
San Francisco reporting increases in a variety of auto-related products.
Defense is another source of strength in the St. Louis and San Francisco
Districts, high technology products in New York and Dallas.

The major area of

weakness is the capital goods industries; Boston, New York, Cleveland, St.
Louis and San Francisco all note that these industries have seen little
evidence so far of a recovery.

An important exception is Chicago which

reports an upturn in capital goods production, mostly for replacements rather
than expansions.

Both Chicago and Boston note that the high value of the

dollar is discouraging exports.
The increases in manufacturing activity have been achieved largely
through increases in the workweek, but the Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond,
Atlanta, Chicago and San Francisco Districts have also experienced increases
in manufacturing employment.
Manufacturing inventories have fallen recently, according to
Cleveland and Chicago.

A large part of the decline observed by Chicago was

involuntary, with sales exceeding expectations; rebuilding is now underway.
Richmond and St. Louis find that a majority of firms are satisfied with
current inventory levels.

iii

Decreases in drilling costs have stimulated oil and gas exploration
in the Minneapolis and Dallas Districts.

Metals mining in the Minneapolis

District remains depressed.
Construction and Real Estate
Housing sales and construction remain vigorous, well above 1982
levels; but Philadelphia, St. Louis and Cleveland report that the pace has
slowed from that set earlier this year.

Demand has shifted towards smaller

less costly homes according to New York and San Francisco and to more
expensive homes according to Cleveland and Atlanta.

Realtors in several

districts expressed concern about the effects of rising mortgage rates;
however, Atlanta and Chicago speculate that the small rate increases so far
may have spurred sales, as potential buyers sought to lock-in current low
rates.

Boston and Chicago note that buyers continue to show a strong

preference for fixed rather than adjustable rate mortgages.
Those districts commenting on nonresidential building activity
generally see a lot of work in progress but few new projects.

An exception is

San Francisco which reports that although construction activity is below year
ago levels, nonresidential building permits are increasing.
Banking and Finance
Deposits continue to grow at financial institutions in all districts
reporting on this subject.

Inflows to MMDAs account for a large part of the

deposit growth, but Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta and San Francisco note
that the growth in MMDAs has slowed.

Loan demand remains sluggish, with only

Philadelphia, Atlanta and Minneapolis reporting substantial growth overall.
Commercial and industrial loan demand is especially weak.

Faced with a

shortage of attractive loan applications, financial institutions in the Dallas
and San Francisco Districts are increasing their holdings of securities.
Agriculture
Cold and wet weather delayed plantings in most Districts.

Crop

development is back to or close to normal in the New York, St. Louis and
San Francisco Districts, but still behind schedule in Chicago and
Minneapolis.

Kansas City notes that while plantings of row crops were

delayed, the wet weather has produced an excellent wheat crop and good range
conditions.

The PIK (Payment-in-Kind) program is seen as having a positive

effect on the incomes of wheat, corn and cotton farmers, but Atlanta warns
that livestock farmers and agricultural suppliers will be adversely affected.
Chicago and Minneapolis see abundant world supplies and weak export demand
putting downward pressure on agricultural prices.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Retailers in the First District are enjoying strong sales gains, with
hard goods moving particularly well.
not seen much evidence of a recovery.

However, many manufacturers have still
Sales of consumer and intermediate

products have strengthened but orders for capital goods remain depressed.
There is apparently considerable interest in capital goods, with a number of
manufacturers reporting increases in the volume of inquiries and requests for
proposals, but potential buyers are unwilling to make firm commitments.

In

both retailing and manufacturing, plans for price and wage increases in 1983
are moderate and are consistent with continued low rates of inflation.
respondents are aggressively pursuing increases in productivity.

Most

In the

banking sector, two of the largest banks in the District recently announced a
merger.
Retailing
Retailers in the First District reported continued strong sales gains
this year, and optimism for similar or greater strength through the third and
fourth quarters.

Prices are reasonably stable, so gains will be mostly real;

vendor prices are also stable, so margins continue to be strong.

Inventory

positions are mixed, but none was considered to be grossly unsatisfactory.
Reported sales increases for May were generally above plan and ranged
from 7 to 20 percent over May last year.

Hard goods were selling

substantially better than soft goods, although men's sport apparel was also
said to be performing well.

Those contacts able to make interregional

comparisons said sales increases continue to be stronger in New England than
elsewhere.
Firms with sales below plan or with slower sales growth in May than
in April reported higher-than-desired inventory levels, but foresaw no serious

problems in bringing inventories back into line.

One contact noted that

"lessons learned during recent hard times" allowed them to support a greater
volume of business with leaner inventories than previously thought possible.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing respondents say that the rate of recovery so far has
been modest at best.
evidence of an upturn.

Capital goods producers, in particular, have seen little
Inquiries about capital products and requests for

proposals have increased but potential buyers are unwilling to commit
themselves.

While some respondents attribute the weakness in capital spending

to low capacity utilization and the buyers' lack of financial resources,
others see a lack of confidence in the recovery as the primary problem.
Capital goods sales to utilities and other energy-related industries are
especially weak.

Reports are more encouraging for consumer goods and

intermediate products.

The improved outlook for the domestic auto industry is

beginning to have a positive effect, with sales increasing for a variety of
automotive products.
Several respondents report that demand has picked up in Canada and
Europe.

For most, however, overseas markets are weaker than those at home;

the strength of the U.S. dollar is seen as a substantial barrier to exports.
Prices, Wages and Productivity
Retailers and manufacturers expect the rate of inflation over the
next two years to be moderate, and their own price and wage plans support this
view.

No one plans very large price increases and a substantial number will

not increase prices at all in 1983.

Buyer resistance to price increases and

low capacity utilization are the most commonly cited reasons for restraint.

For high technology products, technological advances and competitive pressures
will bring prices down.

Wage increases in 1983 will generally be smaller than

in 1982, and at some firms, merit will play a greater role in the awarding of
increases.

Although recent productivity gains are partly due to the current

phase of the business cycle, most respondents have major programs to increase
productivity over the long run.

These programs involve greater use of

performance goals, changing purchasing and other procedures, and automating
where feasible.
Real Estate
The residential real estate market is vigorous, although borrowers
are said to be very sensitive to fluctuations in the mortgage rate.

Borrowers

also have a strong preference for fixed rather than variable rate mortgages.
Substantial numbers of first time buyers are said to be entering the market
and, at least in the Boston area, are choosing more modest single-family homes
in more distant suburbs over similarly priced, more lavishly equipped
condominiums downtown.

Several developers expressed the view that

condominiums have become much less attractive investments.

Apartment

construction remains an unattractive investment unless it is subsidized, but
some lenders say that the purchase of existing properties run by professional
managers can offer very good returns.

There is great interest in real

estate-based tax shelters.
Banking
In the past six months, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut
have passed interstate banking bills.

These permit banks in New England

states with reciprocal legislation to acquire or merge with local banks.

In

1.4

New Hampshire similar legislation was tabled.
banking legislation which is national in scope.

Maine already had interstate
With the passage of the

Connecticut bill in early June, CBT, the largest bank in Connecticut, and Bank
of New England, the third largest bank in Massachusetts, announced a merger.
The new bank will be the second largest bank in the New England region and the
largest in terms of domestic deposits.

II-1

Second District - New York

Introduction
The

economic

recovery continued

at a

steady

pace

in most

of

the

Second District through May and June, but some industries and regions are not
yet experiencing
District's

renewed economic growth.

economy

were

homebuilding,

The most dynamic sectors of
high

technology

industries,

automotive suppliers, and the financial and service industries.

the
some

The regions

in which these industries dominate-New York City, Northern New Jersey, Long
Island, Syracuse, and Albany--are performing well.

It also appears that the

patrons of upscale retail establishments are spending much more than they were
last year.
In the

regions

that

specialize

in the

manufacturing of

producers' durables recovery has yet to begin, and
areas are not even sure that

unemployed

the recession has bottomed out.

manufacturing workforce

has

not

and

some observers of these
Unemployment

rates remain above 13 percent in Buffalo and Elmira, for example.
the

steel

been

called

In general,

back

in large

Other weak spots include the agricultural sector and, possibly, the

numbers.

office construction industry as well.
Some local firms are beginning to increase their borrowing from banks
as economic activity strengthens, but overall the pickup remains spotty.

New

inflows of deposits associated with the MMDAs have encouraged banks to be more
aggressive in expanding loans to businesses, and demand has strengthened for
construction
companies.

loans,

inventory

financing,

Nevertheless, in the industries

and

loans

to

and

regions where

recovery has not been felt, loan demand remains very sluggish.

computer-related
the economic

II-2

On the price side, only a little immediate upward pressure has been
felt on most prices.

However, some shortages of construction materials have

developed, and the increasing cost of medical insurance is raising widespread
concern.

Manufacturing
With the exception of the heavy industrial plants of the Buffalo
area, most
shipments.

District manufacturers

are

reporting

increases

in

orders

and

The high technology sectors on Long Island and in the Albany area

have done especially well, and the automotive suppliers near Jamestown and
Syracuse are beginning to resupply the "Big Three."
has

not

yet

Unemployment

translated
in all

of

into
the

decreases
District's

in

However, growth in output

unemployment

major

in

labor market

Poughkeepsie, remains higher than it was a year ago.

most

places.

areas,

except

Employers, for the most

part, have been increasing the length of workweeks instead of recalling laid
off workers.
Retailing
The District's major retail chains continue to compete intensely for
market

share.

Sales

to

middle

described as a "competitive

income

blood bath".

households
The

especially

have

been

stores serving high income

clientele have enjoyed the largest sales increases over last year, while the
lower priced chains have had substantially smaller gains.
The Financial Sector
The drop in interest rates since last summer continues to improve the
earnings outlook for thrift institutions in the Second District.
quarterly losses at New York State mutual savings
smaller in Q1 1983 than during 1982.

On average,

banks were considerably

Similarly, by the end of 1982 over

II-3

half of the savings and

loan associations in New York

and New Jersey had

turned profitable, and more recently this proportion has risen further.
Deposit inflows at thrifts have increased as a result of the MMDAs,
particularly outside of New York City.

New savings inflows to New York and

New Jersey S&Ls have picked up in 1983, and recent inflows appear to have been
the strongest in several years.

At New York mutual savings banks, the rise in

net deposits since last year has generally been more modest.
reflects

the high

degree

of

competition

market.

Moreover,

some of the savings

for

funds

in

the

In part this
New York

City

banks are not aggessively expanding

their liabilities as a result of concern over their capital positions.
Public Finance
The continuing strong performance of the New York City economy--led
by the finance and service industries--has improved local fiscal circumstances
markedly.

In January the City's

financial analysts were predicting a large

deficit and local leaders were planning large tax increases and the layoffs of
some 4,000 school district employees.
exceeded

expectations

substantial

budget

in

every

surplus,

month.

and

plans

Since then, revenue collections have
The

latest

projections

are

being

considered

envision a
for

service

improvements.
The stronger than expected performance of the City's economy and the
improved condition of its treasury helped pave the way for New York's reentry
into municipal bond markets.

The City's first competitive bond issue

since

the fiscal crisis of the mid 1970s recently received a respectable welcome in
the market, although still at a relatively low credit rating.

II-4

Agriculture
The wet weather this spring is not expected to reduce crop production
in New York State.

However, net farm income was flat in New York last

and is expected to remain so this year.

year

Corn acreage has been reduced through

the Payment in Kind program, but PIK does not apply to New York's large dairy
and fruit industries.

Agriculture should, therefore, remain a weak sector of

the District economy.
Construction and Real Estate
Housing

sales and construction

continued

they were curtailed somewhat by the bad weather.

to

increase

in May

though

In recent weeks some signs

have emerged that buying activity has spread to smaller, less expensive homes,
in contrast to the first quarter when sales were largely confined to the more
expensive end of the market.
In the northern and eastern suburbs of New York City and in Syracuse,
commercial real

estate and

other areas, the

amount

construction

markets

of new space about

to

remained

come on market

construction starts will be sluggish through 1983.
commercial
prospects

real
for

estate

filling

in

the

existing

District
office

remain

space

quite

active.
suggests

In
that

However, most observers of
optimistic

and

expect

regarding

new

the

construction

projects to follow before too long.
Wages and Prices
With
this year.
and

most

two

exceptions, major wage

or price

increases

are

not

likely

Most wage settlements are calling for increases below six percent,
industries

apparently

significant price increases.

consider

competition

too

strong

to

venture

II-5

One exception is building materials.
shortages of lumber and of skilled labor.

Contractors are experiencing

However, increases in the prices of

these inputs are typical during the early phase of an expansion of housing
construction.
The second exception to the general picture of price stability is
causing more concern.
medical

insurance,

beginning to

The costs of health care, and therefore of employee

continue

to

increase

quite

experiment with and even implement

rapidly.

Employers

are

changes in their medical

insurance programs aimed at reducing these costs.
realized, but changes are meeting employee resistance.

Some savings have been

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District point to further improvement in regional
economic conditions in June.

The vigorous expansion in the manufacturing sector has

continued this month, pushing industrial prices up slightly, and local retailers report
double-digit sales growth at area department stores.

Loan volume has picked up

unexpectedly in June, but deposit growth at area banks has moderated.

Real estate

sales, however, have slipped and construction activity has levelled off.
Third District

businessmen

predict continued gains through December.

Manufacturers expect the industrial recovery to carry on at a brisk pace at least through
year-end.

Retail sales are projected to finish the year on a strong note as well, and

merchants are beginning to rebuild inventories in preparation for a December surge.
Bankers foresee modest improvements in lending activity, with better growth in retail
loans but only slowly developing commercial demand.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Activity in the Third District housing
June.

market has backed off a little in

Overall sales are still in good shape on a year-over-year basis, about 25 percent

ahead, but many real estate brokers fear that a recent rise in mortgage rates may have
nipped rising demand in the bud.

Rates have climbed 25 to 50 basis points since mid-

May, and that rise has shown up in lighter traffic and slower sales, particularly of newly
constructed units.

Third District construction activity is flat in June and builders say

new starts are not as numerous as earlier in the year.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers responding to the June Business Outlook Survey say local
industrial

activity has grown sharply

again this month as the

manufacturing sector maintains its brisk pace.

recovery in the

Overall business conditions have shown

III-2

consistently widespread improvement in each of the last five months, which, according to
survey results, is the most sustained strength exhibited by area industry in well over five
years. Both new orders and shipments have increased substantially in June and employers
have been hiring additional workers and lengthening their average workweeks.

Stock

levels, however, have been reduced again at area plants.
General activity is expected to show further improvement over the next two
quarters.

Respondents predict that new orders will play the lead role by climbing

considerably, and producer backlogs are likely to increase. Manufacturers also expect to
bolster factory payrolls and working hours by December. In addition, increases in capital
expenditures are planned by nearly one third of participating businessmen.
Reports of industrial price hikes in June, though still not as widespread as in
the late 1970s or early 1980s, are more prevalent than they have been in over a year.
Whereas in mid-1982 very few Third District businessmen reported rising prices, onefourth say they are paying more for raw materials in June than they did in May, and onesixth report a boost in their own products' prices since last month.

Survey results

indicate that further increases are likely by the end of the year.
RETAIL
Department store sales in the Third District have surged ahead in June,
according

to retail contacts.

Gains in current dollar sales over a year ago are

surprisingly strong this month, hitting double digits at many retail outlets. In the last six
weeks, household furnishings and other durable goods have been moving especially well.
Merchants cite

improved consumer attitudes and favorable weather conditions as

contributing factors in the better-than-anticipated

business.

Promotional activity,

however, also continues to play an important role in generating sales.

III-3

Area retailers are getting bullish in their forecasts and foresee big sales gains
in the next six months. Rapidly growing sales are expected to push December volume 8
percent to 10 percent over fairly strong year-earlier levels. Store operators predict that
consumers will spend at least part of their July tax cut and expect rising employment to
loosen purse strings even more.

By most accounts, a banner Christmas season is in the

making and the rosy outlook has prompted many merchants to add to stock levels, albeit
cautiously. Inventories are now ahead on a year-over-year basis, and carefully controlled
growth is planned for the rest of the year.
FINANCIAL
Third District bankers say loan activity edged upward in June.

Commercial

lending bounced back after dipping in May but volume is still only slightly ahead of a year
ago.

Although demand for traditional business loans for working capital and inventory

financing remains weak, demand for short-term operating loans has been strong enough
to result in the small and unexpected increase in overall C&I loan volume. Retail lending
has picked up again this month as well and, according to contacts, volume is now as much
as 10 percent above last June.

Consistent economic recovery apparently has buoyed

consumer sentiment and increased retail credit demand. Interest rates, however, remain
high relative to historical standards, keeping consumer lending activity below the levels
most bankers had been hoping for.
Area bankers do not foresee any major changes in present lending trends
between now and the end of the year. Modest improvement in consumer loan activity is
anticipated as the economy builds steam, but the recovery still has a long way to go
before C&I loan demand picks up significantly, lenders say. Corporate capital spending
plans are expected to stay soft well into the fourth quarter.

III-4

The prime rate at major banks in the Third District is unchanged at 10.5
percent in June.

The stickiness in interest rates over the last several months has led

local seers to revise their forecasts and most now believe that rates have reached the
trough of their cycle. Analysts predict that rates will average slightly higher in the third
quarter than in the second quarter, and, by late in the year, expanding credit demands
and large deficits are expected to exert further upward pressure.
Deposit flows in the Third District are still healthy but they have softened in
June as they did last month.

Demand deposits slipped again and now only range from

unchanged to 4 percent ahead of last June. Time and savings deposits remain well ahead
on a year-over-year basis despite slower growth resulting from reduced activity in
MMDAs.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.
improve.

Economic conditions in the Fourth District continue to

Employment is rising steadily and unemployment rates, although very

high, are falling.

Manufacturers remain optimistic about the near-term

outlook for price and wage inflation.

Retailers report improving sales.

Manufacturing orders and production are mixed.

Automobile-related production

continues to improve, while capital goods orders and production remain flat at
a low level.

Steel sales and prices are weak, as last winter's spurt in

orders has ended.

Housing construction shows signs of weakening recently, but

office construction remains strong.

Commercial banks are very liquid, as

deposit growth is strong and loan demand is weak.
District Labor Market Conditions.
this District.

Employment is rising steadily in

Total employment in Ohio edged up in May for the fourth

consecutive month and manufacturing employment has risen for five consecutive
months.

Average weekly hours of manufacturing production workers increased

slightly in May for the fourth consecutive month.

Local indexes of leading

indicators point to continued improvement in Pittsburgh and Cleveland.
Indexes for both areas have risen for six consecutive months.
Unemployment rates in the District are falling but remain well above
the national average.

Unemployment rates have fallen in each of the

District's eleven largest SMSAs and averaged 13.3% (nsa) in April, down from
15.4% in January.

However, the unemployment rate for Ohio edged up from 12.8%

(nsa) in April to 12.9% in May, as labor force growth exceeded the gain in
employment.
Prices and Labor Compensation.

Fourth District manufacturers remain

optimistic regarding the near-term path of price and wage inflation.

List

IV-2

prices for their own product lines have generally remained stable since
January, and although discounts are still common, they are gradually narrowing
as market conditions improve.

They do not expect to have a significant degree

of pricing flexibility until the fourth quarter, at the earliest.

With a few

exceptions, including natural rubber, natural gas, and inputs for specialty
steels, material input prices have also been stable over the past several
months.

Labor cost increases have been moderate because of a series of

concessionary labor contracts, reductions in fringe benefits, easing of work
rules, and business cycle-related productivity gains.
Retail Sales.

Major retailers report improving sales.

Sales gains

have been good for several months and especially good in the first half of
June.

Retailers report higher priced goods selling especially well, while

also noting that customers continue to place strong emphasis on price and
price promotions.

Inventory levels are satisfactory and firms plan to expand

them cautiously in line with sales gains.

Retailers are optimistic about the

sales outlook for summer.
Manufacturing.

Manufacturing activity in the District is mixed, with

some producers expanding output and others showing no change.

However, few

firms report declining output.
This Bank's June survey of Fourth District manufacturers shows little
progress in manufacturing activity in May and June.

Employment, hours worked,

shipments, new orders, and order backlogs are flat.

Inventories continue to

fall and about 20% of firms report increases in prices they pay for materials,
components, and services.
A survey of purchasing managers in the Cincinnati area indicates a
steady slowing in April and May in the rate of gain in production, new orders,
and order backlogs.

Inventories of raw materials and finished goods are

IV-3

falling.

Firms report a decline in employment in May after two months of

increases.
Manufacturing of light trucks and automobiles, especially large autos,
is strong.

Producers of these vehicles and their components report expanding

hours and employment, but remain cautious about building inventories.
Production of parts for the auto after-market, which remained fairly steady
during the recession, is rising slowly.
Tire manufacturing is improving mildly.

Tire manufacturers report

shipments of original equipment auto tires up substantially over last year in
line with improved new car sales, while replacement tire shipments are up only
slightly.

Production is up only moderately over last year because original

equipment sales account for only a small share of the business.

Manufacturers

have stopped inventory drawdown but are taking a cautious approach to
inventory building.
The machine tool industry is depressed but deterioration apparently
has ended.
very low.

Orders, production, and shipments are flat, and order backlogs are
Employment is stable, with firms reporting neither layoffs nor

recalls or increases in hours.

The low capacity utilization levels of

customers may increase the customary lag between general economic recovery and
improved demand for machine tools.
Primary Metals.

Demand for steel is weak.

occurred in February and March has ended.

Orders have been weak and flat

since then, causing order backlogs to shrink.
putting great pressure on profit margins.
currently is only about 55% of capacity.

The spurt in orders that

Steel prices remain very weak,

Production in the industry
The industry expects to ship about

69 million tons this year, little better than last year's very low 62 million
tons.

Advance orders for the third quarter are so weak that production,

IV-4

employment, and hours may decline in July and August.

Producer inventory

liquidation has ended except for oil pipe, for which liquidation is likely to
continue through yearend.
Construction.

Construction activity is one of the stronger sectors of

the District's economy.

Housing construction activity is much greater than a

year ago, although recently its improvement appears to have slowed
substantially.
speculation.

Most houses are being built on contract, rather than on
The mix of demand is shifting toward higher-priced homes.

Prospective buyers are reported to be very sensitive to interest rates and are
shopping for small rate advantages.

The recent increase in mortgage interest

rates is reported to have slowed or stopped the rise of, but not decreased,
sales of new and used houses.

Office construction is likely to remain strong

in the District for another year or two as major projects already underway are
carried to completion, but few new projects are being planned.
Commercial Banks.
and loan demand is weak.

Banks are very liquid as deposits growth is strong
Money market demand accounts continue to grow

extremely rapidly, although not nearly as fast as earlier in the year.
deposits are showing solid growth.

Total

Business loan demand is flat or down.

Consumer credit demand is generally flat except for some strength in credit
card credit and variable rate loans.

Automobile loan demand is reported

strong in Pittsburgh in response to rate competition.

COMMENTARY ON ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Business activity is expanding across a broad front in the Fifth
District, yet the pace of expansion appears moderate.

Manufacturing firms,

generally, report recent gains in shipments, new orders, and order backlogs,
but little change in inventories.

Retail activity also appears to be improv-

ing as both total sales and relative sales of big ticket items are reported to
have risen in recent weeks.
sharply, however.
areas.

Inventories at the retail level apparently rose

Construction activity has also firmed substantially in most

Total employment has made only very modest gains, although the em-

ployed are working longer hours, and earning higher wages then earlier in the
year.

Expectations in most sectors are strongly positive.

Loan demand at

District banks and thrifts is also on the rise, but remains spotty in most
areas, lacking solid support from any particular sector.

Manufacturing
Rising levels of shipments, new orders, and order backlogs continue
widespread in the manufacturing sector.

Recent leaders, such as the textile

and apparel groups, have been joined by building materials, especially lumber
and wood products where some extraordinary gains have recently been reported.
On the other hand, primary metals and paper continue to lag somewhat.

Man-

ufacturers inventories were nearly unchanged over the past month as a slight
rise in finished goods was nearly offset by a very minor reduction in materials on hand.

Inventories appear to exceed desired levels on balance,

although a majority of firms seem to be satisfied with current levels.

V-2

Manufacturing employment appears to have eked out a modest gain in
recent weeks.

Employment was actually reduced at some plants, however.

Most

of the recent pickup in activity has been accomplished by increasing the
length of the workweek, in some cases by as much as 25% (32 hours to 40 hours
per week).

It appears that this process still has a way to go before output

gains begin to lead directly to higher levels of employment.

Current plant

and equipment remains somewhat in excess of desired levels, but much more
narrowly so than in most recent months.

Consumer Spending
Consumer activity continues to be a positive factor in the bigger
picture, but now appears less robust than was thought to be the case one or
two months ago.

District retailers continue to report increases in sales,

however, and are selling an increased proportion of big ticket items.

Scat-

tered strength in consumer installment lending further supports this conclusion.

Available evidence suggests that furniture, appliances, and autos

continue to provide considerable strength to the overall sales picture.
Inventories were up over the past few weeks at the retail level, but
generally remain in line with desired levels.

Most retailers also appear

comfortable with existing numbers and sizes of outlets.

Housing and Construction
The situation in the construction sector appears to have changed
little in recent weeks.

Housing construction, overall, remains much improved,

but the improvement is very spotty.
in or near metropolitan areas.

Much of it continues to be concentrated

Most rural areas continue to lag.

There

appears to be growing concern over the prospects for housing in coming months.

V-3

This concern seems to center on the future direction of mortgage interest
rates.

How the housing recovery will progress is generally felt to hinge on

mortgage rate developments.

For now, however, available housing continues to

sell very well in most areas.
Commercial and industrial construction activity continues to be
buoyed by work in progress.

New work and prospects for new work are sparse at

present.

Banking and Finance
Overall, loan demand at banks and thrifts appears to be rising very
modestly, and there is no readily apparent pattern, either geographic or for
types of loans.

Gains in consumer installment lending are among the most

widespread, although in some areas mortgages or business loans are leading the
way.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Consumer spending, especially for durables, offers the strongest evidence of
recovery in the Southeast, and retailers surveyed expect sustained growth through the
summer.

The uptrend in construction persists despite a recent increase in mortgage

rates and an earlier drop in building permits.

Business loans at large commercial banks

have risen for the first time since February.

Manufacturers report increased sales,

some firming of prices, and more recalls than layoffs. The pickup in tourism is gaining
momentum, but this acceleration has yet to reach south Florida and Tennessee. Florida's
citrus industry is one of the few bright spots in the troubled agricultural sector.
Employment and Industry.

The southeastern labor market shows signs of

strengthening despite the increase in Florida's unemployment rate from 8.6 percent in
April

to 9.1 percent in May.

The recent volatility in the state's jobless rate is

attributable to changes in seasonality patterns.
14.3 percent in April to 13.1 percent in May.
have exceeded layoffs.
workers.

Alabama's unemployment rate fell from
Even in depressed industries, recalls

Steel fabricators in Alabama have begun rehiring furloughed

Building supply firms, particularly in Florida, report increasing sales and

firming prices because of expanded housing demand.

Executives at cement plants and

lumber mills expect to operate near capacity in the next few months in response to
burgeoning construction activity.

Higher prices in Louisiana's farm chemical industry,

mainly the result of cutbacks in plant capacity and reduced supplies, are probably more
temporary.

However,

industry leaders remain concerned that low-priced,

ammonia will exacerbate their problems.

imported

Louisiana produces 30-40 percent of the

nation's ammonia, a chief source of nitrogen fertilizer for crops.
Consumer Spending.

The May performance of consumer sales exceeded

retailers' expectations; southeastern taxable sales in May rose 6.8 percent from 1982

VI-2
levels in spite of declines of 5.9 percent in Louisiana and 0.3 percent in Mississippi.
Most retailers polled now anticipate sales throughout the summer to run 10 to 35
percent ahead of last year, even though nearly all predict the impact of the July 1 tax
cut will be negligible.
confidence

Merchants attribute these increases to renewed consumer

in the economy and, in Florida,

to a growing momentum

in tourism.

Appliances and other durables, such as stereos, televisions, and lawn mowers, are moving
especially well.
May.

New motor vehicle sales in the Southeast continued to strengthen in

Dealers indicate that a number of popular full-size car lines were in short supply

regionally as well as nationally at the end of May.

Consumers are using credit to pay

for a large portion of these durable purchases, according to retailers and credit reporting
agencies polled.
Construction.

The June 8 increase in the FHA/VA rate from 11.5 percent

to 12.0 percent may spur home sales, according to realtors in the District.

A fall in

discount points accompanied the rate hike and lowered "cash-in-hand" requirements for
many home buyers.

The rise in rates also spurred prospective buyers to sign contracts

in order to lock in current interest rates. Lenders expect no major changes in mortgage
rates in the near future, but they believe increases are quite possible within a year.
Building permit activity remains strong despite the drop in April.
family building permits issued fell 1.1 percent from March to April.

Single-

Many industry

analysts attribute the decrease to aberrations from normal seasonal patterns earlier
this year when lower interest rates catalyzed an unusual winter surge in building.
Permit offices report that June housing activity remains stable.
are especially strong.

Atlanta housing sales

The market now consists of individual transfers from other

regions and a larger share of local buyers seeking to upgrade the value of their housing;
last year corporate relocations accounted for most sales.

Although fairly stable to

VI-3
date, housing prices may begin to rise by the fourth quarter because of inventory
absorption and increasing land costs, according to industry representatives.
Commercial real estate brokers surveyed have become more buoyant in their
outlook despite rising rental rates and ongoing problems of excess supply in many
regional cities such as Orlando, Atlanta, and New Orleans.

Commercial realtors are

not worried that vacancy rates are not diminishing because they expect a 6-8 month
lag between the onset of recovery and office relocation decisions.

However, suburban

markets in the Southeast are faring better than their downtown counterparts.

The

vacancy rate in Atlanta's central business district approaches 20 percent compared to
a metro-wide rate of 15 percent.
Financial Services.
from April to May.
overall increase.

Total loans at large District banks rose considerably

The first growth of business loans since February sparked this

Total bank deposits were off slightly in May.

Some respondents

believe the slowdown in income tax refunds has reduced the influx of most deposits
except time deposits and large-denomination certificates of deposit.

Money Market

Deposit Accounts showed more strength at S&Ls than at large banks in May.

However,

their earlier impetus has slowed to a monthly growth rate of less than 3 percent at
both institutions. Substantial funds flowed out of Negotiable-Order-of-Withdrawal (NOW)
accounts at large banks although super-NOWs at thrifts rose slightly from April to May.
After shelving a proposal to allow interstate banking, the Tennessee legislature recently
passed several bills to make the state's financial institutions more competitive.

Most

notably, banks may now acquire other banks across county lines.
Tourism.

Attendance at most attractions is more than 5 percent over last

year's levels, and state visitor center registrations, except in Alabama and Tennessee,
were up in May relative to last year.
upsurge.

Central Florida remains the leader of this

Respondents in Tennessee and south Florida are pessimistic about travel this

VI-4
summer.

May lodging tax receipts in most states exceeded year-ago figures, but many

properties still suffered lower occupancy rates because of the lingering effects of
recession and because of the expansion in hotel rooms.

Hotels in cities such as New

Orleans and Atlanta, which rely on convention trade, have begun to discount rates to
offset reduced occupancy.

This practice is likely to generate considerable uncertainty

and adverse results, particularly among smaller hotels, in the opinion of those polled.
Agriculture.

Conditions in agriculture remain troubled, although certain

markets show encouraging signs.

Valencia orange production has rebounded from last

year's crippling freeze with an estimated harvest of 72 million boxes (20 million more
Overall revenue projections for oranges portend a 20 percent rise to

than in 1982).
$804 million.

In contrast, large stocks of grapefruit juice carried over from 1982 and

poor marketing practices have resulted in excess supplies, lower prices, and a $40
million decline in projected revenues.

Estimated revenue in 1983 from Sixth District

peach production will be approximately half of 1982 revenue because late frosts and
freezes severely
Carolina.

reduced crops in Georgia, Alabama,

Tennessee, as well as South

Despite these regional crop losses, California's above-average peach crop

has held nationwide prices below 1982 levels.

Adverse weather throughout the South

and widespread flooding in Louisiana and Mississippi lowered the District yield for
winter wheat from 36 bushels per acre in 1982 to 32 bushels in 1983.

Nevertheless,

wheat farmers' net income should be substantially higher this year because approximately
one-fifth of the projected revenue of $530 million will come from sales of Paymentin-Kind (PIK) wheat, for which there are no offsetting costs.

PIK, however, continues

to have an adverse impact on agricultural suppliers and livestock farmers, who face
higher feed costs.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

Things continue to look up in the Seventh District with

prospects favorable for a recovery through the year.

Even so, operating

levels in durable goods manufacturing will remain low relative to
prosperous levels.
usual.

Summer declines in steel and autos will be smaller than

Hiring intentions are significantly stronger than last year at this

time, and claims for unemployment compensation are lower.

Increases in

worker compensation will be smaller this year, but price inflation is
accelerating slightly.

Productivity gains have been large this year, but

are likely to slow down.
heat wave since mid-June.

Retail sales continue to improve, helped by a
Demand for capital goods is showing some life,

but mainly for replacements.
continue.

Closings of marginal manufacturing plants

Housing remains vigorous, but rising loan rates cause concern.

Some new large office buildings have been announced.
work have surged.

Contracts for highway

The high value of the dollar has sharply curtailed

exports of some producer goods.

Farm crops are coming along after a slow

start, but are still behind normal development.

Farm prices are weaker

than had been expected, partly because of reduced export demand.
Foreign Trade.

The high value of the dollar is the principal

cause of a "drying up" of some export markets.

Exports of construction

equipment and heavy trucks are 80 percent below the levels of two years
ago.

There is concern that foreign producers will capture these markets

permanently.

The high dollar also encourages imports of capital goods such

as machine tools, medium trucks, and aircraft components.

Reduced airline

traffic to the U.S. and smaller foreign tourist business also reflect
current exchange rates as well as restrictions on conversion of Latin
American currencies to dollars.

VII-2

Employment.

Surveys show that companies planning to increase

hirings now outnumber those planning reductions, reversing the pattern of a
year ago.

Most of the change reflects fewer planned reductions.

major layoffs are foreseen.

No new

However, most of the companies that cut staff

drastically in the past two years do not plan to reverse these policies.
Middle management has been most affected by cutbacks.

Job opportunities

remain very limited except for well-trained specialists such as data
processors.

The weak job market continues to hold down increases in

compensation.

Many companies are continuing "freezes" for exempt workers.

Unions face tough bargaining in upcoming negotiations.
Prices are strengthening somewhat, overall, but no

Inflation.

significant upsurge is expected this year.

Cost structures have benefitted

from excellent productivity gains, but this trend will slow as activity
rises further.

Most firms strongly desire to widen profit margins, which

are far below the level of the late 1970s.
Housing.

The uptrend in residential construction continues.

Fixed rate home mortgages, on average, have increased from about 12.5
This rise may have stimulated demand from borrowers

percent to 13 percent.

who fear further increases.

(Lenders continue to experiment, with varying

success, with innovative adjustable rate mortgages, which still lack
general acceptance.)

A further increase in rates to 14 to 15 percent could

seriously dampen the market.

Meanwhile, demand for building materials is

excellent, with most gypsum board plants operating at full capacity.
Gypsum board is on allocation in some areas, but this is not restricting
construction activity.
Nonresidential.

Work on new factory buildings is at a very low

level, and no improvement is foreseen.

The office building sector is still

declining, but some large new downtown projects in Chicago are being

VII-3

unveiled for an early start.

The market is overbuilt, but developers

believe that space will be needed in three or four years when these
projects are completed.

Moreover, some developers wish to take advantage

of the temporary willingness of "hungry" contractors to enter bids that may
seem cheap later on.

There is a large volume of rehab work, often handled

at wages below union scale.

Bridge and road work will be up sharply in the

second half.
Capital Goods.

Demand for equipment produced in the District is

picking up, but not as rapidly as the national aggregates on orders and
output indicate.

Producers of steel plates and castings report some rise

in demand from equipment producers.
either parts or whole machines.

Few industries have large new facilities

underway or in the planning stages.
because of new regulations.

Mainly this is for replacement needs,

Sales of truck trailers are booming

Orders for heavy trucks have improved enough

to raise output schedules from very depressed levels.
also are up slightly from near zero.

Freight car orders

Business communications equipment,

which held up during the recession, remains strong.

Machine tool orders

remain very weak, but press orders have increased slightly.

Heavy

construction equipment remains very depressed with large stocks in the
field, including those of leasing companies.

Farm equipment inventories

represent a whole year's sales, and new layoffs have been announced.
Foreign demand for U.S. equipment is very low.
Inventories.

Liquidation of inventories continued into the second

quarter for many companies, but in large part this was involuntary as sales
exceeded expectations.

Rebuilding is apparently underway now, and will

contribute to second half strength.

Inventories of most cars, trucks

(including heavy trucks), recreational vehicles, steel, nonferrous metals,
capital goods components, and building materials are quite low.

Oi1

VII-4

products are in good balance.

Retail stocks of finished farm tractors and

heavy construction equipment are far in excess of current needs.

General

merchandise inventories at retail are lean, but additional supplies are
readily available.
Motor Vehicles.

Sales of autos (especially large models) and

light trucks (especially compacts) are running well above last year.
Orders for heavy trucks, many of which are custom built, have increased.
(Because of downsizing of the heavy truck industry, there is concern that a
surge in demand would strain capacity.)

In contrast to last year when car

output schedules were reduced several times, they have been increased
successively this year.

Third quarter output is now expected to be the

highest for the period since 1978.

The improvement in autos has

reverberations throughout the region for companies making seals, locks,
electric components, frames etc.
Retail Trade.

General merchandise chains have been reporting

improvement in sales for several months, both hard and soft goods, with the
Midwest lagging the nation.
abnormally cold spring.

The uptrend had continued in the face of an

A heat wave after mid-June brought a spurt in

sales of air conditioners, dehumidifiers, light apparel, and recreational
goods, which had been slow.
"traffic."

Other lines benefitted from this increased

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT -

ST.

LOUIS

Sales and production in the Eighth District continued to expand
during May and early June, and prices were nearly stable.

Residential home

sales, however, declined from the pace attained earlier in the year, and
many manufacturing plants continue operating substantially below capacity.
Although there have been net employment gains, unemployment rose from its
already high level, as the labor force was bolstered by graduates and
students seeking summer jobs.

Most respondents anticipate that economic

activity will continue to expand during the summer and fall.
Tourism and Conventions
Tourist and convention business in the St. Louis area was more
than 10 percent greater in May and early June than in the same period of
1982.

Continued gains are expected during the rest of the summer.

Downtown hotels already are booked to near capacity for most of July.

The

Convention and Visitors Bureau has received twice the number of inquiries
about St. Louis attractions in the past six weeks as in the same period
last year.

This summer, 65 conventions-- more than during any other

three-month period in history-- will be held in the area.
Sales
Sales at six department stores in the District were 7 percent
higher in May and early June than in the same period of 1982.

The gains

occurred despite unseasonally wet weather in many areas of the District.
Furniture, appliances, rugs and "Father's Day" merchandise showed
strength.

Apparel did less well, allegedly because the weather in May was

too cool for customers to be interested in summer fashions.

VIII-2

Automobile sales improved in May and early June at four dealers
but slipped back at two dealers.

One large dealer, with sales of both new

and used cars about 25 percent ahead of last year, noted that he had
difficulty maintaining adequate inventories for both autos and trucks.

A

dealer of foreign cars said he was readily selling all the cars allocated
to him and could sell many more of the popular models if available.
Home sales in the Eighth District, which had been strong earlier
in the year, decreased in May and early June.

The unseasonally wet weather

in May and some inching up of mortgage rates in early June contributed to
however,

remained optimistic about

the slowdown.

Industry spokesmen,

future sales.

Residential construction continued at a relatively high

level.
Manufacturing Activity
Most industrial firms in

the District reported an increase in
The gains continued to be largest for

orders and shipments since April.

consumer-type goods and defense items.

Firms producing business equipment

and metals reported little change in sales.

Capital spending plans of most

firms remain unchanged and are not likely to increase until current
facilities are more fully utilized.

Inventories at most firms are near

desired levels.
Employment
Total Eighth District employment crept up in May and early June.
Because of productivity gains,

however,

than the increase in production.

the rise in employment was less

Moreover,

a few firms still

are trimming

their workforces, primarily through early retirements and attrition, in

VIII-3

order to improve efficiency.

Despite the net increase in total employment,

the number of unemployed also rose moderately as the work force was
enlarged by graduates and students seeking summer jobs.
Finance
Consumer loans rose during May and early June at large Eighth
District banks, but commercial and industrial loans declined.
loans changed little.

Real estate

Bank deposits increased, with both money market

deposit accounts and super-NOW accounts rising rapidly.

Savings and loan

associations, also continuing to have an inflow of new funds, were able to
increase their lending and improve their liquidity.

The financial

condition of savings and loans also has been strengthened by a slightly
lower cost of funds and a higher average yield on assets.
Price and wages
Prices have changed little, and wages have risen only moderately
so far this year in the District.

In general, expectations are that prices

and wages will rise moderately during the rest of 1983.
through 1984, however, are more diverse:

Projections

some analysts focusing on excess

capacity believe wages and prices will accelerate only modestly; others,
concerned about the huge Federal deficits and rapid monetary expansion,
anticipate marked accelerations in wages and prices.
Agricultural Conditions
Planting of many District crops was delayed because of rains and
flooding.

A few fields were left idle, and some farmers shifted from corn

or cotton to soybeans, which does not require as long a growing season.
Weather turned more favorable in June, however, and much of the crops are
now planted, and at this stage, most crops are doing well.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District economy

is still on the mend.

Gains in sales of

homes, general merchandise, and autos and increased interest in tourism suggest that consumer spending has continued to strengthen.
oil and gas exploration have been improving as well.

Manufacturing and

But metal mining has

remained in the doldrums, and signs of recovery have been mixed in agriculture.

So

far, the recovery has been strong enough to halt employment de-

clines, but not strong enough to stimulate considerable hiring.

Bank lending,

however, has recently picked up.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending has continued to show the most convincing signs of
recovery.
in

The most spectacular sign has been the continuing sharp resurgence

home building and

sales.

In Fargo, North Dakota, for example, building

permits for 574 residences were issued in the two-month period April-May, more
than five times as many as in that period last year.

In Minneapolis-St. Paul,

home sales in May were up 35 percent from a year earlier.
seem to

have helped boost

home furnishings

department stores this spring.

sales at

Improved home sales

two large Twin Cities

These stores report that other items have been

selling very well too and that many consumers are no longer waiting for sales
to purchase.

Outside Minneapolis-St. Paul, recent general merchandise sales

have been good as well, according to Bank directors.
Another sign of recovery is that the April rebound in auto sales has
continued through May and early June.

A sales manager for one of the nation's

largest auto manufacturers, for example, says that his firm's auto sales in

IX-2

the district have in

recent weeks been up about 25 percent

from a year ago.

Verifying this gain are Bank directors' comments about strong auto sales this
spring in their communities.
A further sign of recovery is that district consumers appear to have
become more willing to spend on travel and recreation.
inquiries

in

The number of tourism

the Upper Peninsula of Michigan this spring has been five times

greater than normal.
reports that it

And the tourism association in northeastern Minnesota

has distributed just about all its brochures;

the supply to last through August.

it

had expected

Businesses also have seemed more inter-

ested in travel and recreation lately.

A major Minnesota resort reports that

its recent reservations for business meetings have been up substantially from
a year ago.

Industrial Activity
District industrial production has been manifesting signs of recovery
too.

The pickup in homebuilding, according to our last report, accounted for

much of the pickup in district manufacturing through early spring, but in May
and early June, auto sales have been providing impetus to manufacturing as
well.

A radial tire factory in Wisconsin has been having trouble keeping up

with orders,

and an auto parts

recalled a substantial

manufacturer

number of workers.

in

the Upper Peninsula recently

The district's one auto assembly

plant has been working two shifts and plans to hire additional workers this
summer if

sales remain at present

started to revive.

levels.

In mid-June, 63

Dakota, compared to 47 in mid-March.

Gas and oil exploration

has also

rigs were active in Montana and North
A North Dakota director attributes this

increase to a sizable drop in drilling costs.

Some district industrial activ-

IX-3

ities are still suffering, however--particularly iron mining.

The only Minne-

sota taconite plant to remain open throughout 1982 just announced that it is
shutting down for two months and laying off 1,000 workers.

Agricultural Conditions
In agriculture,
continue to

report

signs of recovery have been mixed.

that

the

Payment-In-Kind program

is

Bank directors

having a

positive

impact on agriculture, but several who are in the industry are concerned that
excess worldwide supplies will put downward pressure on prices.

This mixed

outlook is perhaps reflected in the Minneapolis cash prices for corn, wheat,
and soybeans; they remained essentially unchanged between April and May, after
increasing markedly between January and April.
early June is another worry.

Cold, damp weather in May and

The height of Minnesota corn in mid-June aver-

aged only 7 inches, which is 3 inches below normal, while soybeans averaged
just half their normal 4-inch height.

Employment
The recovery in consumer spending and industrial production seems to
have

arrested the decline

employment,

seasonally

fourth quarter,
lier.

and in

in

district

adjusted,
April it

been

essentially

unchanged

was 1.5 percent below its

since

the

level a year ear-

(National wage and salary employment increased 0.4 percent between the

fourth quarter and April and in
ago.)

has

District wage and salary

employment.

that month was down

1.1 percent

from a year

District employment has stopped falling because employers have reduced

the number of workers they have been laying off.

Minnesota's initial claims

for unemployment insurance in April and May were 20 percent below their year-

IX-4

ago

level.

But

employment

has not risen because most employers

significantly step up their hiring.
2,891 job openings

have yet to

The Minnesota Job Service currently lists

in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, for example.

Although

this is up considerably from last year's 1,780 openings, it is down considerably

from

the

approximately

8,000

openings

listed

in

both

1978

and

1979.

Conversations with several large district employers corroborate these figures;
none

has

done extensive hiring

lately.

The

district's

largest

manufacturer

has not added any workers nationwide for several months.
Employment

conditions
In

complete states, however.
was
to

down about 2 percent
job

declines

Montana

had a

construction
1.5

percent.

ago,

mostly

4

of

That

In

Dakota,

wage and

stemmed

from a

in

mining
state's

trade

salary
26

wage

from a year ago,

decline,

and this

and

29

increase

in

percent

in

in

17 percent

four
April

mining.

decline

employment was down

employment

employment

held

construction

steady.

from a

in

roughly

from a

was unchanged

employment was up 1.5 percent

percent

district's

can be attributed largely

along with a

services

the

and salary employment

and salary

payroll

and

among

manufacturing

wage

South Dakota,

because

considerably

Minnesota,

percent

comparable
jobs.

vary

year

In

North

year ago.

This

employment

that

can be

attributed primarily to a huge coal gasification project.

Financial Developments
As

some industries have revived and employment

off, bank lending has increased in the district.
June,

loans

months.

at country member banks

This rise is

confirmed

has picked up in their areas.

rose

have leveled

Between late April and mid-

2 percent,

by Bank directors'

declines

the

first

rise

in

many

comments that loan demand

But directors also indicate that the quality of

many recent loan applications has been poor.

TENTH DISTRICT-KANSAS CITY
Overview.
strengthen.

Business activity in the Tenth District continues to

Growing sales are expected to bring moderate additions to retail

inventories, but materials inventories are expected to stay near current

levels.
tinue.

Small but broad-based increases in auto sales are expected to conThe winter wheat crop is in excellent condition as harvesting begins

in Oklahoma.

Farmland values are stabilizing after recent declines.

Loan

demand at Tenth District banks is showing very little growth, and deposit
growth remains limited primarily to money market deposit accounts.

The

prime rate remains generally stable, and no change is anticipated in the
near term.
Retail Trade.

Respondents report nominal sales gains of up to 10 per-

cent in the first five months of 1983 compared with the same period of 1982,
with most responses falling in the 5 to 10 percent growth range.

Sales in

all product lines have been growing steadily, with sales of women's apparel
particularly strong.

Most retailers indicate that inventory levels are

satisfactory although about one-third of respondents are still reducing
stocks.

For the remainder of 1983, retailers throughout the Tenth District

expect a continued steady growth in sales that would prompt about a 5 percent
expansion in inventories by yearend.
Purchasing Agents.

Prices of major inputs are currently 3 to 5 percent

higher than in June of last year, according to purchasing agents contacted,
with virtually all of the increase in the past three months.
whole, agents foresee prices rising 3 to 6 percent.

For 1983 as a

Purchasing agents

report attempts to manage inventories extremely closely in the recovery.

X-2

Thus, over the course of the year, they intend either to trim inventories or
to maintain them at current low levels.

At the present time, inputs are

readily available, lead times are short, and there are no reported bottlenecks
of either labor or capacity.
Automobile Dealers.

Most respondents report a small but broad-based

increase in auto sales compared with sales in the same period of last year.
The growth in auto sales is attributed to low interest rates offered by manufacturers' finance companies.

While some dealers report lower-than-desired

inventories due to difficulties in obtaining large cars, most stated that
inventories are being held constant or trimmed slightly in preparation for
the new model year.

For the rest of the year, auto dealers expect continued

moderate growth in sales.
Agriculture.

The winter wheat crop throughout the Tenth District is in

excellent condition, as a result of early spring rains.
this week in parts of Oklahoma.

Harvest is starting

District bankers report that the majority of

wheat farmers plan to remain in the PIK (Payment-In-Kind) program.

The

planting of row crops is slightly behind normal but the recent dry weather has
aided planting progress.

Range conditions have also benefited from adequate

moisture and are reported excellent for livestock pasturing.

Many cattle that

have been grazing on PIK acres have gone to market after attaining desired
weight, while the rest have moved to grass pasture where available or to
feedlots.

According to District bankers, farmland values appear to be

stabilizing after declining for two consecutive years.

Not much land is

selling, but almost all of the land that is changing hands is being purchased
by farmers.

Outside investor activity in land sales is currently reported to

X-3

be minimal.

Farm implement dealers are faring poorly with sales similar to

1982's depressed levels.

Sales of large items such as tractors and combines

have been particularly depressed.

Tenth District bankers expect little

increase in sales before the end of the year.
Banking.

Loan demand at Tenth District banks has shown very little

growth during the last month.

A number of respondents report that real

estate lending has increased, and a smaller number report an increase in consumer loan activity.

Commercial and industrial loan demand as well as agri-

cultural loan demand remain constant.

Most respondents report deposit growth.

Demand deposits, conventional NOW accounts, and Super-NOW accounts have shown
no growth, on average.

Continued steady growth of money market deposit

accounts (MMDA's) was reported, with most of these funds coming from outside
the reporting institutions.

Reported growth in money market certificates,

small saver certificates, and large CD's is quite variable but, on average,
unchanged.

With few exceptions, the prime rate of responding institutions

was 10.5 percent for the past two months.
anticipated.

No change in the prime rate is

Automobile loan rates have declined within the last month at a

number of respondent institutions.

Otherwise, consumer rates show little

change, and little change is anticipated during the next month.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT-DALLAS

The

economic

recovery in the Eleventh District is strengthening.

Increases in consumer and construction spending are leading
Department
levels.

store

the

recovery.

are rising, and auto sales are above year-earlier

sales

Construction is robust.

Manufacturers' shipments have

picked

up

as a result of stronger demand for housing, autos and other consumer goods.
Mortgage and construction lending at S&Ls remains strong.
commercial

banks

continues

to

slow.

Loan

growth

Banks have shifted to real estate

lending partly to offset sluggish business loan demand.

Growth in deposits

The District drilling

at all financial institutions slowed sharply in May.

Trends

rig count is slowly rising after hitting a low for the year in May.
in

the agricultural sector are mixed.

at

Rising feed costs are helping grain

farmers but are hurting livestock producers.
The pace of
Construction
rise.

construction

is

still

very

construction this year
construction
slowing.

in

the

District

is

brisk.

of single-family homes and retail shopping space continues to

Apartment construction

activity

activity

Increases

high.

in

to

slow

but

the

level

of

Two-thirds of the permits for residential

been

have
strong

remains

beginning

is

for

Office

apartments.

space

under

but the pace of new project announcements is

retail

construction

are

partly

offsetting

the

slowing in the office sector.
Department store sales increased steadily in May.

Respondents are

optimistic about consumer spending during the rest of the year.
the

Sales

in

hard-hit Gulf and Mexican border regions were up slightly from April's

level, but they are

still

well

below

the

year-ago

figure.

Consumer

XI-2

durables

are

selling well, but apparel sales are uneven.

Inventories are

slightly above planned levels.
New car sales remained steady in May at levels above
volumes,

but

shortages

of

popular

models

are

Dealers expect manufacturers' low interest-rate
economy

to

year-earlier

still curtailing sales.

programs

and

keep new car sales at current or higher levels.

a

stronger

Sales of used

cars are sluggish.
Manufacturing production in this District continues to respond
growth from consumer spending.

Shipments of electronics, steel, chemicals,

and lumber and wood products has picked up in response to increased
for

consumer

durable

goods, autos, and housing.

and wood products are still rehiring workers.
other

manufacturing

firms

is

still

accomplished mainly through attrition.
to

increase productivity.

to

demand

Manufacturers of lumber

Employment at

declining

a

number

of

but reductions are being

Most firms are augmenting

programs

Respondents expect little increase in wages and

prices this year.
S&Ls again
strong.

Respondents

report

mortgage

and

construction

lending

is

are concerned, however, that interest rates may turn

up sharply in the near term.
dry

that

They anticipate that borrowing

up if mortgage rates go to 14 percent or higher.

rates to return to the 12- to 13-percent

range

by

demand

would

Most expect mortgage
year-end.

Given

this

interest rate outlook, efforts to lengthen the average maturity of jumbo CD
holdings

have

been

made.

Consumer

demand

however, has declined during the last 30 days.

for

longer-term

deposits,

XI-3

At

District

member

banks a slight decline in loan growth in May

was offset by increased security holdings.
percent above the year-earlier level.
all major categories except real
remains

sluggish

and

16

Loan growth at large banks slowed in

estate

outstanding

Outstanding bank credit was

lending.

consumer

Business

loans

loan

demand

were unchanged.

On a

year-over-year basis, deposit growth at all financial institutions in

this

District was 12 percent in May.
The

number

of

drilling rigs

operating

in

the District states

turned up slightly in early June after declining in May to its lowest level
this

year.

The

outlook is favorable for a pickup in petroleum drilling.

Drilling costs are well below historical levels because of excess
of equipment.

supplies

In May, the dollar value of bids for lease sales of drilling

sites in the Gulf of Mexico set an all-time high.
Conditions

in

the

except for cattle producers.
higher

feed

nevertheless,

costs

have

agricultural sector

are

are

reduced

profits.

Texas

from

cattle

producers,

put more cattle on feed in May than a year ago, because they

rising.

Cotton

prices

recovery and better export prospects.
benefit

improved

Recent declines in cattle prices coupled with

anticipate lower prices for feed grain later this year.
incomes

generally

rising

prices,

Cotton

producers'

moved upward on the strength of the
Corn and sorghum farmers continue to

but income gains may be temporary if rising

corn prices trigger the release of government-controlled corn reserves.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

The recovery in Twelfth District economic activity is gaining momentum,
extending to a greater number of industries.

Retail sales at department stores have

been rising at an accelerated pace recently, while the recovery in Western
homebuilding and sales activity has been even stronger than the upturn nationally.
In the manufacturing and mining sectors, employment gains are becoming more
widespread.

Moreover, although the capital goods industries are not yet expanding

their payrolls, employment has stabilized.

The net inflow of funds into MMDAs at

District banks has slowed but still remains

substantial.

Banks have been investing

most of their excess funds in short-term Treasury securities since business and
consumer loan demand remains weak despite promotional efforts.
Consumer Spending
Respondents report that consumers are imbued with a renewed sense of confidence
and that retail sales have been increasing widely throughout the Twelfth District.
Major department store chains in Southern California reported that sales rose sharply
in May and ran nearly 13 percent above the year-earlier level, representing a solid
gain in real terms.

The only weakness is occurring in Utah where flooding,

attributable to a record spring snow melt, is adversely affecting shopping.
Competition for sales is reported to be extremely intense with department stores
engaged in heavy discounting of list prices.

These promotional efforts are being

successful, however, and seasonal inventory is moving well.

Sales of durable goods,

severely depressed during the recession, are rising even faster than nondurables.
particular, the upturn in home sales is helping to spur sales of household goods,
including furniture, appliances, and other big ticket items.

Interest rate

concessions by manufacturers have stimulated sales of automobiles.
delinquencies are returning to pre-recession levels.

Retail credit

In

XII-2

Manufacturing and Mining
The recovery in Twelfth District manufacturing activity is becoming broader
based.

Until recently, gains in employment and prices were confined mainly to the

important lumber industry which benefited early in the recovery from the pickup in
national homebuilding activity.

But in the past two months, employment also has

begun to rise in a number of other important regional industries including primary
metals, chemicals, apparel and food processing.

Recent labor agreements in the

aluminum and copper industries have removed the threat of strikes.

The pickup in

orders for those metals therefore is attributable to a fundamental increase in
consumption by the automobile, appliance, container and housing industries, rather
than to strike hedge buying.

The West's major capital goods producing industries--

including those that manufacture machinery, electronic equipment, trucks, aircraft
and rail cars--have not yet experienced an overall pickup in orders.

Although the

defense and consumer markets for some of those products is growing, business demand
for capital goods remains weak.

Nevertheless, except for aircraft, where low

commercial airline orders are still causing cutbacks, employment in most of those
industries has stabilized.
Construction and Real Estate
The West is experiencing an even stronger recovery in homebuilding and sales
activity than the nation as a whole.

Housing starts in the West currently are

running at double the level of a year ago and permit activity points to still further
gains in the months ahead.

Sales of new homes throughout the District apparently are

rising at a strong enough pace to prevent an excess accumulation of unsold inventory.
Sales of lower-priced homes have picked up especially rapidly.

But in the Los

Angeles area, single-family residences in the $200,000-$300,000 price range also are
selling well.

A large portion of the new homes are being financed through subsidized

FHA/VA or state government mortgages.

Although nonresidential construction activity

XII-3

remains below the year-ago level, respondents report a pickup in certain geographical
areas for such non-office projects as shopping malls, hotels and hospitals.
Moreover, the rising value of nonresidential construction permits issued suggests
that spending will increase in the months ahead, provided interest rates do not rise
sharply.
Agriculture
The return of clear weather in the past two months has permitted California
farmers to plant lettuce, tomatoes, onions and other vegetable crops, which had been
delayed by flooding.

As a result, vegetable prices have begun to moderate after

rising sharply earlier this year.

Similiarly, fruit prices also are coming down.

Prices for fruits and vegetables are still well above levels of a year ago, however,
and California farmers are expected to experience a year-to-year increase in net
income from those products.

California farmers also are expected to benefit from the

Federal payment-in-kind (PIK) program.

In fact, cotton prices have been rising

sharply recently and production costs for grains are down generally.

Elsewhere

throughout the District, smaller gains in net farm income are anticipated.

One

potential threat is the record snowpack which could damage California agriculture
this summer.
Financial Institutions
The net flow of funds into MMDAs at Twelfth District banks has fallen off
considerably in recent weeks in keeping with the national pattern, partly due to
interest rate competition from thrifts.

Still, the inflows represent a significant

source of funds, which has allowed banks to reduce their reliance on purchased funds,
especially large CD's, and to actively promote both business and consumer loan
products.

Business loan demand remains flat to weak, however.

Thus, most

institutions are heavily promoting their consumer loan products--i.e., auto loans,
installment loans, and credit card plans--to stimulate consumers' demand for shorter-

XII-4

term or variable rate credit.

Aggressive advertising campaigns and lower loan rates

are the most common efforts being employed by banks to attract borrowers.

Despite

these efforts, consumer loan growth has not accelerated rapidly because of
competition from captive finance companies offering discount loan rates and
increasing competition from other nonbank lenders.

Since the volume of banks'

mortgage loans outstanding has not been growing, these institutions have been
investing excess funds in short-term U.S. government securities.

