SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

January, 1984

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .......................................................

i

First District - Boston ......................................

I-1

Second District - New York ...................................

II-i

Third District - Philadelphia ................................

III-1

Fourtn District - Cleveland ..................................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ..................................

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta .....................................

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago

..................................

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis .................................. VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis .................................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City ................................

X-

Eleventh District - Dallas ...................................

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco .............................

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Overview
Retailers across the country enjoyed an excellent Christmas
season. Year-over-year sales increases, largely real, were well into
double digits.

Post-holiday sales were also relatively strong.

Increases

in manufacturing activity were widespread.

Price hikes are becoming more

frequent; delivery times are lengthening.

Capital spending is picking up;

the emphasis is on modernization but some capacity expansion is also
planned.

In the banking sector, commercial and industrial loan demand

increased modestly, consumer loan demand strongly.

Homebuilding and

housing sales have held up well in most districts.

Severe weather damaged

citrus and vegetable crops in the South, but did not affect winter wheat in
the Midwest.

Retail Trade
Retail sales were very strong this Christmas.
gains in December were in the 10 to 25 percent range.
noted that these increases were largely real.

Year-over-year sales
Several districts

Sales of big ticket items

such as appliances, consumer electronics and recreational equipment were

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

particularly strong.

Apparel also fared well in some areas.

Credit use

was heavy, according to Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco.

Sales

volumes in early January were also good, but the year-over-year increases
were not as large as in December.

Inventories are generally satisfactory.

Retailers are optimistic about 1984 and in the Philadelphia district they
are more worried about losing sales than about accumulating excess
inventories.
Automobile sales have been brisk, although low inventories have
been a limiting factor in several districts.

Manufacturing
The manufacturing sector continues to recover.
and production were widespread.

Increases in orders

Among the industries for which increases

were reported were motor vehicles and automotive products, especially
trucks; nonelectrical machinery; electronics; some types of steel;
chemicals; semi-conductors; paper and paper board.
upturn in farm equipment did not materialize.

However, an expected

The demand for aircraft

remains depressed in the Cleveland district, but has improved in San
Francisco.

Boston notes that export sales remain very weak, although sales

by foreign subsidiaries are improving slightly.
Capital spending is picking up.

Philadelphia, commenting on its

survey of manufacturers, observes that "for the first time in seven years,
half of the respondents...intend to increase outlays for plant and
equipment during the next six months."

The emphasis is on modernization

and productivity enhancement, but some expansions are planned.

iii

Price increases are reported to be more frequent but, for the most
part, still moderate.

Lead times are lengthening.

According to Chicago,

cutbacks in domestic capacity have contributed to the scattered supply
problems.
In the Atlanta and Dallas districts, higher rig counts point to a
recovery in drilling activity.

Minneapolis also reports an upturn in oil

activity, but not in gas and coal.
Increased manufacturing activity has been reflected in more
trucking and railroad business in the St. Louis district.

Barge traffic

has also been increasing gradually.

Banking
Commercial and industrial loan demand increased modestly in several
districts, declined in St. Louis and rose sharply in Cleveland and Kansas
City.

Demand for consumer loans is strong in most districts.

As loan

demand has increased, banks have improved credit quality but become
somewhat less liquid, according to Richmond.

Real Estate
Homebuilding and housing sales have held up well in most districts,
although New York, Kansas City and Cleveland report a slowing in sales at
year-end.

Respondents in New York and Cleveland do not expect 1984 to be

as strong as 1983 because most of pent-up demand has been satisfied.

New

York and Atlanta are also concerned about the effects of shortages and the
increasing prices of housing materials.

However, Chicago builders expect

1984 to be a better year and Richmond reports an upturn in speculative
building, indicating that industry expectations are high.

Variable rate

mortgages are becoming more prevalent in the Chicago and San Francisco
districts; initial rates are substantially below those on fixed rate
mortgages.

Agriculture
Severe weather damaged citrus fruit crops in the Dallas and Atlanta
districts.

Fresh vegetables were also affected.

However, San Francisco

growers expect to benefit from the resulting price increases.

The weather

does not appear to have harmed the winter wheat crop, but cattle are not
gaining weight at normal rates.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Retailers in the First District enjoyed a very successful Christmas
season.

Hard goods, especially electronics, sold particularly well.

Inventories are satisfactory.

Plans for 1984 are optimistic.

Manufacturers are also very confident that 1984 will be a good year, but
they are apprehensive about 1985.

Capital spending is picking up but the

emphasis is on productivity enhancement rather than expansion.
remain very weak.

Exports

Price increases seem to be more frequent, but firms are

still very cautious about raising prices.

Mortgage lending by thrift

institutions declined in the fourth quarter.

Committment rates for

fixed-rate mortgages have been edging lower.
Retail
Retailers in the First District report very strong sales gains in
December.

They are optimistic about 1984.

Hard goods in general and

electronics in particular highlighted a highly successful Christmas
shopping season.

Local merchants again commented on the Northeast's

strength compared to associated stores in other regions.
For two of the firms contacted sales in December were more than 20
percent above sales in comparable stores in December a year ago.

(Most

newspaper reports of sales growth are not on a comparable stores basis.)
Departments performing very well included video cassette recorders, tapes
and records, computers, microwave ovens, TVs and other appliances,
hardware, physical fitness products, and women's coats.

A store selling

1.2

mostly apparel and other soft goods attributed "good but not outstanding"
results to a lack of consumer hard goods.
All those contacted have optimistic plans for 1984, with one firm's
optimism bolstered by 24 percent sales growth to date in January.
Inventory levels are satisfactory.

Merchants attribute consumer enthusiasm

to steady prices (and even declining prices for some computer and
electronics items) as well as to the general recovery.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturers are confident that 1984 will be a good
year, but they are apprehensive about 1985.

Everyone contacted has seen an

upturn in business, with several reporting that their most recent quarter
was "excellent."

While order and shipment increases have been widespread,

sales of automotive products - both original equipment and after-market have been particularly robust.

Demand has also improved markedly for

smaller-scale, productivity-enhancing capital goods.

Still languishing are

very large, capacity-expanding capital goods and projects.

One respondent

noted that the only markets today for increased capacity in such basic
industries as autos, steel and energy are overseas; and these overseas
markets are drying up because of the strong dollar.
are the other major area which remains very weak.

Exports of all kinds
In contrast to exports,

sales of overseas subsidiaries seem to be picking up a little.
The capital spending plans of First District manufacturers are
consistent with the pattern they observe in their own sales.

A number are

increasing capital spending, but the emphasis is on productivity
improvement.

Two respondents are adding to capacity, but most have no

1.3

plans to expand and several are consolidating their operations in fewer
plants.
Employment levels are rising for most firms, although one
respondent foresees a large layoff in one division.

Several manufacturers

noted that they are producing more output with fewer people than in the
past.
Price increases seem to be more frequent.

Most firms say they see

more increases in the prices of purchased materials and components.
steel and aluminum were mentioned.
recently increased their own prices.

Paper,

Several of the firms contacted have
Nevertheless, manufacturers are still

very cautious about raising prices and will back off if the increase meets
a lot of resistance.

According to an automotive supplier, the auto

companies are negotiating long-term contracts with price decreases in the
first year and very modest increases thereafter.

One respondent expressed

concern that the wage settlement to be negotiated between GM and the UAW in
1984 will be very large and will set a pattern for other industries.
Mortgage Lending
Mortgage lending by thrift institutions declined in the fourth
quarter but remained far above the level in the fourth quarter of 1982.
Loan repayments appear to have exceeded loans made in the fourth quarter,
but for the entire year loans were ahead of repayments.
have declined slightly from the highs of late summer.

Mortgage rates

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Introduction
The

improvement

in

the

Second

continuing at a moderate pace.

The

one

sales

for

area

retailers,

with

year-earlier period in the 10

to

activity continues

led

sector.

to

Purchasing

expand,

managers

District's

economy

is

Christmas season was a strong
gains

over

the

20 percent range.
by

note

strength

a

pickup

in
in

increased willingness to accumulate inventories.

lackluster

Manufacturing
the

automotive

orders

and

an

The nonresidential

real estate market remains strong with a quickening pace of leasing
activity and the announcement of new building projects.

Residential

construction is at a seasonal low but the outlook for the spring is
favorable.

On the financial side, banks report a modest increase in

business borrowing and strong demand for consumer credit.

Consumer Spending
Second District retailers reported brisk sales
Christmas season,
in the 10
most

with over-the-year increases in

to 20 percent range.

stores

and

only

December-to-December

one

gain

generally heavy from the

of

Business

upstate
less

New

than

during

the

December generally

exceeded expectations at
York

chain

10 percent.

Thanksgiving weekend to

wide range of products was reported in demand.

recorded
Spending

Christmas,

a
was

and a

This contrasted with

II-2

1982

sales were

when

engaged

until

late

in the final week of

strong

the

in

season

to

promotional activity prior

in heavy

continued

weak

1983 but

stores

and

Christmas.

Sales

in early

January

reports were more mixed, with growth over 1983 ranging from flat to
20

Some

percent.

desire
only in

to

stores

report

replenish stocks.

line with sales.

low levels

Others

plan

Most retailers

of

to

inventories and

increase

a

inventories

expect demand

to remain

strong compared to the levels of a year ago, but with much smaller
over-the-year gains than in December.
Business Activity
Business

activity

in

the

Second

expanding at a moderate pace in recent weeks.

District

continued

While the automotive

industry remains the major source of strength throughout much of the
District, other manufacturing industries reporting improvement were
electrical

and

nonelectrical

machinery,

fabricated

metals,

New orders are continuing to improve,

chemicals, and food products.

and purchasing managers in some upstate

areas noted

an

increased

willingness to accumulate inventories.
Several companies have recently announced plans to open new
facilities in the District.

These include a large printing plant in

Saratoga Springs, a computer operations center on Long Island, and a
factory for producing computer components in the Poughkeepsie area.
In addition, a
renovation

of

number of companies will soon begin expansion and
their

existing

operations.

The

largest

of

these

projects is a $67 million, 2-year modernization and expansion of a

II-3

paper

mill

in

installations

upstate

and

New

expansions

York.
are

In

most

cases

to

generate

expected

these

new

increased

employment.
Unemployment has
with the national trend.
State

was

7.4

percentage

declined in

Second District in line

The December unemployment rate in New York

percent,

points,

the

while

an
New

over-the-year
Jersey's

6.8

improvement
percent

rate

of

1.7

was

2.4

percentage points below its December 1982 level.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction activity is at a seasonal low now
Traffic and sales

that cold weather has moved into the District.

have also slowed and are not expected to pick up before
January.

Over

the

bright.

Homebuilders
many

Nonetheless,

construction pace.
been

already

few

next

are

fully

question

though,

months

the

booked

the

outlook

through

sustainability

the end of

the
last

of

remains
spring.
year's

They believe that most of the pent-up demand has

satisfied

and

that

lower mortgage

rates

and

stable

housing prices will be needed to generate much additional interest
from potential homebuyers.
in

stabilize

Builders seem skeptical that prices will
because of

the near-term

ongoing

labor and materials

And the likelihood of continuing large

shortages.

Federal deficits

makes them doubt that mortgage rates will decline much.
The nonresidential real estate market continues to exhibit
strength.

signs

of

brisk

pace

Leasing

and generally

of office

without

space has

significant

progressed at

rent

reductions

a
or

II-4

other

landlord

been scarce,

concessions.

Although

several new plans

been announced.

for

nonresidential

future

Some of these represent

generally considered

starts

projects have

have

recently

expansions into what are

secondary locations such as the West

the area north of the World Trade Center in

Manhattan,

Side and

and north of

the Route 287 corridor in Westchester County.
Financial Developments
Banks

in

the

Second

District

have

a

reported

modest

increase in business borrowing during the last month.

Inventories,

receivables,

and

machine

tool

purchases,

construction,

capital

expansion were cited as uses for the increased loans, although no
one purpose was singled out as being particularly significant.
respondent

noted

an

expansion

of

loan

demand

at

One

middle-size

corporations but no increase for the largest corporations.
Consumer

borrowing

remained

strong

in

recent

particular, auto loan demand was cited as being robust.

weeks.

In

Some banks

reported that strong consumer credit demand has continued into early
January instead of the usual after-Christmas slowing.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
The Third District economy appears to be off to a good start in 1984.
Significant gains are reported in the manufacturing industry since early December, and
retailers, having recently enjoyed a banner holiday season, report very good January
sales. The financial sector, although awaiting a long overdue pickup in commercial loan
activity, continues to experience strong retail loan demand.
Third District contacts have a very positive outlook for the first half of
1984.

Manufacturers' plans for increasing capital expenditures are at a seven-year high

and retailers are forecasting double-digit gains in sales over the first half of 1983.
Bankers expect to see a pickup in C&I loan activity and also remain very confident about
retail loan demand in 1984.
MANUFACTURING
Respondents to the January Business Outlook Survey indicate significant gains
in local manufacturing

activity from December levels.

Over 48 percent of the

manufacturers surveyed report an increase in overall activity, while only 6 percent
indicate a decline.

New orders and shipments have posted gains comparable to their

increases during most of 1983, and unfilled orders have made their strongest monthly
advance since early fall. At the same time, inventory levels remain steady and marginal
gains are reported in employment.
Manufacturers' outlooks for the first half of 1984 are very positive, as 3 out
of 4 survey respondents are forecasting higher levels of activity by July.

Highlighting

the manufacturing forecast once again are planned capital expenditures; for the first
time in seven years, half of the respondents to the survey intend to increase outlays for
plant and equipment during the next six months. Widespread increases also are predicted
in new orders, shipments, and producers' backlogs, and area businessmen are projecting
gains in both inventory levels and employment.

III-2
Industrial prices are reported to have risen in January from December
levels.

About one-third of those polled report higher input prices while one-fourth say

they have received higher prices for their finished products. Looking ahead, 82 percent
of the manufacturing executives surveyed expect to face higher materials prices six
months from now and 65 percent foresee higher prices for finished goods.
RETAIL
The Third District retail industry enjoyed one of its best holiday seasons in
recent years in 1983 and is currently experiencing very satisfactory January activity.
December sales ranged from 10 percent to 25 percent higher than those of the previous
Christmas season, and several major retailers report early January volume to be 15
percent better than a year ago. The traditional January home furnishing promotions and
"white sales" are in full swing in the Third District, with most contacts indicating current
activity very close to expectations.

Retail executives also report ideal inventory

conditions over the last six weeks: very few items were in short supply during the holiday
season, yet little was left unsold at the year's end.

Despite the absence of widespread

markdowns, characteristic of early January, the "new" merchandise on store shelves is
selling very well.
Merchants

remain

confident

that

the

recovery

will

continue

and,

consequently, are forecasting sales for the first half of 1984 to exceed those of 1983 by
roughly 10 percent. One major retailer anticipates a 20 percent gain over its solid 1983
performance.

Inventory plans reflect their optimistic sales forecasts. There appears to

be a greater concern over preventing a loss of sales due to short supply than over holding
excess merchandise.

III-3
FINANCIAL
Although Third District bankers generally agree that loan activity in the
retail sector has increased consistently in recent weeks, they report varying conditions in
the commercial and industrial sector. While most contacts note a 2 percent to 5 percent
increase in C&I volume since early December, one banker, who deals with relatively
small businesses, reports a recent surge in activity. The same executive also reports a 20
percent increase over last year in commercial loans outstanding, while year-to-year
figures at other banks are mixed.

Retail lending performance, on the other hand,

continues to please Third District financial executives.

Led by credit card lending and

home improvement loans, consumer loans are growing at a 12 percent to 18 percent
annual rate in January.
Although bankers have tempered their optimism over C&I activity due to its
continued sluggishness, they are generally forecasting solid demand for both commercial
and retail loans in 1984.

Contacts maintain that a pickup in C&I demand is imminent

given that the recovery continues. On the retail side, executives forecast a strong year,
especially in automobile and home improvement loans.
The prime rate remains at 11 percent at area banks and most contacts believe
that interest rates will remain within 25 to 50 basis points of their current levels
throughout 1984. Forecasts of the direction in which rates will move differ among bank
executives.

Those predicting lower rates cite the fact that 1984 is an election year and

also that the recovery shows signs of slowing down; others feel that private credit
demands, the deficit, and increasing inflation could push rates slightly higher.

IV-1

Fourth District - Cleveland

Summary.

Economic activity in the District continues to improve.

The employment situation is mixed, as firms have been reluctant to recall
workers, and are stressing overtime and productivity increases.
sales were strong in the holiday and post-holiday seasons.

Retail

Manufacturing

activity continues its strong growth from recently depressed levels.
Production of flat-rolled steel for consumer goods is strong but demand for
other steel products remains weak.

Capital goods production is

strengthening from a low base but imports are hindering recovery for some
products.

Demand for automobiles is growing and some parts suppliers have

reached capacity limits.

Firms are cautious about increasing capacity;

capital spending is emphasized for modernization rather than expansion.
House construction may have topped out.

Loan demand, especially for

commercial and industrial loans, is strengthening.
District Labor Market Conditions.

Labor market conditions in this

District show mixed trends, and the unemployment rate remains well above the
national average.

In Ohio, the numbers of employed and unemployed workers

both declined (s.a.)

in December.

from 11.5% in September (s.a.)
national rate.

The unemployment rate has fallen to 10.4%

but remains 2.2 percentage points above the

Unemployment (n.s.a.) rates in eleven major SMSAs in the

District in November ranged from 8.5% in Columbus, Ohio to 14.1% in
Youngstown.
Production workers in Ohio manufacturing firms achieved record
average weekly earnings in November as overtime work continued to increase.
Hourly earnings increased slightly but the average workweek increased by
one-half hour to 42.5 hours.

IV-2

Retail Sales.

Fourth District retailers report an active holiday

season, and express optimism over the first quarter sales prospects.

Some

report sales were unusually strong in the first two weeks after Christmas.
General merchandise sales are roughly 10 to 14 percent above year-ago
levels, according to three major retail chains the district.

Sales gains

were achieved in almost all merchandise categories, especially apparel and
household furnishings.

Fourth District sales of both domestic and import

cars were also brisk during the holiday period.

Import dealers are not

currently experiencing shortages, but most expect shortages to develop again
by early February.

Domestic new-car dealers indicate that inventory

positions are near desired levels.
Manufacturing.
this District.

Manufacturing activity continues its upward trend in

A survey of Cleveland area purchasing managers for December

indicates production was higher than in the preceding month for a larger
percentage of respondents than any time since April 1977, and new orders
were higher for a greater percentage of respondents than any time in over
ten years.

Respondents report rush orders and split shipments are becoming

more common.

Finished goods inventories are rising slowly.

Employment is

unchanged, suggesting that firms are using overtime to expand production.
A survey of purchasing managers in the Cincinnati area indicates
production, new orders, and backlogs are growing, although less rapidly in
December than in October.

Strong price pressures are reported for

commodities.

Delivery time is increasing and split shipments are becoming

more common.

Finished goods inventories are rising.

This Bank's survey of Fourth District manufacturers indicates that
firms expect moderate growth of shipments, new orders, and inventories in

IV-3

January.

Employment is expected to hold steady while average weekly hours

worked is expected to increase.
Steel.

Production of flat-rolled steel used in consumer goods is

near capacity but demand for oil-country goods and construction steel
remains weak.

A major steel producer reports gradual improvement in demand

from the capital goods sector.

Another firm reports December shipments

strengthened as buyers anticipated early 1984 steel price increases.
Industry production is currently about 70% of capacity, adjusted for plant
closings.

One firm estimates the new breakeven point, given present prices,

is 68%-70% of capacity, and suggests that all producers can expect to make a
profit in 1984.
Capital Goods.

Orders for heavy duty trucks have been strong since

August because of the need to replace the existing fleet of trucks.

The

recent surge in demand has caused supplies of some truck components to be
tight.

A supplier reports being at full capacity in truck-related

production, partly because his capacity was reduced in 1982 and 1983.
Demand for parts for construction machinery is beginning to improve but
parts demand for aircraft and agricultural equipment remains weak.
A machine tool producer reports orders have doubled from six months
ago but nevertheless are still at a low level.

Orders are unlikely to reach

their previous peak because foreign producers now have 40% of the domestic
market.

Nevertheless, production of machinery to produce some electronic

equipment is at capacity, and a producer expects large productivity gains
from electronic equipment to dwarf interest costs as a consideration by
purchasers in 1984.
Automobiles.

Sales of new cars rose substantially in 1983:IVQ,

following a supply-constrained third quarter.

Orders are continuing their

IV-4

gradual strengthening, but dealers are keeping inventories tight.

A major

producer reports some suppliers are at capacity, sometimes hindering
automobile production.

A need for additional capacity by parts suppliers is

reported because many suppliers went bankrupt during the last recession.
Nevertheless, suppliers are reluctant to expand capacity because of
uncertainty about the duration of the current expansion.
Construction.
match last year.

Orders for new houses are down, and are unlikely to

Builders of single-family homes report that new orders in

the fourth quarter were down by 10% to 12% from a year earlier.

The outlook

for housing construction in 1984, according to a major Fourth District
builder, is fairly good,

but won't match 1983's performance because pent-up

demand is not as strong as in early 1983, and interest rates are not
expected to fall to the 12 1/2% levels reached in early 1983.
Commercial Banking.

Loan demand appears to have strengthened at

Fourth District banks in recent weeks.

An increase in loan volume is

evident for virtually all loan categories and especially for commercial and
industrial loans and loans to financial institutions.
time deposit growth were not exceptionally strong.

Demand, saving and

District banks

apparently funded loan demand by running down their holdings of liquid
assets and by issuing large denomination certificates of deposit.

In

particular, bank holdings of short-term Treasuries and federal fund sales
both declined.

V-1

COMMENTARY ON ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Fifth District business and economic activity is continuing to
expand across a broad front judging from available evidence.

In the

manufacturing sector shipments, new orders, and order backlogs all made
further gains in the latest month as did employment and the length of the
average work week.

Inventories were down sharply.

Among retailers, depart-

ment stores and other general merchandise dealers still contend that the
holiday season provided a spectacular conclusion to a very good year.

Most

have reported double digit gains, December to December, with little of those
gains absorbed by price increases.

Housing and construction, also, are

holding the gains of spring and summer.

The residential sector is seeing more

speculative building of late in anticipation of a spring resurgence of sales.
Financial institutions have recently experienced moderate growth in loan
demand, largely on the consumer side.

With little deposit growth, however,

liquidity is down from the unusually high levels reached in the fall.

Manufacturing
The

recent advance in manufacturing activity apparently continued

through the latest month.

Shipments, new orders, and order backlogs all

showed further increases from the previous month.

The rate of increase in new

orders seems to have fallen off somewhat, but seasonal factors in a few
industries are largely responsible.

Across the sector employment was up

moderately and the average work week increased slightly.

Nonetheless, there

was a significant inventory runoff, particularly of finished goods, but

materials were also down.

Most District manufacturers are comfortable with

current inventory levels.
For the most part these developments have occurred consistently
across industries, and there are few notable exceptions.

Particular strength

has recently appeared in primary metals and machinery and equipment, however,
and seasonal weakness is most apparent among furniture manufacturers.
Consumer Spending
Reports from District retailers continue to suggest very strong
activity through the end of the year.

Many department stores around the

District have reported sales gains of 12 percent to 26 percent, December 1983
over December 1982.

A nationwide chain specializing in home appliances and

consumer electronics and entertainment equipment reported a year over year
gain of 43 percent for the month.

One major exception to this pattern is a

large catalog showroom retailer, which showed a year over year gain of less
than 2 percent.
In addition, there are indications that at least some dealers were
able to trim promotional activities at year end while holding sales levels and
preserving margins.

Despite some concern just prior to the holiday selling

season, there are few indications that stock outages or inventory shortages
presented any generalized problems.

With the exceptions of a few lines and an

occasional sale item, dealers were apparently able to meet customer demands.
Automobile sales are also reported to have held up surprisingly well
over the month.

Some import dealers continue to encounter supply problems,

selling, as they say, everything they can get their hands on.

V-3

Otherwise, activity is characterized as robust, but stable, despite a continuing shortage of low mileage used cars.

Housing and Construction
The construction sector also remains quite lively.

The commercial

and industrial side continues to make steady month by month gains, and the
level of activity is now significantly improved from earlier in the year.

The

principal strength in the industry, however, is still originating in the
residential sector.

By nearly all accounts sales of residential property

continue apace, and builders are trying to get ahead in anticipation of spring
sales.

For the first time in a good while there is talk of speculative

building going on.

Clearly, industry expectations are for another good year

in the District's housing sector.

Banking and Finance
Loan demand at District financial institutions is still growing
moderately, and growth remains largely on the consumer side.

Nonetheless, as

deposit growth has slowed and loan demand has picked up, however moderately,
institutions have moved to restore credit quality and have become somewhat
less liquid.

Most institutions seem to be comfortable with current credit

quality and loan to deposit ratios.

The Outlook
Business people in the District remain, on balance, strongly optimistic.

Retailers seem to think they can hold the gains of 1983 and have

another very good year.

Manufacturers are looking for further improvement and

most expect progress over at least the next six months.

The reemergence of

V-4

speculative house building attests to the positive outlook in that sector.
One of the few negative notes comes from the textile industry where there is
still much concern over import competition.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Construction and consumer spending continue to sustain economic recovery
in the Southeast, and contacts are optimistic about 1984.

Retailers enjoyed the best

holiday sales in the last four years. Housing purchases remained strong through December
despite rising mortgage rates and adverse weather.

Strength in these sectors has

prompted recalls of laid-off manufacturing workers and sharp increases in orders in
construction-related industries.
advanced sharply.

Lending activity slowed in December, but bank deposits

Unusually cold weather adversely affected tourism and agriculture.

Losses of vegetable and citrus crops have pushed up prices.
Employment

and Industry.

Industry contacts believe that labor market

conditions continued to improve through December and gains will persist at least through
the first quarter.

In November, unemployment fell in four of the six District states.

Manufacturing employment grew by over 85,000 from November 1982 after falling by
161,000 in the previous 12-month period.

Vigorous auto sales led to the recall of 1,600

workers for a second shift at a large auto assembly plant near Atlanta.

The scheduled

mid-February reopening of a large Alabama sheet steel mill and the attendant recall
of 2,500-3,000

workers bodes ongoing improvements in

manufacturing

Contacts expect 1984 to be a good year for the timber industry as well.

employment.
Boosted by

renewed vigor in the housing industry, southeastern construction employment rose 38
percent in November above year-earlier levels.

The American Plywood Association

indicates that 1983 plywood production, nearly 25 percent over 1982 levels, attained
record highs, largely as a result of increased demand in the "do-it-yourself" market.

A

rig count increase from 282 in November to 321 during December betokens recovery
in Louisiana's oil and gas exploration industry.

Many chemical plants in Louisiana found

themselves ill-equipped to cope with the unusual Christmas cold spell, but an industry

VI-2

spokesman believes the short-lived production halts may have helped stabilize falling
prices.
Consumer Spending.

District retailers surveyed about December sales regard

1983 as the best year since 1979.

New car sales sustained the momentum of recent

months despite unusually cold weather.

Department store merchants report double-

digit increases over the previous year.

Retailers cite apparel, big-ticket items, and

jewelry as leading holiday sellers.

These reports suggest a continuation of the healthy

growth shown in November's state sales tax receipts.
consumer optimism about employment prospects.

Merchants perceive widespread

If this optimisim is well-founded,

retail spending should remain strong in 1984.
Construction.

December's housing sales were slightly above normal despite

unusually severe weather and rising conventional interest rates early in the month.
Realtors report increases in the share of used homes sold and in the proportion of
buyers "trading up." Improved employment opportunities and transfers account for much
of the real estate activity in Nashville, Mobile, and Jacksonville.
to retirees

The sale of houses

in Florida is strengthening as national economic improvements enable

homeowners to sell their residences elsewhere. Builders who have moved from Houston's
saturated market are stimulating residential construction in Orlando, and realtors expect
this trend to continue.

Area lenders say that the deregulation of the FHA mortgage

rate has resulted in higher rates and lower discount points.

Confusion over post-

deregulation requirements for FHA loans made some lenders less willing to make FHA
loans.

In the opinion of those surveyed, FHA activity should increase as lenders become

more familiar with the loans' new terms.

However, some builders fear recent price

increases in supplies will dampen the pace of residential building.

In the last two

months, the number of single-family building permits declined on a seasonally adjusted
basis.

VI-3
Office space absorption and construction in Atlanta and Nashville continues
at a brisk pace.

Shopping center development is reviving throughout the Southeast.

However, commercial construction in Orlando has slowed from its previously booming
pace. Realtors fear that Orlando and several other cities may have excessive inventories
of office and hotel accommodations on the market or under construction.
Financial Services.

After maintaining strong growth for six months, loans

at large banks advanced only slightly on a seasonally adjusted basis from November to
December.

The slow growth is attributable to a decline in real estate lending, flat

demand for consumer loans, and a moderation in the recent strong growth of commercial
loans.

Bank contacts report that loan demand through early January increased over

late last year, although the improvement in Mississippi has been modest.

Respondents

most often cite commercial lending as the fastest growing segment, but Florida and
Atlanta contacts report that consumer lending is strong.

S&L spokesmen indicate that

loan applications are at least maintaining, if not surpassing, the rate of late last year.
Deposits at large banks ended 1983 with the strongest monthly showing since
June.

The strength is attributable to faster expansion of both demand and time deposit

accounts and the continued strength of savings.
to the spurt of deposits in December.

Jumbo CDs contributed significantly

Savings at thrifts grew slowly in December and

early January, according to those surveyed.

Contacts do not expect the January 1

elimination of the quarter point advantage formerly held by S&Ls on regular savings
accounts to trigger the sort of competitive struggle in the Southeast that attended the
introduction of MMDAs a year ago; competition is concentrated in higher rate accounts.
Tourism.
in December.

Cold weather weakened the performance of the tourism industry

Visitor center registrations declined relative to year-ago levels in three

states, and attendance at most southeastern attractions fell.
soft in most cities.

Hotel occupancy is still

Even in Orlando, occupancy fell 7 percent in November after 14

VI-4
months of increases. Air travel continues to improve because of rising passenger volume
and expanded carrier service at southeastern airports. The relatively small (1-2 percent)
increases in revenue-passenger miles reported in December by the major southeasternbased carriers are probably attributable to unusually high year-earlier volumes. Discounts
triggered much of the year-ago increase.

Since the proportion of passengers flying on

discount has declined, present levels indicate healthy conditions despite the modest
nominal growth.
strong demand.

Renewed auto-train service from Virginia to Florida has generated
Most southbound routes are sold out, and advance bookings are reportedly

heavy.
Agriculture.

The unexpected freeze at Christmas inflicted substantial injury
Grower losses may exceed $500 million.

on Florida agriculture.

Approximately 85

percent of the state's orange crop had not been harvested when the cold struck.

The

most recent USDA estimate projects a 23 percent loss in the orange crop with a
concomitant 13 percent decline in juice yield per box.

By early January the wholesale

price of orange juice had climbed 15 percent above its pre-Christmas level.

Imports

of Brazilian orange juice should temper the impact on consumers somewhat, but Brazilians
have increased prices 18 percent from last season in anticipation of strong demand.
Consumers will face much sharper price increases for fresh vegetables until
new crops reach harvest.

The wholesale price of lettuce has more than doubled since

the freeze. Tomatoes, pepper, and squash also incurred extensive injury.

Higher prices

will partially offset citrus crop losses, but revenues for many growers will be below
earlier expectations.

Vegetable growers' annual revenue should decline because they

have lost their most advantageous marketing period. The freeze has reduced employment
except in south Florida, where many growers have undamaged fruit suitable for sales
as fresh produce, and in portions of central Florida, where growers are rushing oranges
to juice processors.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary.

In early 1984 business activity in the Seventh District is

on the uptrend over a broadening spectrum of sectors.

Evidence available in

the District does not indicate the "slowing" suggested by some national data.
The general view here is that the improvement will continue through 1984, but
with a possible dampening effect from higher interest rates in the second half
of the year.

Employment in manufacturing is rising, but gains in

nonmanufacturing are modest at best.
December.

Reports on retail sales were strong for

Inventories are generally low.

Demand for some types of mechanical

capital goods, e.g. construction equipment, is strengthening.
prices are firming, but many remain below 1979 levels.

Wholesale

Residential

construction is expected to increase again in 1984, but remain far below peak
years of the 1970s.

Severe cold adversely affected some sectors in late

December, but stimulated outlays on batteries and plumbers' bills.

Rising

demand is causing shortages of some materials such as gypsum board and has
boosted backlogs for heavy trucks and trailers and large autos.
Shortages and Leadtimes.
becoming more frequent.

Reports indicating pressure on capacity are

For December, 38 percent of the purchasing managers

in Chicago and 48 percent in Milwaukee reported longer delivery leadtimes,
while only a few reported shorter leads.
shortening.

In late 1982, delivery times were

The stretchout has been particularly marked for truck trailers

and custom-built heavy trucks.

Large cars also are back ordered.

Gypsum

board producers say that shortages in the South are attracting high-cost
shipments from Canada.

The piggy-back rail car fleet is fully utilized.

There are also some reports of tight supplies of steel sheets, computer chips,
refrigerators, and car batteries.
in domestic capacity.

Problems of supply partly reflect cutbacks

Most industries still have ample capacity, and steps

are being taken to eliminate bottlenecks.

VII-2

Prices.

Some 45 percent of District purchasing managers reported

paying higher prices in December, while only a few paid lower prices.

A year

earlier companies paying lower prices still outnumbered those paying higher
prices.

Prices have not risen sharply except for a few cases such as aluminum

and airline fares.

More moderate increases are also reported for castings,

forgings, paper and paperboard, gypsum board, and some types of steel.

In

most industries where prices have increased, analysts insist that substantial
further increases must occur if profit margins are to return to a prosperous
level.

Further increases in utilization rates are necessary, however, before

the competitive situation will permit such increases in these industries.
Consumer Purchases.

General merchandise retailers were very pleased

with sales in the Christmas season.

Sales of recreational equipment,

appliances, computers, telephones, and auto accessories were especially
strong.

Auto sales were held back by availability of large domestic cars and

Japanese cars.

Credit use has been heavy, and delinquencies have been

low--probably as a result of careful screening in response to more lenient
bankruptcy laws.

Airline traffic in December only about equalled year-ago,

partly because of weather, but also because most bargain fares have been
withdrawn.
Employment.

Improved job markets in the District are still largely a

result of callbacks in manufacturing.

Rehires by motor vehicle and parts

plants are by far the most important, but there have also been gains in
appliances, mobile homes, and recreational vehicles.
is also up.

Residential construction

In November, all District states, with Michigan far in the lead,

reported good gains in factory employment from late 1982, but the shortfall
from late 1978 still ranged from 15 percent in Wisconsin to 20 percent in
Iowa, and 24 percent in Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan.

Total

non-manufacturing employment data show no improvement through November.

State

VII-3

and local governments, public utilities, and financial institutions are
generally hiring only to fill essential vacancies, and many are reducing staff.
Steel.

Raw steel facilities are expected to operate at 65 percent of

capacity in the first quarter versus 60 percent in the fourth quarter.
will be higher at the most modern Chicago-area mills.

Rates

Demand for all types of

steel is stronger, but the concentration is in cold-rolled steel, mainly for
auto and truck bodies, and hot-rolled sheet for frames for trucks and large
cars.

Tubular "oil country" products are picking up from a low level.

(Quality of some pipe on hand had deteriorated.)

Demand for plates, for

producer goods, and heavy structurals, also has improved, but very slightly.
Steel mill operations were handicapped by a variety of problems during the
severe cold of late December.
Capital Goods.
showing signs of life.

Mechanical-type capital goods (non-electronic) are
Orders for large and double trailers, authorized last

year, are three times current capacity, and quoted delivery times are for
September.
deliveries.

Producers of heavy-duty trucks to haul trailers are quoting April
Capacity to produce heavy trucks has been reduced and may be

under strain if demand continues to rise.

But the capital goods picture in

the District is still far from satisfactory.

Relatively few laid-off workers

have been called back.

Orders for freight cars increased in December, but

from a very low level.

In farm equipment, the anticipated spurt in sales

before the turn of the year to gain tax advantages did not materialize.
Parts Versus Finished Goods.

The capital equipment improvement is

still characterized as a repair, replacement and modernization market, rather
than an expansion market.

Modest increases in demand for forgings, castings,

components, steel bars, drill bits, and fasteners are in line with this
assessment.

VII-4

Electric Power.

Electricity usage has increased in the past month or

two reflecting both higher industrial demand and cold weather.

This rise was

welcomed by District utilities, some of which are under unprecedented
financial strain.

The power industry, once a rock of stability, faces

perilous times because of an adverse regulatory atmosphere (both on rates and
environmental considerations), and questions concerning costly facilities
under construction that are not needed to accommodate prospective demand.
Housing.

Sales of new and used houses, which slipped from the rates

reached last spring, have held up better than many observers had thought
possible.

Assuming no significant rise in interest rates, builders expect a

further increase in starts in 1984.

However, the District total would still

be about 50 percent short of the best years in the 1970s.

An important reason

for optimism in the Chicago area is the sharp rise in use of variable rate
mortgages from about 25 percent last spring to 50 percent in October--even
higher in new homes.

First year mortgages rates of 10 percent or less are

available, usually with 3 or 4 percent fees.

A wide array of terms are

offered, so "shopping around" on the part of home buyers is advisable.

VIII -

1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The upward momentum of the economic expansion in the Eighth
District continued in December and early January.

The Christmas season

surpassed retailers' optimistic expectations despite severe cold weather
in the last two weeks, and after-Christmas sales have been satisfactory.
Manufacturing has been improving almost across the board, most transportation companies are moving more goods, and employment has risen
markedly since early fall.

Real estate sales and construction activity

have remained strong despite a seasonal slowing.
Outlook
Employers in the St. Louis and Memphis areas, according to recent
surveys, anticipate slower growth in total employment over the next three
months.

Less than 20 percent of the employers polled plan to hire

additional workers in that period, a similar proportion expect some staff
reductions, while over 60 percent plan virtually no net changes.

Three

months earlier, 27 percent of the St. Louis employers planned staff
additions and only 7 percent expected reductions.
Consumer Spending
District retailers use words like "tremendous" and "fantastic" to
describe their Christmas sales.

One large chain reported December sales

38 percent above the previous December, and most stores reported gains in
double digits.

Most merchandise sold well, but the willingness of

shoppers to invest in "big ticket" and high-quality items was particularly
impressive.

There was no need for panic price markdowns to move merchan-

dise as in the previous year, and hence retail profits jumped more than

VIII - 2

sales.

After-Christmas sales were generally described as satisfactory,

but year-over-year comparisons were lower than in December.
Manufacturing and Employment
Manufacturing activity continued to expand in the District during
December and early January.

Orders are up, backlogs are increasing, and

some firms are implementing capital spending plans.

Most capital spending

continues to be directed toward productivity improvements, but some is for
capacity expansion.
With greater production, employment has continued to rise.

An

automobile company increased its employment by 1,500 in early January,
both to staff an additional shift and to reduce overtime payments.
However, unemployment rates have shown only a slight decline in recent
months as the labor force has also continued to expand.
Real Estate and Construction
Real estate sales and construction (adjusted for seasonal
influences) have remained at high levels since November.

One builder sold

15 relatively high-priced homes in the first week of January, which was
beyond his expectations.

Six other homebuilders reported heavy shopper

traffic through display homes, and a major realtor said sales of older
homes were strong for December and the first half of January.
Transportation
Several truck lines in the District reported improved business in
December and early January; for one line, December was the best month in
four years.

Two railroads reported business up nearly 25 percent in

December from the same month a year earlier, with gains in most general
business lines.

Barge traffic at the Memphis port has been gradually

VIII - 3

increasing.

On the other hand, one company owning 150 barges recently

filed for bankruptcy.

Barge traffic in the St. Louis area was adversely

affected in late December and early January by the unexpected quick
freezing of the Mississippi River further north, locking in many barges.
Agriculture
A large number of acres were planted in winter wheat despite the
PIK program, and the crop appears to be surviving the cold weather.

Early

indications are that plantings of corn and soybeans this spring are likely
to match those of the large 1982 plantings.

As a result, sales of seed,

fertilizer and herbicides are improving.
Finance
Commercial and industrial loans at large District banks declined on
a seasonally adjusted basis during December and early January.

Savings

and loan associations have been making few loans to businesses, even
though they have had authority to do so for more than a year.

Two

St. Louis area associations, however, have recently added additional
lending officers and are aggressively seeking business loans.

Most

District associations have less than 1 percent of their assets in
commercial loans, and even the aggressive associations are nowhere near
the Federal limit of 10 percent in 1984.

Nonetheless, these percentages

have been rising and are expected to continue to rise as associations gain
experience.
In general, the financial health of the savings and loan
associations in the District has continued to improve.

Several Louisville

and St. Louis savings and loan associations, however, reported an increase
in delinquencies on mortgage loans in December.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Strong holiday

retail

sales,

occurred

which

despite

the

unusually

frigid district weather, indicate continued growth in both consumer confidence
and the economy.
ing.
the

These sales have been accompanied by heavy consumer borrow-

Also despite the cold weather, the agricultural outlook, particularly in
livestock

sector,

has

improved

a

little.

Activity

in

the

district's

resource-related industries has improved as well.

Consumer Spending
All reports

indicate consumer

strong and would have been even
lows.

One

large district

retail

spending this holiday season was very

stronger if
chain

temperatures had not hit record

reports

their best December nominal sales increase in
inal increase was mainly real,
to a

twenty-year

low.

A

noting that winter apparel

coming as it

Minneapolis

that

ten years.

reports

vigorous

post-holiday

their wallets--thawed out.

Further,

this nom-

similar

increases,

Our Bank directors report good

sold quite well.

too.

Several retailers say sales

dropped somewhat when temperatures dropped below zero.
surprised by a

stores experienced

did at a time when inflation fell

retailer

sales throughout the rest of the district,

its

demand,

But some of them were

which came when

customers--and

Business at ski resorts has also been hurt by the

intense cold, but it also improved when the weather did.
Motor
vious reports.
and trucks

vehicle

sales continue to show the

soundness

evident

in

pre-

Domestic car sales managers say that inventories of both cars

were barely adequate at year's end.

Sales were up last quarter,

IX-2

especially sales of trucks.

One firm's truck sales were reportedly 41 percent

higher this December than last.
great

demand.

Recreational vehicles are also said to be in

Big cars and pickups are

Moderate to good sales are reported
of South Dakota.

in

selling very well in

southern Minnesota,

South Dakota.

Montana,

and most

Furthermore, special promotions have not been fueling these

sales; they instead reflect the favorable economic climate.
To finance this spending, consumer borrowing has been increasing at a
good clip in

nearly all of the district.

A Bank director in

reports that consumer lending has been strong there lately,
South

Dakota

says

that

it

has been

district retailer says that its
and as a percentage

of its

reports no problems with
still

while another in

fairly good at many banks.

One

large

credit sales have been rising, both absolutely

increasing total sales.

its

rural Minnesota

credit

accounts.

Another

However,

local

retailer

consumer lending is

weak in the economically troubled Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

Agriculture
Overall,

the agricultural picture has improved slightly in

Most

few months.

of the

heavy winter wheat

Montana have adequate snow cover,
by

high

If

winds.

wheat

plantings in

Montana

production

show that

the

reports good

newly

enacted

is

as

high as

expected,

Federal

Dairy

though,

the

An agricultural implement

sales and low inventories.

offer farmers between $5,000 and $15,000 each.
dairy-intensive areas find it

North Dakota and

although some fields have been whipped bare

resulting low prices will depress farmers' profits.
dealer in

the last

Diversion

Recent estimates

Payments

Program

will

But district Bank directors in

hard to accurately estimate the likely degree of

IX-3

farmer

participation

relatively

strong in

in

this

program.

some parts

Lending

of the district.

to

dairy

farmers

While a recent

has

been

survey of

agricultural lenders shows that farmers have been paying off their debts more
quickly,
ments

a Bank director in

South Dakota

says that farmers'

have not been as good as expected.

financial state-

Finally, while cattle prices have

increased, extremely cold weather and high hay prices have made it difficult
and expensive to keep cattle from losing weight.

On balance,

one Bank direc-

tor is guardedly optimistic about livestock profitability.

Resource-Related Industries
Resource-related
interest in

lumber

business activity has perked up recently.

operations

in

western Montana is

have fallen from their high point in
year,

and slow but steady improvement

paper

industry

is

still

1983,
is

performing well

reported.

While sales

stud prices rose 23 percent
foreseen this year.
throughout

is starting to pick up, though.

Due to

is trending upward.

gas activity and coal production are not expected to pick up.

ore production

last

The pulp and

the district.

favorable drilling costs, oil activity in North Dakota
However,

Renewed

Iron

A local taconite official

thinks that production this year will exceed 1983 levels.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Economic activity in the Tenth District continues to show

moderate improvement following a strong Christmas sales season.
have increased somewhat in early January.

Both retail inventories and

materials inventories are being closely controlled.
inputs are beginning to increase.

New car sales

Lead times for materials

Housing sales slowed late in 1983, and the

demand for mortgage funds at savings and loan associations is weak.
Commercial and industrial loan demand has been increasing at commercial banks,
and deposit growth is strong.

Tenth District agriculture has apparently not

suffered greatly from the severe winter weather.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers report current dollar sales in 1983 from

13 to 20 percent higher than in 1982.

Christmas sales were unexpectedly

higher than in previous years for most retailers, although some stores were
hurt by December's bad weather.
in 1984.

Sales are expected to continue their growth

More than half of the respondents began clearance sales earlier than

in the past in order to reduce inventories and remain competitive.

Prices

have been stable and are expected to remain so in early 1984.
Automobile Sales.

Most auto dealers surveyed report significant sales

increases in the first weeks of January compared to December's somewhat
disappointing performance, which some attribute to harsh weather.
in obtaining financing for floor planning were reported.

No problems

Loans are available

for potential buyers although some dealers have suffered from reductions in
low-cost captive financing.
expanded.

Inventories range from constant to slightly

All dealers surveyed were optimistic about sales in 1984.

Purchasing Agents.

Most purchasing agents contacted report steady to

slightly increasing input prices through 1983.

Agents are expecting increases

X-2

in major input prices in the range of 3 to 9 percent in 1984.

Although few

difficulties are being experienced in getting materials, lead times have
increased and are expected to increase further.

All respondents report

inventory levels to be relatively lean but satisfactory.

Stocks are expected

to remain at or slightly above their current levels during 1984.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Home builders report that housing starts

in 1983 were way ahead of the previous year, while sales of new houses were
moderately higher.
weeks of 1983.

A slight slowdown in sales was experienced in the last few

Prices of new houses increased 3 to 5 percent in 1983.

Virtually all home builders surveyed report fairly tight inventories of unsold
houses.
Savings inflows at savings and loan associations are slightly higher than
a year ago, but virtually all respondents report a weak demand for mortgage
funds.

Nearly all institutions surveyed indicate that mortgage interest rates

are holding steady and will continue to do so for the next few months.
Banking.

Loan demand at Tenth District banks increased in December,

with the strongest growth in commercial and industrial loans.

No declines

were reported in consumer, agricultural, or commercial real estate loans, but
a couple of institutions experienced declines in residential real estate
loans.

Total deposits were up in almost all surveyed banks.

Virtually all

categories of deposits increased or remained the same, with demand deposit
growth the strongest.

The prime rate ranged between 11 and 13.5 percent, with

over 80 percent of the banks charging 11 to 11.75 percent.

None of the

respondents changed their prime rate last month and over 70 percent do not
expect a change to occur this month.

Consumer lending rates were also

unchanged, and no change is expected this month.

X-3

Agriculture.

Severe winter weather conditions in the Tenth District

brought minimal livestock death losses, but there has been an absence of
weight gains by feeder cattle in recent weeks.

Although District bankers

expect the extreme cold to have little impact on marketing of cattle, they are
concerned about depleted stocks of hay in the event of more severe weather.
The winter wheat crop in the Tenth District is in good condition with adequate
snow cover apparently protecting the wheat from freeze damage.

Wind erosion,

normally a problem in parts of the District at this time of year, is virtually
nonexistent despite adverse weather conditions.

Anticipated end-of-year loan

paydowns by farmers did not materialize, with little if any improvement
expected in the near future.

Bankers report some refinancing of troubled

loans while a few large farm bankruptcies have occurred across the District.
There has been some increase in Farmers Home Administration emergency loan
applications by banks' farm customers, but processing delays prevent the
assistance from being readily available.

Many farmers appear to be carrying

large stocks of corn in anticipation of price improvement.

Sales of farm

machinery and equipment across the District have been flat with no yearend
upturn.

Equipment manufacturers are not optimistic about increased sales of

farm machinery and equipment in 1984.

ECONOMIC COMMENTARY
ELEVENTH DISTRICT-DALLAS

Economic
moderate

pace,

manufacturing
portions

of

growing,

with

vigorous.
year,

recovery
as

strong

industries
the

the

Eleventh

performance
more

energy

orders

in

than

offsets

industry.

for

in

Total

nonelectrical

District is continuing at a
construction

and

several

problems in agriculture and
manufacturing

machinery

production

is

proving particularly

Commercial construction is relatively high for this time of

the

while the majority of residential construction remains in apartments

and condominiums.

Retail and auto sales continue to climb.

A

cautiously

optimistic outlook for the oil field equipment industry exists.

The recent

wave of freezing weather resulted in large losses for Texas citrus farmers.
Recent District
industries

manufacturing

experience

but, overall, moderate growth has been occurring.

is sharing in the increase in capital goods demand
across

varies

country.

the

Orders

that

nonelectrical

for

has

greatly

among

The District
taken

machinery

place

used

in

manufacturing continue a surge that prevailed throughout the fourth quarter
of

1983.

Heavy

steel

fabrication

output

manufacturers indicated a slight increase
months.

in

also

orders

rising.
over

the

Raw steel
last

two

A shakeout of inefficient producers, however, is likely because of

heavy foreign competition and low profits.
at

is

nearly

100

Aluminum production is

running

percent of capacity, in response to strong demand from the

auto, housing and appliance industries.

Demand for chemicals and

plastics

XI-2

continues

to grow only moderately, but producers are very optimistic about

sales for the first half of
strong

with

future

equipment expected.

1984.

increases

Orders

for

semi-conductors

continue

in employment and investment for plant and

Despite losses in

1983,

some

apparel

manufacturers

along the Mexican border are optimistic about 1984.
Drilling

activity

in

Texas

continues

to respond positively to

stable oil prices, but signs of weakness still exist in
the

District

energy

industry.

rig count posted a fourth
quarter.

The

rig

quarter

gain

of

19

percent

over

the

third

the

decline

is

seasonal.

Given

oil prices, industry analysts see gradual improvement in the demand

exploration

workers.

of

count declined significantly during the early weeks of

for many types of oil field equipment.
oil

portions

On a seasonally-adjusted basis, the Texas

January, but much (and perhaps all) of
stable

some

One

company

respondent

In Dallas, the office

of

a

large

just announced extensive layoffs of white collar
expects

a

significant

decline

this

year

in

District oil field services employment.
Auto

sales

throughout

the

District

remain strong.

December's

unusually cold weather may have prevented Dallas from posting its best year
ever.

Houston

and San Antonio dealers indicated that low availability of

cars hampered sales.
Retail sales in December proved above expectations
District

cities

but

Houston.

Most

increases in department store sales
earlier,

although

in

major

in

all

major

cities reported double-digit

December,

Houston was up only 5 percent.

said that demand for apparel and appliances has been

compared

with

a

year

A number of respondents
particularly

Optimism concerning the first half of 1984 was widely expressed.

strong.

XI-3

Commercial construction continues at a high level for this time of
year.

The paucity of office building construction in

being

offset

Texas.

by

retail

and

light

year's,

is

largely

industrial construction elsewhere in

Dallas' value of nonresidential permits for

previous

Houston

but Houston's fell.

1983

rose

above

the

Respondents expect Dallas' strength

and Houston's weakness in nonresidential construction to continue in 1984.
The pace of residential construction is
historically

high

multifamily sector
condominiums

rate,
are

but

significant

widely

currently

generally

declines

anticipated.

account

for

the

stable

in

the

Although
majority

at

overbuilt

apartments

of

an

permits

and

issued,

single-family home construction appears to be on the increase.
Loan growth at District member banks on a year-over-year basis has
been

rising

steadily

since

September

1983.

That

follows a period of

deceleration which began in the first quarter of last year.
year-over-year

rate

Even

in

real

estate

loans

is

continuing

business loan growth remains sluggish.
slowed

in

every

Deposit data

for

the

of growth in loans remains well below the average for

the first quarter of 1983 and for the second half of 1982.
growth

so,

quarter
December

of

last

indicated

At large banks,

at a very high rate, while

Deposit

growth

at

member

banks

year compared to year-earlier levels.
that

this

trend

of

deceleration

continued through year-end.
Texas agricultural cash receipts for 1983 through September

Total

were 5.5 percent higher than those for 1982, owing to higher
Prices

paid

by

Texas farmers increased 3.2 percent.

crop

prices.

A spate of freezing

weather resulted in a $200 million loss to Texas citrus growers.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT

In the Twelfth District the expansion is continuing at a rapid pace.

Consumer

spending during the Christmas and post-holiday season has been exceptionally strong,
both at retail stores and automobile dealerships.

Western homebuilding activity in

November regained 1983's August peak and nonresidential construction spending has
been rising as well.

In the manufacturing sector, employment gains have been

widespread and especially strong in such defense and capital goods industries as
electronic equipment and missiles and space vehicles.
improving.

Agricultural prospects are

Adjustable rate mortgages are gaining increased borrower acceptance and

helping to sustain housing.

Consumer loans are growing rapidly due to consumers'

increased creditworthiness and optimism.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending was extremely strong throughout the district during the
Christmas holiday season, and buying apparently has remained strong in the postholiday period, after allowance for the normal seasonal slowdown.
been apparent both at retail stores and automobile dealerships.

The strength has
Major department

stores in Southern California, for example, experienced an average 16 percent gain in
sales in December over a year earlier.
percentage.

In Arizona, sales were up by a similar

Even in Oregon, where the overall economic recovery has been lagging and

weather was particularly severe, major retailers experienced year-to-year sales gains
in December ranging from 12 to 18 percent.

Stores have been discounting merchandise

heavily and thus have been moving a large volume to attain these sales increases.
fact, due to their depleted inventories and optimism with regard to future sales,
retailers are revising their inventory plans upward for the first half of
1984 -- although their attitude with regard to inventory building still has to be
described as cautious.

To finance their heavy expenditures, consumers have been

In

XII-2

sharply increasing their installment debt.

Nevertheless, financial institutions

consider consumers' increased willingness to borrow as a positive factor affecting
spending, since consumers do not appear to be overextended and delinquency rates
actually are declining.
Manufacturing and Mining
Manufacturing employment has been rising rapidly throughout most of the district
states, except in Oregon where the lumber industry has been cutting payrolls since
August.

Gains have been especially strong in the electronic equipment industry --

which has been experiencing rising defense, consumer and business demand -- and in
the missiles and space vehicle category.

California has been the location for most

of this increased high-technology employment, but Arizona and Utah also
have been experiencing rapid gains.

The West's other capital goods industries --

including those that manufacture non-electrical machinery, trucks and aircraft --also
are experiencing a pickup in orders.

In Washington, orders for commercial transport

planes have risen so sharply since mid-1983 that aircraft employment is expected to
stabilize or perhaps rise moderately in 1984 after falling by about 9,000 during each
of the two preceding years.

With the notable exception of the Pacific Northwest

aluminum industry, employment in the West's energy and metal mining and processing
industries has stabilized but not yet begun to rise significantly.

The copper, coal

and oil industries continue to suffer from weak prices and excess worldwide supplies.
Overall, respondents report that manufacturers intend to add workers to their
payrolls very cautiously in 1984 so as to realize continued rapid productivity growth
and hold down the increase in unit labor costs.

XII-3

Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity has rebounded more strongly in the West than it has
For example, Western housing starts in November regained the 1983-peak

nationally.

reached in August.

Permits issued for new dwelling units in the region also rose

more than nationally, suggesting that Western homebuilding activity in coming months
will remain relatively strong.

Sales also are reported to be holding up well,

although housing prices are rising.

Respondents attribute this strong housing market

to buyers' increased acceptance of the newer adjustable rate mortgage packages which
offer initial rates substantially below those of the current fixed-rate mortgages.
Nonresidential construction spending also is picking up.

The upsurge in retail sales

is encouraging modernization and construction of retail stores.
especially electronic manufacturers, are building new plants.

The high-tech firms,
The decline in office

vacancy rates, and the availability of pension fund and insurance company financing,
are encouraging developers to plan and start construction of new office buildings.
Agriculture
The agricultural sector is currently in the midst of its normal seasonal
slowdown.

Crop farmers throughout the district are optimistic about prospects for

1984, however.

Grain farmers expect to benefit from the higher prices for wheat and

cotton resulting from the Midwestern drought.

California and Pacific Northwest

farmers also expect higher prices and stronger demand for their citrus and other
produce because of the freeze in Florida and Texas.

They also are encouraged by the

possibility that energy, interest and other production costs may only increase
moderately.

Farmers are concerned, however, that agricultural exports could fall

again in 1984 due to the high foreign exchange value of the dollar and foreign
imposition of trade barriers.

Livestock producers experienced a decline in net

income last year and current conditions are not favorable.

The drought-induced

XII-4

higher feed costs are forcing ranchers to slaughter their herds earlier than usual,
increasing the availability of meat and reducing prices below year-ago levels.
Financial Institutions
The past few months have seen a significant increase in adjustable rate
mortgages (ARMs) in most parts of the Twelfth District.

Financial institutions have

overcome borrower hesitancy with aggressive pricing and the inclusion of limits on
potential increases in interest costs.

Some are offering ARMs at differentials of up

to 200 basis points under fixed rate mortgages, along with a below market rate of
less than 10 percent for the first six months.

Such pricing has opened up the market

to those unable to qualify at the higher rates on fixed rate mortgages.

The

inclusion of caps on any future upward movement in rates also has contributed to
buyer acceptance of ARMs, providing buyers at least a partial reduction in risk.
The consumer meanwhile is showing signs of continued financial health, as evidenced
by a sharp increase in consumer loans.

In December, the amount of consumer loans

outstanding (n.s.a.) at Twelfth District banks rose at an annual rate of 37 percent.
The sharp increase in December boosted the annual increase in banks' consumer loans
outstanding to 8 percent.

