SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

May 1984

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

i

................................................

First District - Boston ......................................

I-1

Second District - New York ...................................

H-1

Third District - Philadelphia ..................................

l-1

Fourth District - Cleveland ...................................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond
Sixth District - Atlanta

V-1

..................................

VI-1

....................................

VII-1

Seventh District - Chicago ....................................
....

Eighth District - St. Louis ..............................

VIII-i

Ninth District - Minneapolis ..................................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City .................................

X-l

Eleventh District - Dallas ....................................

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco ........

......................

XII-1

SUMMARY*
The overall economic picture in the nation is fairly bright, according to
reports from the twelve Federal Reserve Districts, although a few industries
are still weak.

Retail sales in many Districts bounced back in April from a

March slump and are expected to continue their growth. Auto sales are very
strong, with near-capacity production levels at many auto plants.

Other

manufacturing industries are also doing well, especially paper products and
consumer durables.

Residential construction remains strong, although some

signs of slowing have appeared in recent weeks. Bankers in the Eastern and
Southern parts of the nation report increases in both business and consumer
loans, while borrowing in other areas has remained flat.

Probably the

weakest sector in the economy at this time is agriculture.
AGRICULTURE
The agricultural sector has suffered
combination of factors.

in recent months due to a

Plantings in the Southeast and Midwest have been

delayed by heavy rains, while Dallas and Minneapolis report that overly dry
conditions have held down winter wheat production.

Both Dallas and San

Francisco, however, say cotton growers are having a good year.
Pork farmers in the Atlanta District have been reducing inventories in
response to higher feed prices, but that cutback might be near an end. Dairy
farmers in the northern Midwest continue to experience financial problems,
and they do not expect much help from the new Federal diversion program.
Contacts in Kansas City say this year's calf crop is about average. Poultry
farmers in the Richmond District continue to be troubled by avian influenza
outbreaks.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

Both Chicago and Kansas City report a further drop in farmland
values.

Kansas City also says farm credit problems are as bad this year as

they were last year, and that farm asset liquidation is likely to increase
unless debt is reduced.
MINING/ENERGY
Business activity in the mining and energy sector appears to be mixed
in April.

Both production and prices are up in the coal industry in the

Midwest.

Cleveland attributes some of the strength to utilities' stockpiling

coal against the possibility of a strike by the United Mine Workers in
September.

San Francisco reports, however, that the coal companies in the

West have been laying off workers.
The oil industry remains weak.

The increase in drilling apparently

stems from lower costs and more favorable leasing terms rather than from
growth in demand.

Dallas says these factors have accounted for a 38

percent increase in the number of offshore rigs since the first of the year.
CONSTRUCTION/REAL ESTATE
The underlying upward trend in the residential construction industry
persists, according to most Districts, despite a recent slowdown and anxiety
about the future course of interest rates.

New York and Cleveland report

brisk sales of homes, but indicate that buyers and builders are very conscious
of mortgage rates. In most other Districts, residential sales slowed in recent
weeks, the result of a combination of bad weather and higher mortgage
rates. Higher rates have given a further boost to adjustable rate mortgages
(ARMs). Kansas City reports that over 80 percent of new mortgage loans in
that District are ARMs.

Nonresidential construction remains generally strong despite concern
about overbuilding.

In New York and Chicago the demand for office space

continues to grow. The market for industrial space, however, is mixed.
MANUFACTURING
The nation's industrial sector is continuing along a path of expansion.
Although capital goods industries are weak in some Districts, the overall
picture is bright in virtually all areas.
strongest

at this time,

The paper industry is probably the

followed by consumer

fabricated metals, and electronics.

durables, primary and

San Francisco indicates rapid gains in

the production of missiles and space vehicles, and Cleveland and Chicago
both report that many motor vehicle manufacturing plants are operating at
capacity. Manufacturers' stock levels are generally stable, and there are no
reported
mixed.

plans for significant inventory-building.

Industrial prices are

The only real weakness in manufacturing is in exports.

Boston

reports, however, that there has been a pickup in sales of foreign subsidiaries
of domestic firms.
RETAIL/CONSUMER SPENDING
About half of the District report that retail sales have made a brisk
comeback in April after a sluggish March.

The strongest gains were posted

in Philadelphia, where sales are running as much as 35 percent ahead of the
same time last year; about half of that gain was due to the later Easter
holiday this year.

In other Districts reporting rebounds, gains range from 8

percent to 26 percent. Even in those areas which have not seen an increase
in sales, retailers believe the underlying strength in consumer spending is
still present. Consumer durables appear to be leading the surge in spending,
bolstered by the strength of the housing market. Nondurables, however, are

also doing quite well.

Retail inventories in most Districts have increased

relative to sales, but merchants are not concerned and are not planning any
special moves to cut back.

At least part of the inventory buildup is

intentional and being undertaken in response to continued strength in
demand.
Auto sales are also reported to be vigorous.

Foreign cars and larger

domestic autos seem to be leading the pack, although Atlanta reports
healthy sales of compact vehicles as well.

Some shortages of the more

popular domestic models are reported, and delivery times for foreign cars
are being stretched out.

Recent increases in consumer loan rates in some

parts of the country do not appear to have dampened the demand for cars.
BANKING AND FINANCE
Virtually all Districts in the Eastern and Southern parts of the nation
report strong growth in loan demand this month. Business loans remain brisk
in those areas, with both large and small companies borrowing for a variety
of reasons.

Consumer borrowing is also up, especially loans for autos.

Deposit flows, however, are weak at many financial institutions, and loans
are being made with borrowed funds.

Districts in the Western part of the

country say there has been little or no loan growth in March and April.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Business activity in the First District continues to expand.
Retailers report satisfactory sales, and manufacturers are seeing a pickup
in orders.

While the expansion is widespread, it is not uniform - some

sectors continue to outpace others.

A few supply problems have

materialized, but price increases are quite moderate.

Demand for bank

loans is strong and increasing.
Retail
Retailers in the First District reported sales growth on or better
than plan in recent months, although unseasonable weather combined with a
later-than-usual Easter to shift March sales into April.

All retailers

contacted expect steady sales growth to continue through the year.

Supply

problems have caused inventories to be higher or lower than desired levels
in some cases, but the deviations were not considered serious.
rising very little because of strong price competition.

Prices are

1984 capital

spending by retailers contacted this month will probably mirror 1983.
Merchants expected low sales in March because of Easter's late
arrival, but sales fell below even modest plans because of consistently bad
weather in New England.

However, April sales rebounded to bring

year-to-date sales back to plan or better.

Reported increases for April

ranged from 8 to 15 percent on a comparable stores basis.

Aside from items

the stores were actively promoting or downgrading, no specific products
were noticeably stronger or weaker than average, except that one chain sold
more lumber and building materials than they expected.

Two retailers have lower inventories than desired because some of
their suppliers are not providing promised merchandise.

In contrast, one

department store's high inventory levels were attributed to excessive
ordering by divisions faced with shipping delays.

These problems are not

serious; none of the merchants contacted planned any significant changes in
inventory practices.
Most retail respondents this month reported capital spending plans
for 1984 similar to last year.

New store openings and remodeling and

expansion of existing stores reflect continued confidence in steady
regional growth.
Manufacturing
Business is very good, according to most of the manufacturers
contacted.

Representatives of the metal working industry tend to be less

positive than other manufacturers, but they also report that business has
improved over the past several months.

The strength is widespread,

although appliances and other housing-related products and electronics are
unusually strong and capital goods for the farm and construction equipment
industries are unusually weak.

In general, orders for capital equipment

are picking up, but the rate of recovery is varied.

Several capital goods

manufacturers report that demand is behind schedule for this stage of the
recovery; customers may have ambitious investment plans, but they seem
unwilling to make large cash commitments.

In contrast, a few firms report

unexpectedly strong demand with very tight delivery dates; these firms are
uncertain whether to gear up to accommodate what may be panic buying. Sales
in Canada, the Far East and Europe are increasing, but because of the

strong dollar, the pickup is more pronounced for sales of overseas
subsidiaries than for exports.
Manufacturers are operating with lower inventory-to-sales ratios
than in the past.

Use of computerized inventory management techniques and,

in some cases, simply more attention to inventories have made it possible
to reduce inventory ratios without impairing customer service.

Several

respondents commented that because of lower inventory ratios, their need to
borrow working capital was substantially below normal for this point in a
recovery.
None of the firms contacted has seen evidence of widespread price
increases.

Pulp prices are said to be rising, but no other products were

singled out.

Semiconductors are in extremely short supply; but the problem

is lead times not price increases.

Wage increases are also reported to be

moderate; several respondents expect increases in 1984 of about 5 percent.
Commercial Banking
Banking respondents report vigorous growth in loan demand.
expansion is broad-based.
installment loan demand.

The

Smaller banks are seeing strong real estate and
At larger banks, business loan demand is

increasing, with medium-sized and New England-based firms providing much of
the strength.

To a substantial degree, banks are financing the increased

demand with purchased funds rather than deposit growth.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

Introduction
The slowdown in the national economic recovery suggested by
the leading indicators and unemployment
reports

from the Second

activity

continued

District.

Several

to

District
expand

for

in

purchasing

rates was not reflected
March

and April.

in

Business

most

sectors

throughout

managers

report

very

the

favorable

conditions and the unemployment rate in New York reached a four-year
low.

The demand for homes is

very strong and builders expect to be

busy until the end of the year.

Nonresidential construction is also

strong with especially tight space availability in some parts of the
District. Consumer spending did slow in March, and despite a sharp
recovery in April, several retailers report excess inventories.

On

the

of

financial

side,

consumer loans:

banks

have

begun offering

two new

types

variable rate installment loans and equity access

accounts.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales in the Second District were weak in March but
rebounded in April.
sales

lower

in

March

Two retailers located in New Jersey registered
than

reported very small increases.

last
In

year,

and

contrast,

several

store

chains

consumer spending rose

sharply in April throughout the District, to amounts ranging from 11
to 26 percent higher than those of last year.

Bad weather in March,

II-2

good weather in April, and an Easter holiday three weeks later than
last year were common explanations for this pattern.
The

increase

in

April

sales

was

not

enough

to

prevent

excess inventory build-up for a number of retailers in the course of
the past few months.

Several stores have accumulated merchandise 20

or 30 percent over last year's levels.

While much of the inventory

growth was intentional, levels at some stores were up to 10 percent
higher

than

planned.

Some

retailers

plan

to

reduce

stocks

by

cutting back or cancelling orders, but others expect increased sales
to absorb excess inventory.

Business Activity
The business
its

pace in recent

expansion in
weeks.

the

Purchasing

Second

District maintained

managers

in

upstate

areas

reported quite favorable economic conditions, and the percentage of
managers in the Buffalo area citing increases of new orders reached
the

highest

level

in

six

years.

Downstate,

improved

economic

conditions made possible a New York City budget proposal calling for
substantially higher levels of public employment.
Further employment gains were registered in many areas of
the District.
increased

March nonagricultural employment in New York State

broadly

to

a

record

level

for

that

month,

and

the

unemployment rate fell below 7.0% for the first time in four years.
The greatest improvements were in the construction, trade, service,

II-3

and financial industries.

Manufacturing employment also rose as a

pickup in business capital outlays led to increased employment in
the electrical and nonelectrical machinery industries.
Among major new construction projects in the District, two
of the largest were the groundbreaking for a new 300-room hotel and
convention center in the Albany area, and a planned office building
and hotel near Giants Stadium in New Jersey.

Other large expansions

include an additional building at IBM's Kingston, New York complex,
increased

space

at

a

dairy

plant,

and

the

enlargement

of

its

headquarters building by a microwave firm.

Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction activity was brisk throughout the

District despite occasional interruptions due to unseasonably wet
weather.

Demand is very strong and builders anticipate being booked

through November.

Because of anxiety over the future

course of

interest rates, New York and New Jersey builders are considering
issuing "builders bonds" to finance mortgages themselves, in order
to assure a stable flow of funds next year.
Nonresidential real estate activity also picked up a bit in
recent months.

The strength in the Manhattan office market, which

has recently been confined to older buildings, is extending to new,
higher-priced office space.

Demand is also up in New Jersey and

II-4

lower Connecticut, but remains fairly slow in the northern suburbs
of New York.
rate hikes,

On Long Island, despite fears of large electricity

the industrial market was especially tight.

of available industrial space

fell

The amount

by nearly 25 percent in

the six

months ending in March.

New office buildings are planned or starting both in New
York

City and

in

suburban

areas.

Construction

of

retail space,

especially "strip centers" along major roads is up on Long Island.

Financial Developments
Small Second District banks are offering two relatively new
consumer financial

instruments, variable-rate

loans and equity access

accounts.

consumer

Most banks

installment

surveyed now offer

variable-rate consumer loans.

Monthly payments are generally fixed

for

and

the

term

of

the

loan,

quarterly

rate

incorporated by changing the number of payments.

adjustments

are

The response to

these loans has been quite good; the banks reported that up to 80
percent of consumer loans are now of the variable rate variety.
Equity

access

accounts

accessed like lines of credit.
banks

and

demand

for

these

are

mortgage

loans

that

can

be

They are are being offered by fewer
accounts appears

to

be

fairly weak.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Most Third District contacts report steady growth in the local economy during the
past six weeks. The one exception is the real estate and home construction industry, which has
experienced a recent slowdown in activity.

In other industries, manufacturers report solid

increases in activity since early March and, after an anticipated let up in March, retailers are
enjoying handsome sales gains in April. Additionally, local bankers report very steady growth in
both commercial and retail loan volume.
The outlook varies across industries. Manufacturers and retailers forecast continued
growth, but at a slightly slower pace than during the recent quarter.

Area bankers are

confident that they will continue to see healthy loan growth during the next six months. On the
other hand, real estate and construction executives express the concern that if mortgage rates
continue to rise, their industry will experience a significant and sustained slump in activity.
MANUFACTURING
The Third District manufacturers responding to the most recent Business Outlook
Survey report solid increases in activity during the past two months.

Over 50 percent of the

respondents indicate a pickup in activity, while only five percent report a decline.

New orders

and shipments continue to make significant, steady advances, and unfilled orders and delivery
times are also up. Contrary to national figures, survey results indicate that local manufacturing
inventories have been unchanged for the past six months.

Also, April employment has made

only slight gains over March levels.
The effect of the economic expansion is being felt in industrial prices at area firms
according to the survey. In April, 51 percent of the respondents report paying higher prices for
raw materials and 23 percent indicate that they are being paid more for their output. Looking
ahead, the April price outlook marks the 12th consecutive month in which more than threequarters of the respondents have forecast higher input prices. This month, 80 percent of those

III-2
polled predict increased input costs by October, and 54 percent anticipate receiving higher
prices for their final products.
The overall outlook for manufacturing during the next six months is positive, though
to a slightly lesser degree than in past months. Two-thirds of the executives surveyed foresee
continued expansion in manufacturing activity until at least October.

Additionally, a large

portion of respondents (47 percent) once again forecast a pickup in capital expenditures over the
next two quarters.
RETAIL
Following an anticipated mediocre performance in March, retail sales in the Third
District have been very healthy in April.

Retailers report sales increases of 25 percent to 35

percent over April '83; they attribute about half of that gain to the late Easter holiday. Despite
the reported declines in national retail sales for the months of February and March, contacts
here have not sensed a reduction in either consumer confidence or willingness to spend. In fact,
credit sales as a percent of total sales continue to rise. Inventories at local department stores
are reported to be slightly on the heavy side, but retailers say they have no plans as yet to
undertake markdowns.

Merchants report that they promoted heavily during the Easter selling

season, but that current promotions are normal for this time of year.
Looking ahead, retailers foresee some easing in sales growth, but still forecast 5-15
percent increases over a year ago through September.
FINANCIAL
Bank contacts in the Third District report healthy growth in both commercial and
retail loans since early March.

C&I loan activity is maintaining the 10 percent to 15 percent

rate of increase over 1983 levels which began in February. Contacts report that both large and
small companies are borrowing money for capital expenditures, inventory financing, and working
capital. Retail loan volume also has posted healthy advances during the past six weeks, and

III-3
consumer loans outstanding now exceed last year's levels by 10 to 20 percent.

Loan officers

remark that the growth is attributable to automobile loans and credit card borrowing.
While most bankers foresee continued strength in loan growth for the remainder of
1984, some have cautioned that higher interest rates could discourage borrowing later in the
year.

On the retail side, local contacts unanimously forecast generally robust activity for at

least the next two quarters.
The prime rate at Philadelphia banks is currently 12 percent, up from 11 percent six
weeks ago. Bank economists are forecasting gradual upward movement in both short-term and
long-term rates through the end of this year. They predict that continued GNP growth in the
second quarter (3 percent to 4 percent), an increasing rate of inflation (5 percent to 7 percent),
government borrowing demands, and a firm Fed policy will push rates gradually higher. Some
local economists feel, however, that the FOMC will attempt to keep the federal funds rate at or
below the 11 percent level for the remainder of this year. They believe that if second quarter
growth appears to be within the 3-4 percent range and there are no unexpected jumps in the
monetary aggregates in the near future, the Fed will be able to achieve that goal.
REAL ESTATE/CONSTRUCTION
Third District realtors and residential builders have begun to feel some effects of
rising mortgage interest rates, which have climbed by 50 to 125 basis points over the last two
months.

Local rates for 30-year, 3-point fixed-rate conventional mortgages currently range

from 13-1/2 to 14 percent.

Although real estate sales firms report that sales have remained

strong through early April, (15 to 20 percent higher than those of a year ago) some are now
seeing a slowdown in activity.

Local builders, however, report a more dramatic drop in sales

over the last several weeks, which they say are now running 30 to 40 percent behind last April's
strong pace.

Both realtors and builders attribute the recent easing of activity exclusively to

buyer nervousness over rising mortgage interest rates.

III-4
New housing starts also have slowed considerably as local builders express caution
over the dangers of speculative construction during a period of rising interest rates. Builders
also are concerned about the possible increase in the rate of buyer cancellations of contracts on
houses already under construction.
slim.

As a result, inventories of uncommitted homes are very

As for the future, industry contacts feel that if mortgage rates reach the "magic" level,

somewhere between 14 percent and 15 percent, the industry will enter a sustained slump.

IV-1
Fourth District - Cleveland

Summary.
Economic activity in the Fourth District continues to increase, but
labor market conditions remain weaker than in the nation.

Retail sales

improved in April from March, but gains for the March-April period are
smaller than for the previous two months.

Output and prices in

manufacturing continue to rise, and some primary metals and automotive
production lines are operating at capacity.
remain strong.

Housing construction and sales

Strike-hedge demand for coal is rising.

Business loan

demand remains strong at commercial banks.
District Labor Market Conditions.
Despite steady recovery, labor market conditions in this District remain
weaker than in the nation.

A banker estimates the unemployment rate for

eastern Kentucky to be 16%.

Ohio's unemployment rate in March was 3.1

percentage points below its year-earlier level but was still 2.4 percentage
points above the national rate.

Nevertheless, the average workweek in Ohio

manufacturing increased 0.2 hours to 42.6 hours (n.s.a.)

in March, after two

months of declines, and the average workweek in automobile manufacturing
increased to 46.2 hours, the highest since December 1978.
Unemployment rates in eleven major metropolitan areas in this District
in February ranged from 7.6% in Columbus to 13.3% in Pittsburgh.

An index

of leading indicators for the Pittsburgh area has risen strongly in the last
few months following a slowdown last autumn, suggesting substantial
employment gains in the months ahead.

IV-2
Retail Sales.
Retail sales recovered briskly in April from the previous month's
slump.

General merchandisers contacted, however, report less than 10%

year-over-year gain for the March-April period as compared with increases of
about 11% to 12% in the previous two months.

Much of the April strength was

concentrated in soft goods, especially apparel.
quite strong in April.

New cars sales remained

Both domestic and import dealers report solid,

across-the-board sales strength, which is expected to persist through the
remainder of the quarter.

Shortages were reported for some larger size

models, and the waiting period for some import models has lengthened to
about eight weeks.
Manufacturing.
Output and prices continue to rise.

This Bank's survey of Fourth

District manufacturers indicates that firms expected shipments to rise in
April but at a slower pace than in March.

A survey of northeastern Ohio

purchasing managers indicates production and new orders rose again in
April.

Two-thirds of the respondents report prices paid are higher than a

month ago, and none report lower prices.

A survey of Cincinnati area

purchasing managers indicates vendor performance is continuing to
deteriorate while prices paid are rising.

A major auto producer reports

difficulty adding to production schedules that are at capacity for mid- and
standard-size cars.
Primary Metals.
Demand for sheet steel and aluminum remains strong.

A major steel

producer reports that production is at capacity for sheet steel, which is
used primarily in automobiles.

The firm suggests demand for sheet steel may

not increase further because automobile production has peaked and steel

IV-3
imports are readily available.

Area steel producers report growing demand

from the capital goods sector.
A major aluminum producer's fabricating facilities have been operating
at capacity for a year.

The firm is allocating supplies of aluminum sheet

among customers for June and July deliveries because demand exceeds
production capacity.

The firm's smelters have been operating at capacity

since autumn; however, some high cost smelters are closed and won't reopen
unless aluminum prices increase by about two-thirds.

World market prices of

ingot aluminum have declined in the last three months despite apparent tight
supplies, a phenomenon the firm cannot explain.

World supplies of bauxite

and alumina are reported to be ample.
Housing.
House construction and sales remain strong but are sensitive to interest
rates.

Builders of single-family homes report that construction activity

during the first quarter of 1984 was up from a year ago, and barring a
further rise in interest rates, construction in 1984 would match or possibly
exceed last year's total.

The "move-up" market remains strong and demand by

first-time buyers is being bolstered by expectations that interest rates
will edge up steadily as the year matures.

Realtors, who reported record

earnings in 1983, are currently experiencing a strong sales pace; even if
interest rates rise slightly, they expect a fairly good housing market for
the balance of 1984.
Lenders recently experienced a decline in mortgage applications.
Applications for fixed-rate mortgages fell, but are being partially replaced
by applications for adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs).

Lenders say ARMs will

keep the market buoyant until initial ARM rates reach the 13% - 13 1/2%
range, which lenders now consider the "tolerance" rate.

IV-4
Coal.
Coal prices are rising and demand and shipments are increasing in
eastern Kentucky.

Utilities are reported to be increasing stockpiles as a

hedge against a strike when the United Mine Workers' contract expires on
September 30.
Commercial Banking.
Loan demand remained strong at Fourth District banks in recent weeks.
Business lending led the way and is expected to remain strong throughout the
year.

Consumer loans also increased, particularly auto loans.

Bankers

expect the pace of consumer lending to taper off somewhat, but expect
overall loan demand to remain quite strong in the months ahead.
Net deposit inflows have been relatively flat with the lack of growth
partly attributed to the April 15th tax deadline.

Loans have been financed

to a large extent with borrowed and purchased funds, and from the sale of
government securities.
in the next two months.

Bankers expect deposit growth to pick up moderately

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Although there are some indications that the rate of expansion of
the District economy has slowed, activity continues to increase.

Also, at

least a portion of the perceived slowing is attributed to recent weather
conditions.

Construction and agriculture, especially, have been hampered.

On

other fronts, industrial activity, retail sales, and mining remain robust, as
do the underlying trends in commercial and residential construction.

District

coal production also continues to run well ahead of year earlier levels.

In

general, loan demand is also growing, but financial institutions appear
capable of absorbing significant additional loan growth, especially if deposit
forecasts come close to the mark.

Manufacturing
After allowance for seasonal factors, manufacturing activity
appears to be still expanding generally.

Shipments, orders, and order

backlogs all showed further growth over the past several weeks, although the
improvement was more narrowly based than in the previous few months.
Manufacturing employment also seems to have gained, and the length of the
average work week may have risen sharply.

Our information indicates little

change in manufacturers' inventories over the past month or so, only some very
modest accumulation in raw materials.

Most of our respondents still find

current stocks at comfortable levels, although a few report them excessive.
There is some sentiment for expanding inventories if sales continue to rise,
but little expectation of a significant accumulation in the near future.

In general, current plant and equipment capacity is considered about
right.

There is occasional mention, however, of plants or industries facing

possible short-term constraints.

In particular, the paper industry and some

of its customers, such as the gypsum wall board industry, may be near capacity.

Isolated plants in the textile, furniture, automobile, and printing

industries are also cited as examples.

Consumer Spending
Sales of general merchandise lines have made further headway in
recent weeks despite some purportedly seasonal weakness in apparel and related
products.

It is generally felt that subsequent periods will make up for this

weakness.

Automobiles may also have gone through a lull, but continued

improvement is widely expected.

Other consumer durables such as furniture and

appliances continue to do quite well, perhaps even gaining a larger share of
total sales.
Retailers do report some inventory accumulation recently, but are
generally comfortable with current stocks, as they are with the present number
and size of outlets.

Also, employment by retailers appears to have expanded

over the past four to six weeks.

Housing and Construction
Adverse weather conditions have undoubtedly resulted in lost production in the construction sector since mid-March, and measured activity will
certainly reflect this.

Underlying trends in the industry remain strongly

positive, however, and widely-held expectations are that the recovery will
continue when weather permits.

Both commercial and residential construction

appear very strong if gauged by projects in various stages:

plans,

V-3

announcements, permits, starts, in progress, etc.
points to continued strength in the industry.

Nearly all the evidence

In addition, house sales are

still quite strong.

Banking and Finance
Loan demand at District financial institutions has grown somewhat
more rapidly in recent weeks than earlier in the year, particularly on the
business side.

Nonetheless, consumer installment and residential mortgage

activity remain strong.

Financial institutions have the capacity to

accommodate further loan growth, and many project that deposit growth will
outstrip the expansion of loan demand in coming months.

Agriculture
Unseasonably wet weather during March and April has delayed farmers'
plantings, possibly causing a shift from corn to soybeans for some.

Avian

influenza, which inflicted heavy losses on Virginia's poultry industry in the
Shenandoah Valley last winter is continuing to plague turkey growers with
sporadic outbreaks, resulting in sizeable economic losses.

On the input side,

farm production expenses are expected to increase only 2-4 percent in the
current year, which, coupled with stronger expected product prices, is causing
some optimism concerning farmers' profit positions this year.

The Outlook
The outlook around the District certainly remains positive, but is
somewhat less ebullient than in recent months.

There is no sense of an

impending contraction, but more observers seem to see less and less capacity
and opportunity for further growth.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The pace of economic growth is slowing in the Southeast.

Labor markets

continue to strengthen largely because of ongoing expansion in the industrial sector.
However,

most manufacturers,

fearful that the recovery

is near its peak,

initiating plant expansions and are monitoring inventories carefully.
spending has decelerated,

but retailers

are

are not

Growth in consumer

satisfied with current inventory levels.

Rising interest rates contributed to a decline in residential construction in the early
spring, but commercial building remains on the rise.
has slackened.

Consumer and mortgage lending

Even the growth rate of business lending, which was strong throughout

the first quarter, fell in April.
adjustable-rate mortgages.

Southeastern thrifts are avoiding sharply discounted

Conditions in the travel industry are healthy despite rapid

expansion of lodging facilities and the lingering effects of intense airfare competition
last year.

Pork supplies should not fall as drastically in the Southeast as in the nation,

and the outlook for profitability in this segment of the agricultural sector is positive.
Employment and Industry.
seasonally

adjusted

The unemployment

basis in five District

states.

construction are boosting employment in Florida.
was the lowest in nearly a decade.
growth rates of recent months.
increased.

rate in March fell on a

Defense contracts,

tourism,

and

Florida's 5.5 percent jobless rate

Manufacturing is sustaining much of the employment
Steel and aluminum production in Alabama recently

The forest products industry is operating near capacity, according to a trade

association spokesman.

Recent unfavorable weather conditions have hampered some

timber harvesting, causing mills to struggle to meet surging demand.

However, lumber

industry representatives are concerned about the effect of rising interest rates on
demand for wood products.

Strong backlogs reported by contacts with oil surveying

crews and seismic operations in Louisiana portend renewed drilling activity.

VI-2

Contacts in most industries stress that greater utilization of present facilities
is a top priority; plant expansions are infrequent at this time. Many producers, fearing
that the recent surge in economic growth cannot be sustained, are maintaining a close
watch over inventories.

The strong dollar and slow recovery abroad are retarding the

growth of manufactured exports from Miami to Latin America and of grain and coal
exports from New Orleans and thereby limiting the recovery of foreign trade activity
in the District.

Port officials throughout the region foresee a continuation of slow

export growth.
Consumer Spending.

District retailers report a slowdown in March-April

sales growth from the year-over-year advance recorded in the January-February period.
Easter holiday sales were below merchants' expectations, but they were above 1983
levels.

Electronics, home furnishings, cosmetics, shoes, and sportswear were among

the top selling items this Easter.

Retailers also report that there have been no

significant increases in suppliers' prices and inventories generally are at desired levels.
The monthly growth rate of car sales in the region remained strong in the first four
months of 1984 but, in contrast to the 1983 pattern, has fallen below the national rate.
Compact and medium-sized models are showing particularly healthy sales growth here.
Construction.

Contacts in major District cities report decreases in single-

and multifamily building permits from March to April following increases from February
to March.

Orlando, with 26 and 52 percent decreases in single- and multifamily building

permits, respectively, experienced the greatest slowdown from March to April.
respondents attribute the decline to rising interest rates and rainy April weather.

Most
The

Federal National Mortgage Corporation is discouraging sharply discounted adjustable-rate
mortgages (ARMs), and some private mortgage insurers have become reluctant to insure
such ARMs.

As financial institutions respond to this trend, higher income requirements

for ARMs may be shrinking the pool of potential home buyers.

VI-3

Nonresidential construction, measured in square feet, increased 57 percent
from February to March, surpassing the national rise of 39 percent.
concern in Atlanta's office market.

Overbuilding is a

Fears of further materials price rises and interest

rate escalation have caused builders in Orlando to decrease speculative building and
purchase forward commitments

to guarantee current rates.

Population growth and

corporate relocations are also fostering development, but increased building costs and
rising interest rates have spurred builders in some areas to rush projects in progress
in case the boom should end soon.
Financial Services.
quarter.

Loan demand at banks has been strong through the first

Business and real estate lending has grown most rapidly, although business

lending slowed somewhat in early April.

Consumer lending softened in the March-April

period.

Deposits, especially demand deposits, at large commercial banks declined in

March.

Contacts believe withdrawals for income tax payments caused the shrinkage.

Savings and loan associations in Louisiana and Mississippi registered large increases in
mortgage

commitments,

somewhat in April.

but higher

mortgage

interest rates

dampened

this

activity

A poll of southeastern savings and loan associations revealed little

usage of deep-discount (5-7 percent range) adjustable-rate mortgages.
steps such as raising minimum income requirements

S&Ls have taken

to protect themselves from the

heightened risk of such loans.
Regional interstate banking is gaining legislative momentum in the Southeast.
Georgia has enacted a law permitting interstate banking, and Florida, South Carolina,
and North Carolina have bills at varying stages of the legislative process.

Meanwhile,

banks outside the Southeast are taking advantage of a provision in federal banking
statutes

allowing

out-of-state

banks

to operate

consumer loan

and

deposit-taking

facilities provided they refrain from offering either business loans or checking accounts.
Over 30 institutions have applied to operate these consumer banks in Florida and Georgia.

VI-4
Tourism.

Most sectors of the tourism

beginning of the spring season.

industry

posted increases

at

the

Visitor center registrations were generally up in March,

although the rate of growth in Florida was a narrow 2 percent, a reflection of both a
deceleration in visitor growth and a later Easter.

Respondents report that convention

business is healthy, especially in Nashville and Orlando.

Lodging tax revenues showed

a double-digit percent increase over year-earlier levels in every state. Hotel occupancy
rates, however, have softened from last year because of the large number of new rooms
available.

The 1984 World's Fair in New Orleans should help hotels in Louisiana,

Mississippi, and Alabama.
spring.

Reservations managers report strong bookings through the

Advance ticket sales to the Fair had been below expectations but have spurted

in recent weeks.
Air traffic continued to rise in most smaller cities in March, but the Atlanta
and Miami airports reported a drop in passenger volume of 2 percent and 3 percent,
respectively.

These declines reflect the elimination of sharply discounted fares, which

inflated air travel a year ago.

Cruise ship bookings are still slow but on the rise.

Anticipating growth, several lines have launched new luxury ships from Florida ports.
Agriculture.

In response to rising feed costs, pork farmers began to reduce

inventories last year by marketing hogs earlier and breeding fewer sows.

A recent

survey suggests that reductions are continuing and this summer's farrowings at the
national level will be the lowest since 1975.

However, partial data for the Southeast

imply that inventories here will remain at approximately 90 percent of 1983 levels. If
normal crops are produced in 1984, feeding costs should decline in the fourth quarter
and hog prices should rise, prompting an increase in production that will reach the
consumer next year.
pork producers.

Declining costs and rising revenues should improve the profits of

The pork industry generates over $800 million in annual farm revenue

in the Sixth District.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

The business improvement in the Seventh District continues,

but the uptrend in retail sales slowed in the early spring and housing
activity ebbed, allowing for seasonal trends.

Employment has increased

further, but gains are still concentrated in manufacturing.

Despite sharply

higher profits, cost reduction programs are still being pressed vigorously.
Output of motor vehicles, paper products, gypsum board, and household appliances
is high, often at or near full capacity.
ing new life, both private and public.

Nonresidential construction is showDemand for most mechanical capital

equipment has improved, but only moderately.

Two major public utilities have

serious financial problems, with no resolution in sight.

Although leadtimes

on deliveries of goods have stretched out further and price increases are more
frequent, most items continue to be readily available.

Inventory building is

underway on a broad front, but appears to be voluntary and in line with plans.
Despite evidence of slower growth, most District executives anticipate further
gains in a highly competitive environment.

Pressures to restrict imports are

building, supported by business and labor groups.

Farmland values declined

again in the first quarter.
Cost-Cutting.

Various companies whose sales and profits have increased

sharply since the low point of the recession continue to press cost-cutting
programs--eliminating marginal and replacing better-paid employees, consolidating functions, selling or closing less profitable operations, etc.
expansions such efforts often were relaxed.

In past

New hirings require special

approval, and early retirements are encouraged.

Staff reductions through at-

trition are difficult because, reflecting slack labor demand, quit rates are a
small fraction of the postwar average, and the lowest since the 1930s.

Also

VII-2

cutting staff are banks, insurance companies, and other financial service companies facing intense competition.

The medical field--hospitals, laboratories,

and medical supply firms--has been laying off workers, after expanding rapidly
for many years, because of pressures for "cost containment."
Business Climate.

Interested groups are much concerned about publicity

given to recent studies indicating that Midwest states are "inhospitable" to
business.

Problems cited include high wages and benefits, restrictive work

rules, energy costs, taxes, unemployment insurance and workers' compensation,
government regulation, and lack of special incentives to locate, expand, or
remain in the region.

Some charge that evaluation methods of the surveys are

unfair and inaccurate, but there is general recognition that unfavorable "scores"
have foundation in fact.
Job Markets.

Increases in manufacturing employment in the District since

the low point in late 1982 compare favorably with increases in the nation, mainly
because of callbacks in the motor industry.
ever, has increased less than in the nation.

Nonmanufacturing employment, howFor both manufacturing and non-

manufacturing the District experience compares unfavorably with the nation relative to the 1981 peak or to earlier years.

Nevertheless, many factories are

working long hours--seven-day weeks, heavy daily overtime, and extra shifts.
Major food chains in the District have cut compensation of union workers substantially despite existing contracts.

Executives say these moves were neces-

sitated by growing competition from food discounters.

Cuts in labor costs

have been reflected in lower food prices.
Retail Sales.
least of soft goods.

Merchants were somewhat disappointed by April sales, at
However, it is not believed that the underlying strength

of the upturn has deteriorated.
been "phenomenal".

Sales of appliances, led by microwaves, have

Other hard goods also have done well.

Inventories, overall,

VII-3
are now slightly higher than had been budgeted, especially when goods on order
are included, but not a cause of concern.

General merchandise prices, up 2 per-

cent in 1983, are expected to rise 3 percent this year.
Capital Equipment.
variations by category.

Orders for capital equipment are rising, but with wide
Farm equipment remains very weak.

equipment has improved, but not heavy types.

Light construction

Freight car orders are somewhat

higher, but only specialized types, including piggy-back flatcars, auto carriers,
and some bulk carriers.

Machine tool orders have exceeded shipments this year,

but the industry remains in "dire straits" because of sharply reduced cash flow.
The paper industry is starting a new wave of expansion.

There is no activity in

new chemical plants, oil refineries, electric utilities, ore processing, cement,
and gypsum board.
sheet mill.

A leading steel producer may build a large, modern cold-rolled

Output of heavy trucks and trailers is at full capacity, and this is

expected to continue into the second half.

Traffic handled has increased sharply,

and the trucking fleet aged and deteriorated in the past several years of low
investment.
Housing.

For the first quarter, housing permits were one-third above 1983,

and four times the pitiful level of 1982, but less than half that of early 1977
or 1978.

Sales of new and used homes slowed in the past month, except in partic-

ularly "hot" markets.

The housing slowdown is attributed to a reduction in the

overhang of deferred purchases, and concern over the soundness of ARMs that involve artificially low starting rates.
Nonresidential Construction.

The uptrend in office building construction

has gathered strength, but mainly in the Chicago area.

Additional large build-

ings are getting underway. (Factory work is up, from almost zero, but still very
low.) Leasing activity is up substantially and rents have firmed, belying "expert"
forecasts early last year that the overhang of space would take several years to

VII-4

absorb.

Highway construction projects are moving forward at a very rapid pace,

after lagging earlier in the year.
Steel.

Shipments of steel are expected to continue to rise through the

year with a less than seasonal decline in the summer.

Demand is strong for

lighter steels to be used in vehicles, appliances, and housing, with output at
virtual capacity.

Inventories are building, on a voluntary basis, but remain

low by past standards.

Structurals are improving, but demand for heavy plates

used in capital goods remains weak.
Agriculture.

Our survey of agricultural bankers indicates that farmland

values in the District declined nearly 3 percent in the first quarter, ranging
from virtually no change in Indiana and Michigan to an unusually large decline
of 6 percent in Iowa.

Overall, farmland values were 5 percent below the year-

ago level and 18 percent below the 1981 peak.

Weakness in farmland values

partly reflects asset adjustments by a small number of farmers.

The major cause

of forced sales has been debt-financed investments in the boom of the late 1970s,
at high prices and high interest rates.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District continued to increase
in March and April, but the pace of the expansion slowed.

Retail sales

were moderately strong, but year-over-year comparisons were less
favorable than during the winter.

Industrial production rose

moderately, construction remained vigorous, and employment increased.
Farmers have been hampered by wet weather, but expectations of large
plantings have stimulated seed, fertilizer and implement sales.
Outlook
Employers generally are optimistic about the near term
outlook.

In a recent survey of St. Louis area business firms, 32

percent planned to hire more workers in the second quarter of 1984,
while only 7 percent planned staff reductions in the quarter.

In a

similar survey taken a year ago, 23 percent of the employers said they
planned to hire more workers and 8 percent expected to trim their
staffs.
Consumer Spending
Department store sales in the District continued to be above
year ago levels in March and April.

At six stores, sales during the

two months averaged 5 percent above the same two months in 1983.
Clothing items moved well, but appliance sales slowed.

Inventories

are higher than in January, but retailers do not judge them burdensome.
Auto sales have been strong.

Several dealers report that

March and April sales were 16 percent or more above year ago levels.

VIII-2

Dealers claim that sales would have been larger if popular models
had been available.

Sales of used cars and trucks also have been

vigorous.
Rainy weather in March and April adversely affected home
sales in the District; they were about the same as in the comparable
months a year ago.

Industry spokesmen, however, expect total home

sales for 1984 to be at least 10 percent higher than in 1983.

This

year's growth in the sales of multifamily homes has been offset by a
decline in single family home sales.

Prices of homes are rising,

but not out-of-line with general inflation.

Construction costs have

increased with a recent 5 percent wage boost, rising land prices and
higher material costs.

Builders and realtors expressed concern over

increases in the mortgage interest rate: if it rises much more,
sales are expected to decline greatly.

Manufacturing
Industrial activity in the District continued to expand
moderately during March and April.

Expenditures for capital

equipment were strong, but most of the outlays were for replacement
and modernization rather than for increased capacity.

Inventories

are higher than last fall, but with sales also up, they are generally
still within the desired range.

A few firms, however, reduced their

production growth rates in order to prevent an unwanted buildup of
inventories.

A large firm in Arkansas cut back its operations

significantly and laid off 450 workers because of slower sales.

VIII-3

Employment
Total employment in the District rose slightly in March and
April with gains recorded in the manufacturing, construction and
service industries.

This increase, however, about matched the

growth in the labor force, and the unemployment rate was little
changed.

Respondents indicate that summer jobs will be somewhat

more plentiful this year than last.
Agriculture
Farmers plan to plant substantially more acres this year
than last, when the PIK program caused a marked reduction in crops.
As a result, implement, seed and fertilizer sales have been much
improved.

The amount of land planted in April, nevertheless, was

negligible because the ground was too wet to work.

This delay will

not become critical, however, for another two weeks or so.
Finance
Banking data indicate little net change in credit and
deposits in March and only a moderate expansion in the first three
weeks of April.

Commercial and industrial loans increased $120

million at 12 relatively large District banks from the end of
February to late April.

Real estate loans rose only $10 million,

while consumer installment credit was up $50 million.

Time deposits

climbed by $70 million, while demand deposits expanded by nearly
300 million.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District's growth prospects, while still good, have moderated

somewhat over the past few months.

Consumer spending has been slowed a

bit by bad weather and a slack farm economy.
tinued its usual seasonal

improvement.

Employment,

however,

has con-

Also, though the agricultural sector

is still suffering from a general malaise, some scattered signs of improvement
have appeared.

Resource-related industries have improved as well, with the

production of taconite, coal, oil, and wood products all firming.

Meanwhile,

loans and deposits haven't appreciably changed.

Consumer Spending
Primarily due to bad weather and a slack farm economy,
general

merchandise has been at a

trict.

One large

district retailer

only 5 percent

greater than

stores

that

reports

"disappointing."
local

stores

little

its

its

February

the dis-

lower rate than usual in

reports that its

sales

spending for

last

and March

March.
sales

sales this
A chain

in

March were

of department

the Twin Cities

were

While bad weather has kept some rural residents shopping in

rather

than

in

urban malls,

rural

shopping throughout

trict has been restrained by the generally slack farm economy.

the dis-

Reflecting

this, Bank directors report spotty sales figures in Montana, South Dakota, and
parts of Minnesota outside of the Minneapolis-St. Paul area.

However, accord-

ing to the limited data available, consumer spending improved throughout the
district in April, thanks to better weather and Easter sales.

IX-2

Regional auto sales
previous months.

have continued to show the strength

both

auto and truck

sales

were up

report

good to strong sales

in

One large automaker reports

substantially from comparable

levels and that current inventories are low.
tors

in

Large domestic automakers report that monthly vehicle sales

increased 50 percent between February and April.
that

evident

1983

Corroborating this, Bank direc-

the cities within Montana,

the Dakotas,

and western Wisconsin.
While home buying increased in the first quarter of 1984, March sales
failed to match the very high level of March 1983.

In the Twin Cities, both

unit and dollar sales were between 10 and 20 percent below year-ago levels in
March, whereas in January and February sales had been between 10 and 20 percent above year-ago levels.
sales

Scattered reports

remained good in other parts

indicate, though, that home

of the district, including Fargo, North

Dakota, and western Wisconsin.

Employment
Labor market

conditions have continued to improve.

The seasonally

unadjusted unemployment rate in Minnesota fell from 7.9 percent in January to
7.1

percent

growth

despite an increase

in March,

has been particularly

robust

in

the

in the labor

force.

Twin Cities area,

now

unemployment

claims in Minnesota were 28 percent lower this March than last.

In Minneap-

olis,

the jobs

during

the help wanted advertising

level last February.
trict.

lost

the

Also,

which has

initial

regained

recession.

Employment

index for February was more than double its

Improvement was also noted in

other parts of the dis-

The unemployment rate in west central Wisconsin fell from 10.7 percent

IX-3

in

January to 10.1 percent

North

Dakota,

area

also

in

February.

fell between

The unemployment rate in the Fargo,

those months,

from 5.1 percent

to 4.6

Meanwhile, the unemployment rate in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan

percent.

but the recently announced construction

remained over 20 percent,

of a large

paper mill should help in the future.

Agriculture
The generally gloomy agriculture picture described in

our last report

Dairy farmers are still having problems

has brightened only a little lately.

in Minnesota and western Wisconsin, and the federal dairy diversion program is
Farm auctions and loan delinquencies are preva-

not expected to help much.
lent.

Cropland values continue to fall in South Dakota.

are below normal
wheat harvest.
taken

from the

hurting the prospects

Farm equipment sales continue to be slow.
recent

scattered reports
in

parts of Montana,

in

1 percent

rise in

Minnesota's

land prices,

of increased

Moisture conditions
for the winter

Some comfort can be

farm price index,

from

and from the continuing strength

livestock markets.

Resource-Related Industries
Signs of
industries.
operating,
are
Coal

running

improvement

have

been visible

in

several resource-related

Due to increased demand, all taconite plants in Minnesota are now
albeit
at

75 percent

production is

North Dakota.

at an average

up in

of only

of capacity
Montana,

53 percent of capacity.
in

the Upper

Two plants

Peninsula of Michigan.

but no new mines are foreseen there or in

Oil production is picking up in Montana and may be picking up

IX-4

in

North

ago.

Dakota.

Oil

Wood product

Waferboard

plants

production is

still

lease prices are higher in Montana now than a year

sales

are

are

running

high in

continuing to build throughout
constantly,

the district,

and

prices

have

the

district.

firmed.

and a large new mill is

Paper

being built

in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

Finance
Neither total loans
early this year.

nor total deposits appear to have changed much

Commercial and industrial loans at banks in the Ninth Dis-

trict rose a bit in February and fell a bit in March, leaving the level about
the

same.

Deposits

at

savings

and

loan

associations

in

Minnesota

fell

slightly

in February.

Deposits have been fairly stable in rural areas re-

cently.

Still, both loans and deposits were around 10 percent higher than a

year ago in the first quarter.
Variation is seen among other loan categories.

Consumer loans have

reportedly increased a bit in North Dakota and southern Minnesota.

However,

agricultural lending has been fairly flat, partly because of the higher cost
of money in rural areas where incomes are depressed.
liquid in most rural areas
exist.

Banks are keeping fairly

of Montana, where few good lending opportunities

TENTH DISTRICT -- KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The current moderate improvement in Tenth District economic

conditions is expected to continue.

Retail sales in early 1984 have been well

above a year earlier, except in rural communities.
sales growth is expected, however.

A gradual slowdown in

Prices are expected to be stable to

slightly rising, both at retail and for materials inputs.

Lead times on

materials inputs are increasing, leading to some inventory expansion.
sales are good in most district states.

New car

Housing starts are strong, but

builders expect a slight decline as the year progresses.

Demand for mortgage

funds is down somewhat at savings and loan associations, which report making
over 80 percent of new loans on an adjustable rate basis.

District commercial

banks report modest deposit growth and weak loan demand, with demand strongest
for consumer loans.

Winter wheat conditions vary widely across the District,

depending on local disease and moisture conditions.

Spring crop planting has

been delayed in much of the district by excessive rain.
Purchasing agents.

Most Tenth District purchasing agents contacted

report input price increases of 5 to 10 percent since April of last year, but
few report significant increases during the last three months.

A majority

expect further increases of 5 to 10 percent during the remainder of the year.
Nearly all respondents report increasing lead times and some problems with
availability of inputs, with little improvement expected over the course of
the year.

In general, materials inventories are at satisfactory levels after

recent expansion in response to increasing sales and worsening lead times.
Retail trade.

Most retailers report sales for the first three months of

1984 well above a year earlier, except in rural communities where there has
been little or no improvement.

Because of extremely competitive conditions,

retailers have not raised prices.

Furthermore, aside from increases to

maintain markups if costs rise, prices are expected to remain stable through
1984.

Many retailers report high inventories which they intend to trim.

A

gradual slowdown in sales growth is expected for the rest of 1984, but sales
are expected to stay above year earlier levels.
Automobile sales.

Automobile dealers in the Tenth District report

generally improved sales in 1984 relative to a year ago although some areas of
weak sales still exist, particularly in rural areas.
Missouri and New Mexico, and weakest in Colorado.

Gains were strongest in

Domestic inventories are

being expanded where possible in expectation of continued strong sales, while
very low inventories continue to suppress the sales of imports.

Most dealers

report that funds are available both for floorplanning and for customer loans.
All dealers contacted are optimistic about the outlook for sales through 1984.
Housing activity and finance.

Home builders report housing starts are

up from a year ago despite recent bad weather, but are expected to fall
slightly as the year progresses.
behind year-ago levels.

Sales of new homes are lagging slightly

New home prices are up 5-10 percent over a year ago.

Home builders report no problems in obtaining materials.

Savings inflows at

savings and loan associations are generally unchanged from last year but are
expected to increase slightly through the rest of 1984.

Increased mortgage

rates have slightly reduced the demand for mortgage funds.

Further rate

increases are expected to weaken demand the remainder of the year.

Savings

and loan associations are aggressively marketing adjustable rate mortgages
with 80-100 percent of all new loans made in this form.

Because the rates on

most ARM's are tied to an index which lags market rate changes, recent
increases in market rates have not yet resulted in significant collection
problems.

Banking.

Bankers' reports on both loan growth and deposit growth differ

widely, ranging from slightly stronger to weak.
New Mexico do conditions seem uniformly good.

Only in Colorado and Northern
Surveyed bankers report a

slight increase in loan demand during the past month.

Demand is strongest for

consumer loans, especially auto loans, and for commercial real estate loans.
A few bankers report a slight increase in residential real estate loans.
Demand for commercial, industrial, and agricultural loans is flat
Districtwide, however.

The prime rate has increased to a range of 12 to 13

1/2 percent from a range of 11 to 12 1/2 percent last month.

Most Tenth

District banks report a slight increase in deposits from last month, nearly
all due to MMDAs, IRAs, and Keogh accounts.

Conventional NOW accounts and

demand deposits increased slightly in the last month while Super-NOWs and
passbook savings accounts remained constant.

Large CDs also remained constant

Districtwide, reflecting weak loan demand and modest deposit growth.
Agriculture.

Winter wheat conditions throughout the Tenth District

range from poor, due to disease or lack of moisture, to good.

District

bankers report that farmers' sign-up for the government's revised 1984 wheat
program thus far has been high.

The planting of spring crops in all but the

southwest area of the District has been delayed by at least two weeks due to
excessive rain.

The calf crop in most of the District is above average with

calving rates as high as 95 percent in some areas.

Some yearling cattle are

being sold this spring; others will be pastured until fall.
available for farm operating loans this spring.

Ample funds are

Farm credit problems,

however, are at least equal to those of last year, with some farmers wholly or
partially liquidating assets to reduce farm debt.

Unless farmers can

substantially reduce their debt this year, farm liquidations will likely rise.
Farm real estate values continue to decline as the supply of land on the
market increases, but relatively few sales are being reported.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District recovery continues strong despite the
sluggish energy sector.

Manufacturing employment increased for the second

consecutive month in March and overall production was 13 percent above its
Brisk auto and retail sales are ahead of the

low during the fall of 1982.
strong pace set last year.

Residential and commercial construction

maintained their overall strength, but, a decline in multifamily starts may
suggest further weakness in that area.
District manufacturing activity is healthy.

Manufacturing related

to construction, consumer goods, and electronics account for almost all of
the gains.

Strong consumer spending and high levels of residential and

commercial construction led to increases in the demand for nonelectrical
machinery used to

produce electrical goods and consumer durables.

The

demand for fabricated and primary metals is greater than one year ago and
this strength can also be traced to construction and consumer expenditures.
Mills for manufacturing paper products and materials for residential
construction are running at or near capacity.

Strong consumer spending is

also buoying the demand for apparel with the increases
higher employment and output.

being reflected in

The economic recovery is finally impacting

the production of chemicals and plastics.

Some firms have responded to the

strong demand by running multiple shifts.

Primary metals and chemical

XI-2
manufacturers indicate that intense domestic and foreign competition is
squeezing profits and reducing market shares.

Domestic firms hope to

counter this pressure by using their technological advantage to develop new
products and improve their competitive position.

Manufacturing firms in

the District are continuing to implement controls to maintain lower levels
of inventory without hindering their ability to meet demand.
Continuing weakness in the energy sector is mirrored in the
District's rig count which is down 12 percent from the first of the year
and is only 9 percent above year-earlier levels.

The lack of a significant

increase in drilling means the dismal picture for this sector is likely to
continue.

Despite the overall weakness, the Texas offshore rig count has

registered a 38 percent increase since January.

This can be attributed to

reduced drilling costs and recent leasing of favorable tracts offshore.
Some oil field suppliers reported reductions in inventories and spot
shortages of certain products used in drilling.

This may portend an upturn

for manufacturers and suppliers of oil field equipment later this year.
Auto sales are outpacing their increases of the previous year.
Higher interest rates have not had noticeable effects on consumer attitudes
or purchases.

Sales would have been even higher but for shortages of the

more popular models.

Increased car production is mitigating inventory

constraints, pointing to a strong 1984.
Retail sales maintain their strength.

Some respondents reported

declines in March but these were more than offset by mid-April sales and
both months were well above the same period a year ago.

Demand for durable

goods in particular is benefitting from homebuilding and continued consumer

XI-3
optimism.

Inventories are being increased because of retailers' bright

outlook for the economy and a fear of shortages.
The boom in office and commercial construction is continuing with
the exception of Houston, where the depressed energy industry has dampened
demand for office space.

Vacancy rates there have reached record levels.

Industry analysts are predicting higher vacancy rates in Dallas but, to
date, these expectations have not prevented marked increases in office
construction.

The value of new office and commercial development for the

first quarter in Dallas is 43 percent above the level for the same period
in 1983.
After leading the recovery with a stellar performance, residential
construction growth is beginning to slow.

Permits and starts of single

family homes are still increasing but the number of new multifamily units
has dropped significantly, reflecting fears of overbuilding.

In Dallas

alone, permits dropped 42 percent in March.
Total loans increased at savings and loans and the District's
large banks.

The rate of growth in real estate loans has slowed while

remaining significantly above last year's March figures.

Overbuilding in

multifamily units has induced caution among lenders.
Farmers are benefitting from increasing commodity prices.
continues to plague about one-third of the District.

Drought

Most cotton producers

are not affected by the current drought and sales should increase because
of brisk export demand and moderate growth in domestic consumption.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy appears to be growing at a slower rate than earlier
this year but still to be outperforming the nation.

Consumer spending strengthened

in April, with rising interest rates reported to have had no dampening effect on
durable goods sales.

Western homebuilding activity has slowed since January, but

remains far stronger relative to a year ago than nationally.

Nonresidential

construction activity continues to pick up, but there is some concern that vacancy
rates in office and commercial buildings are rising.

In the manufacturing sector,

employment and output generally continue to grow but at a slower rate, partly due to
the effects of the housing slowdown on such industries as lumber and the near full
capacity operations reached in a few industries such as aluminum and paper.

In

California, agricultural crop growing and demand conditions generally are
considerably better than a year ago, but wheat farmers in the Pacific Northwest are
experiencing another difficult year.

Loan demand at Twelfth District banks has

continued at a strong pace despite higher interest rates.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending appears to have increased more than seasonally during April.
Major department stores in Southern California, for example, experienced an average
11 percent year-to-year gain in sales during the first half of April compared with a
10 percent rate of growth for all of March.

In other Western states, sales also

increased, although the year-to-year gain was not as large.

Sales of apparel have

been especially strong -- up 25 percent at Southern California department stores.
But furniture, appliances and other durable goods also are selling well and have not
been adversely affected by higher interest rates.

Auto dealerships have been

experiencing much larger sales gains than department stores, even in rural areas, and
sales would be even higher were it not for shortages of some larger-size vehicles.
Auto financing charges to consumers have risen only slightly due to competition

XII-2

created by captive automobile financing companies.

Except for autos, retail

inventories are reported to be somewhat heavy.
Manufacturing and Mining
Manufacturing employment continues to expand among a wide spectrum of industries
The most rapid gains

but at a slower rate overall than during the fourth quarter.

continue to occur in the electronic equipment and missiles and space vehicles
industries located in California, Oregon, Arizona and Utah.

Electronic firms have

been benefiting not only from rising defense and consumer demand but business capital
spending to enhance efficiency.

Other capital goods industries adding to their

payrolls include nonelectrical machinery, trucks and aircraft.

In Washington, the

nation's leading manufacturer of commercial transport planes has been adding workers
since October but recently reduced its sales forecast for the 1985-87 period.

The

Pacific Northwest lumber industry has been experiencing a decline in orders and
Two other Pacific

prices recently due to the slowdown in national homebuilding.

Northwest industries -- aluminum and paper -- are reported to be operating at near

full capacity, as is the California semiconductor industry.

Apart from these

industries, the manufacturing sector throughout the West generally still has ample
unused production potential.

After a period of stability in payrolls, the copper and

coal industries have been laying off workers.
Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity in the West has slowed since January in response to the
rise in mortgage interest rates.

But as of March, Western starts still remained 22

percent higher than a year earlier compared with only a 3 percent year-to-year gain
nationally.

Housing sales remained strong through March, but are reported to have

dropped 10-20 percent in April.

This slowdown in sales, combined with the large

number of new homes recently completed, has resulted in an increase in the inventory
of unsold homes which suggests that Western housing starts could fall in the next few
months.

Respondents point to several factors which indicate that any such decline

XII-3

could be moderate however.

These factors include the rapid increase expected in

personal income in the West, the increased public acceptance of adjustable rate
mortgage packages -- which offer initial rates as much as 3 percentage points below
conventional fixed rate mortgages -- and the increased offerings of "buy-down"
programs by builders.

While respondents report a sharp increase in nonresidential

construction activity, they express concern that the supply of new office and
commercial space is already beginning to outstrip demand.

Firms continue to be

cautious about investing in new industrial structures, except for electronic
equipment manufacturers, especially semiconductor firms.
Agriculture
Agricultural conditions and prospects vary among the District states.

In

California, crop conditions generally are considerably more favorable than a year
ago.

Prices for most fruit and vegetable crops produced in the state are up sharply

from those of a year ago, partly as a result of the winter freeze in Florida and
Texas.

For

Planting and growing conditions are far better due to improved weather.

example, planting of cotton is in full swing under excellent weather conditons.

Tree

crops are budding early, suggesting that yields of tree fruits and grapes will be
moderate and prices higher.

In the Pacific Northwest, farmers are experiencing

another difficult year however.
is in storage.

In Idaho, over 50 percent of last year's wheat crop

Prices for the Fall wheat crop are expected to be only slightly above

the break-even point for most farmers in Washington and Idaho.

Farm property values

are declining in the Pacific Northwest and a few scattered areas of California.
Bankers estimate that around 5-7 percent of California's farmers are in extreme
financial difficulty but that the percentage is considerably higher elsewhere in the
District.
Financial Institutions
Rising interest rates over the last two months have been reflected in loan
rates, but have not yet had a significant impact on loan demand in the Twelfth

XII-4

District.

Commercial loan rates have shown the largest increase because they float

in accordance with market rates.

Consumer loan rates at the major banks in the

region generally have risen by a smaller amount -- 25 to 100 basis points on most
fixed-rate loan products.

Qualification standards, and other loan pricing terms at

most institutions, generally have remained unchanged.
mixed effects on loan demand among institutions.

The increase in rates has had

In some cases, the strengthening

economy has overcome rising rates; other institutions report weaker loan demand.

For

the District as a whole, large banks continue to report rapid growth in commercial
and consumer loans, and moderate growth in mortgage lending.

Banks anticipate

continued strength in demand for commercial loans, especially as borrowers accelerate
their takedowns of the large loan commitments used to finance merger activity.
However, institutions are concerned that further interest rate pressure could begin
to have a significant dampening impact on real estate loan demand.

