TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

First District - Boston. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. .

Second District - New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Third District - Philadelphia. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

1-1
III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
.X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

XI-

Twelfth District - San Francisco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

XII-1

SUMMARY*
Introduction.

The expansion continues in all Federal Reserve Districts,

but with variations in vigor among regions and sectors.

Several banks

emphasize a revival of consumer and business confidence, and widespread views
that strong momentum will sustain the recovery through the year.

Virtually

all sectors are expanding or at least holding level, with oil and gas well
drilling a significant exception.

Geographically, the strongest gains are

occurring on the West Coast, with much of the Midwest and Northeast still
reporting substantial slack in durable goods manufacturing.

Almost all

districts noted exceptional strength in retail sales, often exceeding
expectations.

Demand for housing also is showing surprising strength, helped

by wider use of adjustable rate mortgages.

Capital expenditure plans are

being raised cautiously, with emphasis on productivity and cost cutting.
Employment and consumer income are rising at a good pace, but job markets are
still generally soft in many northern states.
quite low relative to sales.
retail level.

Inventory rebuilding is expected, mainly at the

The farm sector remains depressed, but is being aided by higher

prices and increased plantings.
industries.

Inventories, overall, remain

Pressures are building on capacity in some

Some shortages are reported.

but still only moderately overall.

Price inflation is accelerating,

Credit demands are stronger, especially

for home mortgages and installment loans.

Retail Trade.

Consumers continue to lead the expansion, increasing

spending since the turn of the year more than had been expected.

While all

products are selling well, the list is headed by larger domestic cars,
*Prepared at Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

imported cars (limited by quotas), small trucks, appliances, consumer
electronics, furniture, and recreational equipment.

Philadelphia and San

Francisco report a rising share of retail sales on credit.

Housing.

Demand for new and used homes continued "surprisingly" strong in

January and February.
the West.

The housing revival has been particularly vigorous in

Cleveland reported a leveling in activity.

Stronger than expected

buying is widely attributed to adjustable rate mortgages offered at interest
rates initially well below those charged on fixed-rate mortgages.

Richmond

notes a revival of speculative building, in anticipation of strong spring
sales.

Atlanta notes a sharp drop in permits for multifamily construction, as

first-time buyers move out of apartments.

Dallas also reports concern about

overbuilding of multifamily structures.

Employment.

Job markets have strengthened in all districts, but

unemployment remains disturbingly high, especially north of the Ohio river.
Cleveland reports that cautious employers are increasing use of overtime and
part-time help in preference to permanent increases in force.

Chicago notes

much slower advance in wages than in past years, and widespread moves to
curtail non-wage benefits, especially soaring medical costs.

Manufacturing and Mining.
front.

Factory output continues to advance on a broad

Output of some car and truck models is at capacity, restricted by

component availability.

District reports tell of strength in paper, carpets,

farm chemicals, and fertilizer (Atlanta), defense and high tech capital goods
(Boston, New York, and Minneapolis), and lumber, aircraft, and missiles (San
Francisco).

One of the few weak areas is oil and gas well drilling (Dallas),

with associated manufactured goods.
but still far below capacity.

Steel is up sharply from the low point,

Agricultural equipment output remains at low

levels.

Capital Goods.

The upturn in outlays for business equipment, earlier

concentrated in electronic types, is becoming more widespread among heavier
mechanical equipment.

Further improvement is expected.

A few capital goods

industries are operating near effective capacity, but most are well short of
these levels.

Investment is frequently oriented toward controlling costs and

enhancing productivity, rather than adding to capacity.

Industries

experiencing strong demand or sharply improved orders include electronics and
robotics, heavy trucks, trailers, and aircraft.

Machine tool orders have

improved modestly, restrained by severe foreign competition.

Orders are also

up for freight cars, construction equipment, and mining equipment, but remain
far short of prosperous levels.

Nonresidential Construction.

Although office building construction

continues strong in Chicago, New York, and Dallas, there are fears of excess
space in some areas.
centers and hotels.
construction.

San Francisco sees a strong rise underway in shopping
Richmond notes an improving outlook for commercial

With manufacturers' capital spending mainly to improve

productivity, factory space is still generally ample.
expanding.

But some firms are

San Francisco indicates that electronics and defense suppliers are

investing in new structures.

Most firms, however, are reluctant to add new

space or even bring marginal facilities back on stream.

An expected increase

in highway construction this year may be hampered by Congressional delays in
approving funding.

iv
Agriculture.

Higher farm prices and increased plantings, mainly because

of the expiration of the PIK program, suggest a stronger agricultural sector
in 1984.

However, farmers continue under financial stress.

Atlanta reports a

high rate of farm loan delinquencies, especially on government agency loans.
Kansas City finds farmland sales slow and values soft.

Chicago mentions the

low sign-up for the new dairy program intended to reduce the milk surplus.
San Francisco reports plantings of fruits and vegetables going well, with good
prices for produce, partly because of the freeze in Texas and Florida.

Inventories.

Manufacturers and trade firms are keeping inventories at low

levels relative to activity.

Boston, New York, and St. Louis report retailers

building stocks to accommodate stronger sales.

While most companies say

inventories are at "acceptable" levels (Richmond) or "satisfactory" (Kansas
City), leadtimes are increasing and some shortages are evident.

A number of

districts report low inventories of motor vehicles--especially imported
cars--electronic components, paper and paperboard, and gypsum board.

Inflation.
alarming degree.

Prices are rising at a faster pace, but still not to an
Philadelphia and Kansas City state that purchasing managers

expect prices to rise faster as the year moves on.

Higher prices are related

to shortages and longer leadtimes, which reflect pressures on capacity.

So

far the largest price increases have been for purchased materials, but
increasingly tags are being raised on finished goods.

Chicago finds large

rate increases under discussion for electric utilities and telephone service.
College tuitions have been boosted sharply.

Cleveland states that price

increases for tires have been held back by availability of imports, an
observation that also applies to a wide range of products.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity continues to expand in the First District.
Retailers report strong sales gains and they are optimistic about the rest
of the year.

Several plan major capital expansions.

Retail inventories

have increased, but this is considered necessary to achieving ambitious
sales targets.

Manufacturers are seeing substantial order increases.

The

improvement is broad-based, although machine tool manufacturers continue to
operate at depressed levels.

Manufacturing respondents report that both

their own inventory-to-sales ratios and those of their suppliers are low
and likely to stay that way.
inventory management.

A lot of attention is being given to

Capital spending plans have increased; the emphasis

remains on productivity enhancement.
Retail
Retailers in the First District report strong performance totals at
the close of fiscal year 1983 and continuing through February.
remain the best sellers.

Hardgoods

Inventories are somewhat higher than last year,

but this is not a cause for concern. All the merchants contacted are
optimistic about 1984: some have significant capital spending and expansion
plans.
Retail chains in several very different lines of business reported
very strong earnings and sales increases.

In two cases the fiscal year

ending in January brought record profits.

The largest sales increases were

for hardgoods, but apparel also exceeded plan in several stores.
sales gains for the year and February ranged from 8 to 19 percent.

Overall

Inventories in some stores are above last year, but this is seen as a
service improvement and a necessary part of planning for aggressive sales
growth.

The outlook for the year is generally very good.

One contact has

a store expansion scheduled for late this spring; two major chains plan to
increase substantially their number of stores in the coming year.
Prices are increasing only slowly.

According to one merchant,

prices this spring are 2-2 1/2 percent above last year; another said that
of an 18 percent sales growth rate, fully 95 percent was increased unit
sales, not prices.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing orders and shipments are increasing.

With the

important exception of machine tools, most of the manufacturers contacted
describe business as very good.

The strength is quite general, but some

high technology products and materials and equipment for the auto,
appliance, defense and electronics industries are selling particularly
well.

The machine tool industry has also seen an upturn but it has been

modest and from an extremely low base; foreign competitors have made
dramatic gains in market share in this industry in the past two or three
years.
Manufacturers respondents are working with much lower
inventory-to-sales ratios than in the past, and they are committed to
keeping these ratios low.

Their suppliers are doing the same.

To satisfy

customers with lower inventory ratios requires careful management and the
firms contacted are asking their customers and are being asked themselves
to forecast more precisely when components are needed.

So far, the lower

inventories have not created any significant supply problems, although
there is a shortage of semiconductors.
Capital spending plans have increased.

In a February survey of New

England purchasing managers, 74 percent said their companies would increase
capital purchases over the next 3 to 6 months.
percentage in four years.

This is the highest

The emphasis in capital spending continues to be

on productivity enhancement and cost saving rather than on expanding
capacity, although several respondents are building new offices and some of
the machine tool companies are consolidating operations to cut fixed costs.
Housing and Mortgage Rates
Homes are selling at a very vigorous rate, with one realtor
describing the situation as "exceptional."

Housing inventories are quite

low in much of Massachusetts and Connecticut and prices are rising in these
areas.

In Rhode Island prices are more or less stable, but there too

demand is strong and increasing.
Mortgage rates eased slightly from December to January.

The

effective rate in January on a 25 year mortgage with 20 percent down was
about 13 1/2 percent.

Adjustable rate mortgages have become much more

popular in the past year and a half.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT -- NEW YORK

Introduction
Economic
expand

during

activity

recent

in

weeks

the

Second

though

at

a

District

continued

somewhat

uneven

Consumer spending slowed in January, but rebounded the
month.

to

pace.

following

Manufacturing activity showed further improvement.

Several

firms announced plans to build or modernize plants, and purchasing
managers are increasingly optimistic about the level of orders in
The demand for homes has picked up, and builders expect to be

1984.

busy through
remain

the summer.

willing

to

On the financial

accommodate

the

strong

side, District
demand

for

banks

consumer

installment loans.
Consumer Spending
District department store sales slowed early in the year
from

their brisk holiday season

February.

pace,

but

regained momentum

in

Sales growth over year-ago levels generally ranged from

flat to 10 percent in January and from 10 percent to 27 percent in
February.
major

In part, the large increases in February were due to a

snowstorn that hampered sales a year earlier.
the

January-February period

was

Even among
marked

by

individual

retailers,

extremes.

One major retailer, for example, reported January sales

were little better than the year-ago level, but February's were 20
percent greater than in 1983.

II-2

In contrast to the past few months when inventories were

generally satisfactory, two major retailers noted unexpectedly high
inventory

accumulation

in

January.

One

intends

to

increase

promotions and markdowns in order to reduce the overstock, but the
other

anticipates

sufficient

resolve the problem.

sales

volume

in

coming

months

to

In general, our contacts are optimistic about

sales in the near future.
Business Activity
Manufacturing activity in the District continued to improve
at the same moderate pace of

the last few months.

industry

two

remained strong

recently announced

and

transportation-related companies

sizable investment plans for

new engine and tire lines.

The automotive

the production of

Makers of defense products and capital

good manufacturers also registered gains.

In addition, some upstate

areas report an upturn in specialty steel orders.

Activity in basic

steel remains sluggish, however, and plans to close a foundry were
announced.
Firms in a variety of industries announced

plans for

buildings or expansion and modernization of existing plants.
projects

include

a

services

firm,

glass

a

computer

products

manufacturer

facility,

and

a

sheet

an

new

These

accounting

metal

plant.

Moreover, surveys of purchasing agents and manufacturers in several
upstate areas indicate a widespread optimism concerning the outlook
for

area

businesses

expenditures.

in

1984

and

plans

for

additional

capital

II-3

Employment levels are now higher than a year ago throughout

the

District

although

pre-recession peaks.

many

areas

Unemployment

have

rates

not

regained

generally are well

their
below

year-earlier levels.
Construction and Real Estate
Demand

for

new

housing

has

been

surprisingly

recently, and some builders now anticipate even higher
activity

than

last

year.

Demand

by

strong

levels

interest-sensitive,

of

middle

income buyers is particularly apparent in the southern part of the
District.

Stable

interest

rates

and

greater

acceptance

of

adjustable rate mortgages are two factors cited for the attraction
of

middle

income

buyers.

Over

the

longer

residential construction is likely to

term,

the

level

be boosted in the next

of
few

years by a series of court decisions mandating new low and middle
income housing in parts of New Jersey.
The nonresidential market has been mixed in the District.
The demand for space in Midtown Manhattan improved further in recent
weeks,

and

"fantastic".

was

characterized

by

one

real

estate

broker

as

Downtown Manhattan is also active, continuing the pace

of recent months.

Many firms seeking large blocks of space are said

to be negotiating leases.

However, the market softened somewhat in

suburban areas of Westchester and

Fairfield Counties, and western

Nassau County, where large amounts of new office space have recently
come on line.

II-4

Financial Developments
Sizable
banks'

deposit

willingness

to

inflows

during

accommodate

1983 have

strong

contributed

consumer

loan

to

demand.

While profit margins on consumer loans have fallen somewhat because
of

the

continued

high cost

of

funds,

banks

aggressively for larger shares of the market.
demand for funds usually picks up in the
special

promotions

market share.

in

the near future

are

competing

Noting that consumer

spring,

to try

still

some banks plan

to gain

additional

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy has shown unexpected strength over the last six
weeks.

Local manufacturing posted gains

in February, and retailers continue to

experience surprisingly high levels of sales.
activity

is

finally

showing

steady

In the financial sector, C&I loan

growth

after

months

of

disappointing

And, in the real estate industry, steady mortgage interest rates and

performance.

some pent-up demand for homes have spurred sales since mid-January.
The outlook for the next six months is marked by general optimism but with
a touch of caution.

Manufacturers expect increasing activity into the summer and

retailers foresee continued strong sales.

Both bankers and realtors, however, have

expressed concern as mixed interest rate forecasts lead to varied outlooks for the
two industries.
MANUFACTURING
The

Third

District

manufacturing

sector

posted

further

increases

activity in February, according to the most recent Business Outlook Survey.
February's gains were not as robust
those
levels.

surveyed

reported

an

in

While

as the previous month's, over 37 percent of

improvement

in

activity

over

very

healthy

January

Roughly 40 percent of manufacturers surveyed reported that new orders and

shipments have continued to rise, while producers' backlogs and delivery times were
Inventories increased marginally, their first monthly gain since May

unchanged.
1981.

As for employment, both payrolls and the length of the average workweek held

steady at their January levels.
Despite less
the

outlook

for the

prevalent gains in manufacturing activity during February,
next

two

quarters is

even more optimistic than January's.

Eighty percent of those surveyed expect their businesses to expand further by July,

III-2

and the percentage of respondents planning to increase capital expenditures remains
encouragingly high.

Additionally, over 70 percent foresee continuing gains in both

new orders and shipments into mid-summer.

The employment picture also looks bright,

with roughly half of the survey respondents expecting larger payrolls, and one-third
forecasting a longer workweek by July.
Industrial

prices

continued

their

pattern

of

increases

steady

in

Thirty percent of the executives polled said they were paying more for

February.

materials than in January, while only 16 percent reported receiving higher prices
for

finished

January's;

products.

84

percent

The

six-month

predicted

higher

outlook
producer

was

virtually

unchanged

costs

by July,

and

61

from

percent

anticipated receiving higher prices for their own products.
RETAIL
Third
sales are

up

performance

to

District retailers

an unexpected
unusually

20

mild

are enjoying continued

percent

over

a

weather,

the

continued

sector, and low sales at this time last year.

year

ago.

success as early March
Merchants

strength

of

credit

the

the

consumer

Despite such surprising robustness,

retail executives report no shortages of merchandise.
& women's sportswear and "soft" home furnishings.

Leading sellers include men's

Several store managers note that

credit sales have increased recently relative to cash sales, reflecting what they
feel is perceived economic security on the part of the consumer and the anticipation
of tax refunds.

No area retailers expect to levy a surcharge on credit purchases if

Congress votes to remove the ban on such fees.
would penalize the majority of

They feel that credit surcharges

their customers and have a devastating effect on

sales.
Retailers say that current in-store promotions are typical for this time
of year, but add that the general level of such promotions is on the rise as the

III-3

industry becomes more competitive in the Philadelphia area.

Many report that they

are conducting extensive media advertising and will continue to do so in the future.
Looking ahead, merchants are uncertain over late March sales due to the
late Easter

season, but generally forecast sales to be

higher than a year earlier over the next six months.

10 percent

to 15 percent

Accordingly, inventory plans,

even those of traditionally conservative retailers, are very expansive for the same
period.
FINANCIAL
Third
loan

activity

District bankers
since

report moderate but

mid-January.

steady increases

Many contacts are

pleased

that,

in overall
despite

the

prevailing strength in corporate liquidity, C&I loan activity has made steady gains
since early January.

Current levels of business loans outstanding generally range

from 10 percent to 20 percent ahead of February 1983, although one smaller bank
reports an 8 percent decline from last year.

Reports on consumer lending are mixed;

the majority of those contacted are experiencing a seasonal slowdown in retail loan
growth, while others, who have been marketing consumer loans very aggressively and
expanding their credit card operations, have experienced growth rates of up to 4
percent over

the past six weeks.

Current reports of consumer loans

outstanding

range from 12 percent to 40 percent over year-ago levels.
Encouraged by the recent

steady improvement in the

C&I sector, bankers

predict moderate, but consistent commercial loan growth throughout the year, with
forecasts

ranging

from 10 percent

to

15 percent

above same-period

1983

levels.

Financial executives base their optimistic outlook on the continued strength of the
economy, rising capacity utilization rates, and an erosion of corporate liquidity.
The retail outlook is mixed, however, with buoyant consumer confidence offset to
some extent by the spectre of higher interest rates.

III-4

Area banks are currently quoting a prime rate of 11 percent, unchanged
since August 1983, but contacts anticipate some upward movement in rates for 1984.
Most predict, however, that rates will do very little over the next six months as
economic growth eases and Fed policy remains steady.
of

1984

that

local

bank economists

foresee

It is during the last quarter

increased

borrowing demands,

rising

inflation, and tight Fed policy driving rates up by 25 to 100 basis points.
REAL ESTATE/CONSTRUCTION
Real

estate

and

housing

flourishing since mid-January.

activity

in

the

Third

District

has

been

February housing sales are up between 15 percent and

20 percent from a fair February 1983, although one major builder in New Jersey says
his sales have tripled.

Stable mortgage interest rates are cited as the primary

reason for the recent surge in sales.

Also mentioned as strong contributing factors

are very mild mid-winter weather and significant pent-up demand from last fall when
more widespread interest rate uncertainty kept many prospective buyers out of the
market.
Homes in the $75,000 to $125,000 price range in the City of Philadelphia
and in the $70,000-$85,000 range
sales.
report

in suburban areas are exhibiting the strongest

Buyer traffic seems to be split along geographical lines; suburban contacts
that

traffic

has

nearly

doubled

since early

January, while

realtors have seen the same number of, or fewer, customers.

Philadelphia

Inventories of unsold

homes have remained at fairly constant levels despite the heavy sales, but contacts
note that units are staying on the market for a much shorter duration.

IV-1

Fourth District - Cleveland

Summary.

District labor market conditions continue to improve but the

unemployment rate remains high.

Retail sales gains slowed in February and are

expected to slow further in March.

Manufacturing activity apparently

increased less rapidly in February than in January.

Purchasing agents report

a few products in short supply, and firms in several key industries report
some operations are at or near capacity limits.
reluctant to add to capacity.

Nevertheless, many firms are

Lenders and builders report little increase in

demand for mortgage loans and new houses.

Commercial and industrial loan

demand continues to rise.
District Labor Market Conditions.
improved further in January.
(s.a.)

Labor market conditions in this District

The unemployment rate in Ohio fell to 9.3%

in January from 10.4% in December.

In the last year Ohio's

unemployment rate fell 4.7 percentage points while the U.S. rate fell 2.2
percentage points.

Nevertheless, the Ohio unemployment rate is still 1.3

percentage points above the national rate.

Unemployment rates in eleven major

SMSAs in the Fourth District in December ranged from 8.1% (nsa) in Columbus to
13.3% in Youngstown.
Retail Sales.

An economist with a national retail chain reports

year-over-year sales gains slowed in February, and March sales should slow
further even after allowance for Easter being later this year than last.

He

forecasts consumer spending to grow slower next quarter than this.
Manufacturing.

Manufacturing activity continued to increase in February but

at a somewhat slower pace than in January.

Surveys of purchasing managers in

the Cleveland and Cincinnati areas for February indicate production, new
orders and backlogs rose from January.

Employment rose from January but firms

IV-2
are increasing overtime, using temporary help, and only slowly recalling
laid-off workers.

Inventory levels for raw materials and supplies rose from

January in Cleveland but fell in Cincinnati while finished goods inventories
are unchanged.

Respondents report lead times are lengthening for several

products and suppliers are allocating inadequate supplies of integrated
circuits, circuit breakers, coated paper, and stainless steel rod and wire.
Buyers expect allocations to be imposed for shipping cartons and some
fasteners.
Capacity Utilization.

Major firms in several key industries report operations

approaching capacity but few plan to increase capacity or to bring marginal
facilities into production.

There is also a preference to use overtime or to

subcontract rather than to recall workers.

There is skepticism that the

expansion will continue long enough to justify new capacity, and a reluctance
to add capacity to meet peak demand.
Two major tire producers report operating at capacity (running as many
shifts per week as labor unions will agree to), and one is purchasing tires
from competitors to meet customer demand.
improve efficiency.

Capital spending is being used to

Some capacity is still available at other domestic tire

producers, and growth of imports has restrained price increases.
Nevertheless, prices have begun to firm and industry sources suggest that
another price increase is likely in the months immediately ahead.
A paper box producer reports the industry's capacity utilization is in the
mid-90s%.

Some bottlenecks have appeared but the industry can increase

production a little more before physical limits of output are reached.
A chemical producer reports ample capacity in that industry, weak prices,
and little interest in adding new capacity.

IV-3
The auto industry has plenty of additional capacity to produce some
compact and subcompact cars but is operating close to capacity for mid- and
standard-sized cars.

The industry doesn't plan to reopen marginal plants

because they expect demand to ease as the year progresses.
Truck producers report light truck (particularly 4-wheel drive) production
at capacity, and shortages of axles because supplier capacity was cut during
the recession.

Heavy-duty truck production is at 90% of capacity, but one

parts producer expects demand to fall in the second half of the year after a
special sales incentive has ended.

Medium truck production is at 70% of

capacity.
The aluminum smelting industry is operating at about 83% of physical
capacity.

Prices have been flat since September.

Demand for aluminum is

stronger than demand for steel because aluminum is used more extensively in
consumer products.
The steel industry is operating at 77% of capacity overall but production
of flat-rolled steel, used in cars and major appliances, is at full capacity,
and flat bar production is at full capacity at some mills.

There is ample

capacity to expand production of other steel items.
Electrical equipment producers are experiencing weak demand because
electric utilities have ample capacity and the machine tool industry, a major
customer, is having a relatively mild recovery.
experiencing very strong demand.

Producers of electronics are

Producers of electronic chips and

chip-making equipment are operating near capacity and are planning capacity
expansions.
Construction.

Despite the recent strength in housing activity nationwide,

Fourth District lenders and home builders generally report little increase in
demand for mortgage loans and new houses so far this year.

Although the

IV-4
acceptance of adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) by consumers has increased
(probably because the spread relative to conventional mortgage rates has
increased to as much as 300 basis points at some lenders), speculation that
government borrowing will increase interest rates has tempered demand for
these instruments.

Refinancing of existing mortgages appears to have slowed

sharply from last year.

First-time home-buyers appear to be seeking financing

through builders that offer buydowns and below-market rates, while banks are
servicing more of the move-up market.
Two commercial and industrial building contractors in the Cleveland area
expressed optimism for 1984.

Although the vacancy rate of newly constructed

buildings is still relatively high, they expect that the glut of space will be
substantially reduced by yearend.
Commercial Banking.

Loan demand, particularly commercial and industrial loan

demand, continued to increase at banks in the Fourth District in recent
weeks.

Demand, savings and small time deposits have increased only

moderately.

Banks have funded loan demand by stepping up their issuance of

large denomination negotiable CD's and by reducing their holdings of short
term Treasury securities and sales of Federal Funds.

V-1

COMMENTARY ON ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

Nearly all the evidence suggest that activity in the Fifth District
is continuing to expand at a fairly rapid pace.

Manufacturers responding to

our survey report widespread gains in new orders and order backlogs, and
modest further increases in shipments.

Inventories were virtually unchanged.

Retail sales continue to record substantial increases month to month as well
as year over year.

In addition, the sales increases are spreading to nondura-

bles, although big ticket items seem to be keeping pace.

Construction is also

providing continuing support to District activity, with strength in all
sectors and in most geographic areas.

Sales of residential property also

remain quite strong, and builders clearly expect this trend to continue.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity has recovered from a brief mid-winter lull,
and is showing considerable buoyancy in nearly every sector.

Across the

District new orders, order backlogs, and shipments were all up in the past
month, with new orders showing particularly broad-based strength.

The expan-

sion has clearly spread to the more basic industries such as primary metals
and chemicals.

levels.

Also, coal output is running well ahead of year-earlier

Manufacturers report virtually no change in inventories over the past

few weeks and, for the most part, find current levels acceptable.

There is

some growing sentiment, however, that current plant and equipment capacity is
inadequate.

If this view continues to spread, it would be a change from a

long-standing concern about overcapacity.

Reports offer some evidence that

there is currently some reevaluation of expansion plans going on, perhaps with
an eye toward enlarging them.
District manufacturing employment also rose sharply from year end,
as did employee compensation.

Manufacturers are also encountering more

frequent increases in prices paid and received for goods.

Consumer Spending
District retailers report a continuation of the lofty gains in
activity that began before year end 1983.

Year to year sales increases at

individual establishments and chains are still running at double digit rates
according to available information.

More and more, the strength appears to be

in non-durable lines, although it is difficult to find any evidence of slowing
in sales of durables.

Certainly, automobiles sales are proceeding apace. And

with housing construction and sales at current and projected levels, declines
in furniture and appliances sales seem unlikely.
Price increases do not yet appear as prevalent at the retail as at
the manufacturing level, but the elimination or reduction of promotional
programs may be a factor.

In any event, list prices remain essentially flat.

Retailers appear to have done some inventory rebuilding in recent weeks, but
remain, for the most part, comfortable with current stocks.

Housing and Construction
The construction industry is still a bright spot in the District
despite voiced concerns about overbuilding in the commercial sector and about
housing sales prospects.
gathering momentum.

In both areas, in fact, activity appears to be

It is our impression that the pipeline of commercial

V-3

projects remains full.

New announcements are not uncommon, and the outlook

within the industry seems to be improving.
On the residential side, sales are holding up quite well for both
new and previously owned units.

Figures may be distorted as a result of

unusually warm weather in February.

However, the overall impression must be

that the fundamentals on the housing markets are all positive.
evidence, construction of new units is accordingly strong.

By all

Speculative

building is being revived, as expectations of strong spring sales gain
support.
The Outlook
The conditions described above have clearly affected expectations,
which remain strongly positive.

In nearly every sector a majority of respon-

dents are expecting continued growth over at least the next two quarters.
Most manufacturers surveyed, for instance, expect further gains nationally,
locally, and in their respective markets.

The largest number of positive

responses comes on the question of the outlook for the firm's market.

In

other words, some who see little further gains nationally still expect their
own business to improve.

Retailers are also generally optimistic, expecting

further gains in all areas.

Also, builders and those in related or affected

industries are planning on significant activity as the weather improves and
for the rest of the year.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
No slowdown is apparent in recent reports on sales and employment.
fact, employment in most regionally important industries is increasing.

In

Consumer

spending continues to grow at a healthy pace, although cold weather adversely affected
some localities.

Bank loan demand softened in late February.

Mortgage lending at

thrifts remains strong; deposit growth, although modest, is better than usual for the
period.

Single-family residential construction and sales continue to rise, but excess

capacity has slowed multifamily building.

Although cold weather reduced vacation

travel to Florida, convention travel is improving.

Credit problems have yet to diminish

for a large portion of southeastern farmers.
Employment and Industry.

Sustained growth in auto and housing sales has

stimulated the paper and carpet industries:

packaging used in making a car requires

200 pounds of paper; that used in building a house amounts to 1,000 pounds.

The

American Paper Institute predicts record production in 1984. The South produces about
50 percent of the nation's paper.
to continue.

Industry spokesmen expect the boom in carpet sales

Manufacturers are satisfied with current levels of inventories and do not

foresee substantial price increases during the year.
The phosphate and farm chemical industries are expanding production in
anticipation of an increase in farm acreage this year.

Projected growth in phosphate

fertilizer consumption ranges from 14 to 20 percent.

Mines in Florida, the nation's

largest phosphate producer, already are recalling laid-off workers.

Louisiana's farm

chemical companies, which produce 40 percent of the nation's ammonia-a primary
ingredient in fertilizer and pesticides-are adding staff selectively.

These reports

suggest a continuation of the improvement reflected in labor market statistics for
January, when unemployment rates fell in three of the six District states and the

VI-2
regional average dropped to 8.6 percent, seasonally adjusted. However, steadily declining
rig counts portend renewed weakness in the oil and gas industry.
Consumer Spending.
expected margins.

Retailers report February sales rose by healthier-than-

Their comments indicate that double-digit increases in January

taxable sales are continuing.

Sales promotions introduced during the President's Day

holiday stimulated traffic and sales in areas not adversely affected by weather.

Men's

and women's apparel, appliances, and other home furnishings were the most popular
items.

New car sales in January and February maintained the high growth rates

achieved in 1983.

However, contacts from such diverse retail sectors as restaurants,

clothing, furniture rentals, auto dealerships, and discount stores report increased prices
or shortages and delays for intermediate goods.
Construction.

Transfers and trade-ups by present homeowners account for

strong sales of single-family homes.

Area lenders report that capped adjustable-rate

mortgages recalculated yearly have become the major financial planning tool. Continuing
strength in sales augurs well for the substantial growth in single-family permits issued
during January. However, home purchases by former apartment tenants are exacerbating
problems of excess supply in multifamily construction, permits for which dropped sharply
in four states.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development has issued a

moratorium on new multifamily housing insurance in southern Mississippi.

Commercial

construction and absorption are proceeding at a healthy pace in Nashville and Tampa.
However, Atlanta's nonresidential markets have softened because of large supplies.
Financial Services.

Demand for business, real estate, and consumer loans

decelerated after strong growth in early February.
early March are continuing at high levels.

Mortgage applications at S&Ls in

Contacts at southeastern banks and S&Ls

say deposit inflows range from flat to good into early March.
since deposits normally decline in January and February.

This is a sign of strength,

VI-3

The Georgia legislature
legislation.

enacted

the Southeast's first regional

banking

The law will allow banks and bank holding companies, but not thrifts, to

merge with and acquire other institutions in states with similar legislation; it does not
sanction interstate branching.

Meanwhile, Georgia's Attorney General has challenged

the legality of remittance processing centers, or corporate lock boxes, operated in
Atlanta by several out-of-state banks.
Tourism.

Contacts report substantial improvements in convention business

in Jacksonville, Atlanta, Mobile, Orlando, and Nashville in early 1983.

However,

projected occupancy rates for Mardi Gras were a less-than-normal 80-85 percent because
of New Orleans' greatly expanded supply of hotel rooms.
is below year-earlier levels.

Vacation travel to Florida

Sources attribute the decline to cold weather, the high

foreign exchange rate of the dollar (which discourages foreign travel to the United
States and encourages American travel abroad), and the sharp growth in visitors last
year.

Atlanta had a two percent drop in airline-passenger volume in January because

of cutbacks in discount fares, and data from major trunk lines servicing Atlanta portend
a repetition of this decline in February.
Agriculture.

Financial distress is no better than a year ago.

Georgia and

Florida maintain Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) loan delinquency rates in excess
of 50 percent, among the highest in the nation.

Florida's delinquencies represent only

4 percent of the state's farmers, but Georgia's are 10 percent.

Mississippi, where one-

fourth of the state's farmers are FmHA customers, also is experiencing considerable
financial difficulty.
A freeze in early March, accompanied by high winds, inflicted additional
damage on Florida's agriculture.

Damage was less widespread than in December,

although some vegetable crops suffered heavy losses.
early corn crop perished.

As much as 80 percent of the

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

The expansion in the Seventh District has strong momentum,

with prospects favorable for gains through the year.

Consumer spending,

still the prime mover, has been above expectations.

Confidence levels are

the highest in several years.
in manufacturing.

However, employment increases are still mainly

Output of autos and heavy trucks is at capacity levels,

restricted by component availability.

Some producers of construction equip-

ment, mining equipment, machine tools, and freight cars report increased
orders, but capital goods output, overall, remains far below peak levels.
Not all sectors in the District are expanding vigorously, but there is no
evidence of new deterioration.
years.

House sales have been strong relative to past

Price inflation is increasingly evident.

Inventory investment is

expected to accelerate, with stocks currently low in virtually all lines.
The signup of dairy farmers for the new government output restriction program was far less than expected.
Price Inflation.

Price increases clearly are accelerating, but Dis-

trict analysts believe that the general inflation rate will not accelerate
over 2 percent this year.

Price increases have been substantial for paper

and paperboard, gypsum board, aluminum, and electronic components--all being
produced at near-capacity rates.
percent.

University tuitions are being boosted 8-10

Electric and telephone utilities are requesting very large rate in-

creases, but natural gas rates may level or decline because gas companies have
"walked away" from high-priced contracts with suppliers.

Rail and truck rates

are expected to move up, but airline fares are under downward pressure.

VII-2

Labor Market Conditions.

Increases in employment in the District are

still mainly confined to manufacturing.

Unemployment is reported to be re-

duced substantially in virtually all localities, but declines in estimated
unemployment have not been matched in most cases by increases in employment.
Motor vehicles account for the major share of the rise in manufacturing employment, but even in that sector employment is far below past peaks.

Motor

industry employment has not recovered as much as unit assemblies of vehicles
because of heavy overtime, more automation (including robots), and increased
use of imported components.

A large portion of the reported reduction in the

number of indefinite layoffs reflects deletions of workers who are no longer
eligible for recall.

Scattered callbacks of workers in capital goods in-

dustries amount to only a small fraction of those released during the recession.

Most companies that have slashed drastically their middle management

staffs have no intention of restoring these jobs.

A very large bank, that

already has reduced employment by about 10 percent, plans a further reduction

of similar magnitude, in part by attrition.
Wages and Benefits.

Companies that are increasing wages and salaries

this year indicate that such increases will average in the 5-6 percent range,
down as much as 50 percent from increases in some recent years.

But some

firms are freezing compensation, and others are reducing wages and trimming
benefits.

Wage cuts have been most general in meat packing, with plant

closings threatened if labor does not agree.

The largest food chain in the

Chicago area recently announced a cut of about 20 percent in hourly rates to
get labor costs more in line with fast-expanding "warehouse store" comThis move abrogates a 2 -year union contract signed only a few

petition.
months ago.
minent.

The union involved is suing, but no strike action appears im-

A widespread move is underway by employers to slow the rapid rise in

VII-3

the cost of medical benefits, which now often amount to $1,500 per year per
active worker--$6,000 in one company.

Steps taken include increased em-

ployee contributions, higher deductibles, switches to less expensive plans,
curtailed coverage, and requirements of "a second opinion" before elective
surgery.
Consumer Purchases.

Sales of virtually all types of consumer goods

and services have been strong this year, often above expected rates.

Major

retailers are boosting orders to suppliers to keep stocks at adequate levels.
Regional surveys indicate consumers are more confident of their future incomes than at any time in at least five years.

Improved confidence, to-

gether with rising incomes and generally low installment debt burdens, is
unleashing pent-up demand that had been building since 1979.
cars are especially strong.

Plans to buy

Other big selling lines include major appliances,

furniture, and personal and home computers.

Demand for recreational ve-

hicles and motorcycles also has picked up, but is far below past peaks.
Finally, consumers are spending more on airline tickets and vacations.
Business Equipment.

Output of mechanical capital goods, a major Dis-

trict activity, is increasing on a broader front.

Heavy trucks, truck

trailers, and associated diesel engines are scheduled at full capacity for
several months ahead.

A large producer of earth-moving equipment is re-

calling some laid-off workers as demand has increased and parts inventories
have been depleted.

Most companies report export business very slow, but

a producer of huge mining shovels recently won a Turkish contract, the
largest single order in the company's history.

Orders for freight cars

have been rising but only to about 25 percent of capacity.
placement parts is also up.

Demand for re-

Three District producers of mobile construction

cranes have been phasing out their production activities, because of low

VII-4

demand and severe foreign competition.
up as expected.
dustry.

Farm equipment sales have not picked

Machine tool orders are increasing, mainly from the auto in-

Overall, the District's capital goods producing sector remains de-

pressed.
Motor Vehicles.

Assemblies of both cars and trucks in the first

quarter will be far above last year, and the highest for the period since
1979.

With demand strong and inventories of desired models low, this pace

is expected to be about maintained in the second quarter.

Output is re-

stricted by availability of components, partly because of rejection of
parts that fail inspection.

Domestic producers are acutely aware that the

quality "image" of their products is compared unfavorably with that of vehicles from Japan, Germany, and Sweden.

Inventories of most Japanese cars

are near rock bottom because of import quotas.
Housing.

The market for new and used homes improved sharply last

year and has been surprisingly strong in early 1984.

Realtors report prices

up 6-8 percent in the past year in good areas, with further gains expected.
The market is supported by first-time home buyers who had deferred purchases
in recent years because affordable financing was not available.

A wide

variety of ARMs are now offered, but careful reading of the "fine print" is
advised.

Some lenders are pushing 15-year amortized loans rather than ARMs.

Nonresidential Construction.

Congressional delay in allocating funds

for badly needed highway, bridge, and mass transit projects could require
postponement of some projects until next year.

Nonresidential private con-

struction activity in the District is dominated by a new wave of large office
buildings scheduled to start in the next several months.

VIII - 1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

On the whole, economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve
District has been showing substantial improvement recently.

According to

the latest data, personal income in the District is rising at about the
same rate as at the national level.

The strength of the recovery across

District states has been somewhat disparate, however, with some areas
showing considerably more improvement than others.

Indexes of general

business activity have been rising at rates ranging from 10.8 percent for
Arkansas to 4.3 percent for Tennessee.

Outlook
The managers of District business firms generally expect business
activity to increase over the next six months.

This was particularly true

in the transportation industry and in professional services.

Most of

these firms (about 75 percent of those contacted) look for improvement in
the near future with the remainder expecting business activity to remain
roughly unchanged.

About 60 percent of the firms in the areas of

construction, manufacturing, finance, wholesale and retail trade expect
improvement over the next six months.

Well over half the firms surveyed

cited general economic conditions as the reason for the brighter outlook.
Of all firms contacted, relatively few (4.5 percent) expect business
conditions to deteriorate in the coming months.

VIII - 2

Employment
The general expansion in economic activity has had important
consequences for District employment.

Recently, growth in payroll

employment has ranged from a high of 4.3 percent in Arkansas to a low of
1.0 percent in Missouri.
Despite the expansion in employment, the District's average
unemployment rate has remained, roughly, unchanged.

Recently, Tennessee

has experienced a substantial reduction in its unemployment rate while
slight increases have occurred in Kentucky and Missouri.

Unemployment

rates in other District areas have been fairly static.
These two factors-growth in employment and a stable unemployment
rate--suggest that the labor force in the District has expanded at a rate
commensurate with employment growth.
Over the next three months, about 20 percent of the District firms
contacted plan to increase employment while only 6 percent expected to
reduce their workforces.

Most of the expected increase appears to be

concentrated in the construction and manufacturing industries.

A number

of manufacturing firms have had job openings for more than six months that
they have been unable to fill with qualified individuals.
Sales Volume and Prices
Many firms in the District have experienced higher sales volume
recently.

This was particularly true in the cases of transportation

equipment manufacturers, agriculture and professional services.

In

addition, most firms expect sales volume to increase further over the next
three months while only 15 percent of the firms surveyed expect sales to
decline.

VIII - 3

The expected increase in sales seems to be placing some upward
pressure on prices.

About 20 percent of the firms surveyed plan to raise

prices and these firms were about equally divided between those planning
an increase of less than 3 percent, an increase of between 3 and 5 percent,
and an increase of between 5 and 10 percent.

Only 3 percent of the firms

surveyed plan price reductions.

Inventory
For the most part District firms believe their present level of
inventory is about right.

However, a substantial number of firms in the

manufacturing industry and in wholesale and retail trade plan to increase
inventory levels over the next three to six months.

Relatively few firms,

about 10 percent overall, plan to decrease inventory during this period.

Business Problem Areas
A recent survey highlights a number of problem areas for Eighth
District business firms.

The survey was conducted by the National

Federation of Independent Business and includes responses from 264
District firms.

On the whole, the two most often cited problems were

taxes and interest rates.
transportation industry.

An exception were respondents from the
These individuals indicated that government

regulation is the most onerous problem they confront.

Only 6 percent

of the firms surveyed cited inflation as a significant problem.

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
As the Ninth District's snow cover inexorably deepens, so does its
recovery.

The most recently available statistics point toward general

improvement in the labor markets.

Similar to nationally reported trends,

consumer spending has continued to be quite strong.

Construction and

manufacturing activities have generally sustained their upbeat performance
Agricultural conditions have generally not improved.

into 1984.

Financial

sector performance is consistent with the pace of the recovery.
Employment
The latest available data show continued improvement in labor market
conditions.

A prominent local economist estimates that in December seasonally

adjusted unemployment in Minnesota fell to 7 percent, 1.2 points below the
national average.

As expected, the unadjusted rate for the Minneapolis-St.

Paul metropolitan area rose slightly in December, but it was still only 5.6
percent.

And the Conference Board's help-wanted advertising index for

Minneapolis rose further in December.

Unemployment rates remain below the

national average in other parts of the district as well.

In January, the

unemployment rate was 6.5 percent in North Dakota and lower in its
oil-producing area.

South Dakota had only 5.3 percent of its labor force

unemployed at year's end.

But the Duluth-Superior metro area and the Upper

Peninsula of Michigan continue to suffer from structural unemployment.

The

latter, for example, still had an unemployment rate of 17.3 percent in
December.
Consumer Spending
So far this year, consumer spending has been growing at a healthy
clip.
strong.

Following the national trend, general merchandise sales have remained
One large retailer in the Twin Cities reports that its sales growth

IX-2

rate exceeded its target early this year.

Retailers in downtown Rochester,

Minnesota, also report good sales this year.

This Bank's directors from

Montana, the Dakotas, and Wisconsin report that retail sales in some places
during January were better than a year ago.
Motor vehicle purchases in the district also mirrored the national
strength.

The district manager of one large domestic auto manufacturer

reports that in January car and truck sales were over 65 percent higher that a
year earlier.

A January survey of Minnesota auto dealers shows excellent

sales gains throughout the state, with both domestic and imported autos
selling briskly.

Many South Dakota dealers had a great February, with double-

digit sales gains reported for both new and used cars.

Directors' reports

from North Dakota and Montana indicate that auto sales have been good
throughout the rest of the district, too.
Housing activity in the district posted big gains recently as well.
January home sales in the Twin Cities metro area were up 58 percent from
January 1983.

Growth in that area dropped off a bit in February, but remained

in double digits.

According to a director, variable rate mortgages are

helping maintain the good market in Billings, Montana.

Another director notes

that a lot of housing activity is occurring in many areas of North Dakota.
Construction
Buoyed by the strong demand for housing and by space needs of small
industrial users, construction activity has continued to recover so far in
1984.

A recent survey of contractors and equipment distributors in Minnesota

and the Dakotas found that a solid majority believed that construction
activity was still on the rise.

The Twin Cities Metropolitan Council expects

new housing starts to rise 10 percent in 1984.

Directors note some favorable

IX-3

signs outside the Twin Cities.

One contractor in North Dakota expects highway

construction activity to rise 20 percent this year.

In February, a record
Finally, an

number of building permits were issued in Rochester, Minnesota.
18-story office building is going up in Billings, Montana.
Manufacturing

Good news is generally prevalent in the district's manufacturing
industries.

Paper production has started on the way to what appears to be an

exceptionally good year.
margins.

Low costs are helping that industry's profit

Scattered reports from district directors about other manufacturers

are generally favorable.
extremely well.

A construction supply firm in Wisconsin is doing

A large national firm there expects its employment to be up
A new high tech manufacturing facility is

to full strength this spring.
opening in rural Minnesota.

And a nondefense-oriented manufacturer of

electrical controls in South Dakota has a big backlog of orders.

The

district's farm implement manufacturers, however, are still having a tough
time.
Agriculture
A director sums up the farm picture by quoting one of his sources:
"Agriculture is a powder keg--same as in 1900.

But now they don't have

inflation to cover up mistakes nor the FHA to ball them out."

In this Bank's

recent survey of Ninth District ag lenders, only 22 percent thought net farm
earnings in the first quarter of 1984 would exceed year-earlier levels.
balance sheets have obviously been hurt by drops in land value.

A director in

Montana reports that much land is for sale, even at current prices.
farm news is reported, though.

Some good

Cattle prices are improving and encouraging

signs have appeared in the feeder pig futures market.
crop seems to be in good shape.

Farm

And the winter wheat

IX-4
Finance
Financial sector activity is generally consistent with the pace of
the recovery.

District directors report good deposit and loan growth In

southern Minnesota.

A large South Dakota bank's deposits and loans are

holding steady at a time when they usually decline.

Seasonally adjusted

district consumer installment credit rose at year's end, reflecting the
unusually large increase in holiday buying.
lending.

The only soft spots appear in ag

In late December, a majority of respondents to this Bank's survey of

district ag lenders felt that their loan-to-deposit ratios, averaging slightly
over 60 percent, were too low.

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Overview.
in early 1984.
remain moderate.

Business activity in the Tenth District continues to improve
Price increases, both at retail and for materials inputs,
Inventories of both retail goods and industrial inputs are

generally regarded as satisfactory.

Input availability problems are only

spotty and are not regarded as serious.

Housing starts are expected to remain

strong throughout the year, as are both the demand for mortgage funds and the
inflow of savings to savings and loan associations.

Loan demand at commercial

banks has recently increased somewhat, with lending rates generally unchanged.
Adequate credit for spring planting appears to be available to creditworthy
farm borrowers.
Retail trade.

Virtually all retailers surveyed report that sales for

1984 continue to be up over the same period last year.

Appliances and

electronic merchandise have been selling particularly well, while most
categories of apparel have been somewhat weak.

In general, most respondents

are holding to normal seasonal patterns for clearance sales and most are
satisfied with present inventory levels.

Although the majority of respondents

are optimistic about sales for the remainder of the year, many indicate a
cautious approach to inventory accumulation for the second half of 1984.
Wholesale and retail prices have remained flat over the past three months, and
few retailers expect any significant price increases in the near future.
Automobile sales.

All automobile dealers associations contacted report

that sales are higher in 1984 than in the same period last year.
readily available for all dealers.

Financing is

Potential buyers are able to get loans,

most of which are made directly with banks.

Inventories of domestic cars are

either being maintained or replenished as the recent surge in demand

X-2

continues.

Stocks of imported autos are low, and many dealers are making a

high percentage of orders after sales.

All respondents expect sales growth to

be maintained or to accelerate this year.
Purchasing-agents.

Purchasing agents in the Tenth District report

stable to moderately increasing input prices during the past year, generally
in the zero to 10 percent range.

In the past three months input prices have

been stable to 6 percent higher.

Half of the agents foresee stable prices for

the remainder of 1984, while the rest are predicting increases of 5 to 10
percent.
Some minor difficulties are being experienced in getting materials, as
some firms seek to expand inventories.

However, troubles are spotty with most

agents anticipating only slight problems for the remainder of the year.
Materials inventory levels are generally satisfactory with little change
expected.
Housing activity and finance.

Home builders report that housing starts

in January and February exceeded year ago levels, especially in the multifamily category.

Starts are expected to remain strong throughout 1984.

Sales

of new homes have changed little from last year, while inventories have
Prices of new homes range from unchanged to 8 percent higher than

increased.
a year ago.

Home builders report that construction materials are in general

readily available at steady or moderately increasing prices.
Savings inflows at savings and loan associations are up from last year
and respondents expect inflows will continue to increase through the balance
of 1984.

Virtually all institutions surveyed report a strong demand for

mortgage funds, which is expected to continue.

Mortgage interest rates are

steady and are expected to remain unchanged to down slightly through 1984.

X-3
Banking.

Most Tenth District banks surveyed experienced some increase

in loan demand in February.

Commercial and industrial loans and consumer

loans showed the strongest growth.

Deposits rose moderately or remained

unchanged at slightly more than half of the surveyed banks, and fell somewhat

at the remaining banks.
MMDA's, and IRA's.

The strongest deposit categories were Super-NOW's,

In those banks in which total deposits fell, demand

deposits and conventional NOW's accounted for the decline.

The prime rate

ranged from 11 to 14.3 percent, with most banks charging between 11 and 11.5
percent.

Both prime rates and consumer lending rates were unchanged from last

month and the surveyed banks expect no changes in the near future.
Agriculture.

Adequate credit for spring planting appears to be

available to qualified farm borrowers throughout the Tenth District.

However,

fewer farmers than normal are considered creditworthy, because of increased
cash flow problems and stricter credit standards.

Financial pressures are

causing some farmers to liquidate assets and the number of farm auction sales
is much higher than usual.

Although the quantity of land being offered for

sale is up sharply, many attempts to sell land have been unsuccessful due to a
soft market.

Winter feed supplies are short in Colorado, Wyoming, western

Kansas, and central Nebraska.
sold earlier than planned.
winter feed.

As a result, some calves and cattle are being

Other parts of the district have good supplies of

Profits from wintering stocker cattle, especially those grazed

on wheat pasture, are expected to be quite favorable.

Many farmers in Kansas

and New Mexico are participating in the 1984 wheat program, but there is
little interest in participation throughout the rest of the district.
Interest in the 1984 feed grain program is high in Nebraska and the 1984
cotton program is popular in Oklahoma.

Most grain received by district

farmers under the 1983 Payment-In-Kind (PIK) program has now been sold.

XI-1
ECONOMIC COMMENTARY
ELEVENTH DISTRICT-DALLAS

The Eleventh District recovery paused, although some sectors
continued to show improvement.

Manufacturing employment declined but most

manufacturing respondents reported that orders are now rising.

Strong

performance in commercial and residential construction and in portions of

manufacturing is offsetting weakness in the energy sector.
continue to grow.

Auto sales are strong.

Retail sales

Although the December freeze

caused ongoing problems for District citrus farmers, prices for a wide
range of District farm and ranch products are significantly above a year
ago.
Manufacturing employment in the District fell somewhat in both
December and January, as layoffs occurred in energy-related durable goods
manufacturing.

Nevertheless, respondents in most sectors of manufacturing

reported increasing orders and expressed cautious optimism.

Sales of

lumber and wood products were down slightly in January because wet weather
had slowed homebuilding, but production remained at high levels and
manufacturers expect continued strength in the housing industry.

Raw steel

production was static to slightly improved, with respondents expressing
much concern over foreign competition.

Orders for steel plate and tubular

goods are increasing at some steel fabrication plants.
the fabricated metals industry is sluggish.

Overall, however,

Orders for electrical

machinery and apparel products are increasing.

Rising demand cut the

already low inventories of chemical and allied products.

Manufacturers

said that they were working to replenish stocks and to meet new orders.

XI-2
District drilling activity remains above year-earlier levels, but
it slowed more than the normal seasonal amount in both January and
February.

The seismic crew count dipped between December and January,

while remaining above its year-earlier level.

This, and other factors,

suggest that drilling activity may turndown slightly during the first half
of the year, but that drilling activity should remain above last year's
level.

Expectations of continued firmness in oil prices, a rundown in

natural gas inventories, and anticipations of natural gas decontrol in 1985
are all likely to motivate increased drilling during the second half of
this year.
Auto sales in the District remained seasonally strong.

Auto

purchases are traditionally slow during the winter months but sales in
January and February have been high compared to year-earlier levels.
Respondents expressed optimism for 1984 sales and noted that their largest
current problem is depleted inventories.
Retail sales continued strong in February.

Department stores in

all major district cities reported double-digit percentage gains from a
year ago.

Even in Houston, where recovery has been slow, stores reported

double-digit sales growth on a year-over-year basis.

Retailers noted that

prices have begun to rise lately and some also complained about producer
delays in filling orders.

District retailers are very optimistic about

sales for the balance of 1984.
Commercial construction continues at a high level, despite fears
of overbuilding in the District's largest metropolitan areas.
Nonresidential construction is growing rapidly in Austin, but continues to

XI-3
decline in Houston.
for projects.

Many Houston developers are looking to other cities

Dallas nonresidential building continues at a strong pace,

but fears of excess office space are rising.
Residential construction activity continues strong despite
widely-voiced concerns about overbuilding in the multifamily market.

In

January 1984, Texas' value of residential building contracts was 22-percent
higher than a year earlier and more than twice as high as two years ago.
Declines seem likely later this year.
Year-over-year growth in total loans and securities at large
weekly reporting District banks slowed in February 1984.

January's

year-over-year growth also was below the average growth for any quarter in
1983.

Business loan growth increased in both January and February from its

fourth quarter pace, although it was below growth in the first three
quarters of last year.

Growth in real estate loans slowed in January and

again in February but the average level was still more than 40-percent
above last year's volume.
District farmers are generally planning to plant more
acres-to-crops this year after last year's PIK-reduced acreage.

Cotton

farmers have not fully rebounded to the levels of 1982 despite the
encouraging outlook for exports.

Winter wheat farmers, faced with large

stocks overhanging the market and stiff export competition, planted fewer
acres this year than either of the past two years.

Texas livestock

producers are making money at current prices and are likely to continue
profitable operations through the first half of the year.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT

The Twelfth District economic recovery is continuing with increased momentum.
Consumer spending in the post-Christmas holiday period has been stronger than it has
been nationally, with both retail stores and automobile dealerships experiencing
large year-to-year sales gains.

Western homebuilding activity in January rebounded

even more strongly than nationally, and permits for new units point to a continuing
high-level of activity.
pick up.

Nonresidential construction spending is really beginning to

In the manufacturing sector, nearly all industries have been increasing

production and employment recently, with demand especially strong for defense and
business capital equipment.

Agricultural crop prices are up sharply from a year ago

and the planting season is progressing well.

In the deregulated environment,

financial institutions have chosen not to compete aggressively against each other for
small time deposits but to offer rates fairly close to those of money market funds.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending has been strong in the post-Christmas holiday period and would
have been even greater at some retail outlets had not late December "clearance" sales
Major department stores in

so depleted inventory as to reduce merchandise selection.

Southern California, for example, experienced an average 11 percent gain in sales in
both January and February over levels of a year earlier.
at department stores nationally in January.

This far surpassed the gain

In other Western states -- even those

where unemployment rates are still above the national average -- year-to-year sales
gains were nearly as large as in California.
clothing, have been especially strong.
appliances also are selling well.

Sales of nondurable goods, especially

But durable goods such as furniture and

Moreover, auto dealerships have been experiencing

much larger sales gains than department stores, even in rural areas.

To finance

their heavy expenditures, consumers have been sharply increasing their installment
debt but are reported to be very current on their payments.

XII-2

Manufacturing and Mining
Nearly all manufacturing industries have been expanding output and employment
recently, with the exception of some primary metals, notably copper.

The Pacific

Northwest lumber industry has not yet been adding workers but has been experiencing a
resurgence in orders and prices since November as national homebuilding has shown
renewed strength.

Employment growth has been especially strong in the electronic

equipment and missiles and space vehicles industries located in California, Oregon,
Arizona and Utah.

Electronics firms have been benefiting not only from rising

defense and consumer demand but business capital spending to enhance efficiency.
Orders also have been increasing sharply for other capital goods, including nonelectrical machinery, trucks and aircraft.

In Washington, the nation's leading

manufacturer of commercial transport planes has been adding workers since October,
reversing a two-year cutback.

A large manufacturer of long-haul trucks experienced a

doubling of profits during the fourth quarter from a year earlier.

Even

manufacturers of such big ticket discretionary consumer goods as recreational
vehicles and pleasure boats are experiencing an upsurge in sales.

Despite increased

production, the manufacturing sector generally still has ample unused capacity,
except for paper where demand for certain products has reached the "boom" stage.
Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity has shown even more dramatic strength in the West recently
than it has nationally.

In January, Western housing starts soared upward by 46

percent, reaching the highest level since late 1979 and a pace 73 percent above the
level of a year earlier.

Permits issued for new dwelling units in the region also

rose more than nationally, suggesting that Western homebuilding activity in coming
months will remain relatively strong.

Sales also are reported to be holding up well,

although home prices in the West generally are up on average about 6 percent from a
year ago.

Respondents attribute the greater-than-expected strength in housing to

increased availability of adjustable rate mortgage packages, which offer initial

XII-3

rates as much as 3 percentage points below conventional fixed rate mortgages, and to
gains in real personal income.

They also mention that buyers feel that both mortgage

and inflation rates are going to move higher and that now is an opportune time to
purchase a home.

Equally impressive is the strong pickup already occurring and

planned in nonresidential construction activity.

Throughout the District,

respondents report the launching of a large number of new projects such as shopping
and convention centers, hotels, office buildings, and highway improvements.

Firms

continue to be cautious about investing in new industrial structures, however, except
for electronic equipment manufacturers and other defense suppliers.
Agriculture
Crop conditions throughout the District generally are considerably more
favorable than a year ago.

District farmers are benefiting from sharply higher

prices for vegetables and citrus crops, partly as a result of the winter freeze in
Florida and Texas.

California is experiencing one of the warmest and driest winters

on record -- in contrast to last year's flooding -- so that the planting season is
progressing normally.

The mild temperatures -- and consequent early budding -- will

mean that yields of tree fruits and grapes will be moderate.
prices since tree fruit inventories are low.

This will push up

Production costs are stable, including

interest rates, while the growing domestic economy generally is helping to boost
prices.

However, the slow export market is still a problem.

Despite improved market

conditions, many small growers in California are still in serious financial
difficulty because of previous poor years.

Numerous small farms and parcels have

been put up for sale to lighten debt burden.

Yet even at land prices far below those

of a year ago, owners are having difficulty finding buyers.
Financial Institutions
The financial institutions in the Twelfth District have found the deregulated
market for small time deposits to be rather calm after the initial scramble for
funds.

Some observers suggest that for short-term accounts interest rate

XII-4

differentials of greater than 20-30 basis points are required before significant
movement of funds between institutions occurs.

Rates have been generally stable in

recent months, as the industry seems to have avoided "rate wars" by keeping their
rates in line with those offered by money market funds.

The rates on Super-NOWs have

been particularly stable, staying around 7 percent, as its role as a transaction
deposit apparently dominates any interest rate concerns.

Financial institutions have

not extensively used their increased ability to tailor the maturity of their
deposits.

Some have tried to lengthen maturity.

But in general there seems to be a

willingness to accept the consumers' desire to keep deposits under a year in maturity
because of their uncertainty over future interest rates.

