SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

March 1985

TABLE OF CONTENTS

..............................

i

First District - Boston ............................................

I-1

SUMMARY .............

............

Second District - New York .........................................

II-1

Third District - Philadelphia .....................................

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland ........................................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ..........................................

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta ..........................................

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ........................................

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis ......................................

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis .......................................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City .......................................

X-l

Eleventh District - Dallas ...............................

........

Twelfth District - San Francisco ...................................

XI-1
XII-1

SUMMARY*

Economic activity throughout the nation continues at a modest
pace, though the agricultural and mining sectors are depressed in some
areas.

Most Districts report small but steady gains in overall

employment levels, though there has been little growth in manufacturing
employment.

Unemployment rates have remained steady or fallen slightly

in most Districts.

Retail sales continued strong in February and

promotions remained prevalent.

Industrial activity increased from

January to February in most Districts.

All Districts reporting on new

orders indicate they were up or unchanged with New York the only
exception.

Some Districts report involuntary inventory accumulation

although equally as many note that inventories were at desired levels.
Nonresidential construction continues at a strong pace in most Districts.
Construction
While multi-family residential construction was robust in many
Districts, single-family construction was mixed, despite lower mortgage
interest rates.

Kansas City reports housing starts slightly lower than

high year-ago levels and Dallas indicates that all residential
construction is declining at an accelerating rate.
Nonresidential construction continues to be strong in most
Districts.

Many report that commercial construction is outpacing

absorption rates for office space, however, and several express concern
that a weak period may be in store as vacancy rates increase.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Industry
Manufacturing output has improved in most Districts.
was cited in the following manufacturing industries:

Weakness

textiles and

apparel, chemicals, machinery and equipment, furniture, and
semi-conductors.

Automotive parts and aerospace were among manufacturing

industries contributing to strong growth.

Increases in steel production

are cited by Cleveland, Atlanta, and Chicago.
Indicators of manufacturing activity were inconsistent from
District to District.

New orders are reported to be up by respondents in

the Boston and Philadelphia Districts and unchanged in the Cleveland and
Richmond Districts while New York reports a sizable increase in the
number of agents whose orders had decreased.
were unchanged or declining.

Order backlogs generally

Manufacturers' inventories were at desired

levels in the New York, Philadelphia and Kansas City Districts.

Some

involuntary inventory accumulation is reported by Richmond, St. Louis and
Dallas.
Agriculture

The recession in the agricultural economy remains widespread.
Grain farmers dependent on export markets appear to be most affected.
Livestock producers have enjoyed a slightly better fate although some
weakness is expected in the near future.
particularly for cropland.
value of ranch land.

Land prices continue to decline

Dallas, however, reports modest gains in the

Kansas City estimates 5 to 10 percent of banks'

agricultural borrowers will be denied credit for planting and that 5
percent or less of the District's farmers will leave farming this spring.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales are widely reported to have been strong in February,
despite the colder-than-normal weather experienced in many areas earlier
this year.

Many Districts mention that price discounting and promotions

remained prevalent as retailers attempted to increase sales volume.
Inventories have been reduced to desired levels in most cases.
Automobile sales ranged from vigorous in January and February in the
Chicago and Dallas Districts, to slow in Atlanta due to cold weather.
Most other Districts report generally strong auto sales.

Auto dealers

across the nation are optimistic about sales for spring and summer, and
some are building inventories in anticipation.

Cleveland indicates that

sales of small trucks are at a record pace, but sales growth of
heavy-duty trucks has slowed.

Minneapolis and Chicago also report that

trucks sold well in their Districts.
Banking and Finance
Most districts are experiencing sluggish loan growth mainly due
to seasonal factors.

Atlanta, Cleveland, Dallas, and San Francisco,

however, cite healthy commercial and industrial loan growth while New
York reports a contraction in business lending at large banks.

Consumer

lending increased after the Christmas season although many districts have
experienced a slowdown in the most recent periods.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District appears to be expanding at
a modest rate.

Retail sales continued to grow in January and February,

with sales in some cases exceeding expectations and in other cases falling
short.

Inventory levels vary, depending upon past relationships between

sales and expectations and upon individual stores' planning decisions;
however, no one reports that inventories are seriously out of line.
are generally stable and the outlook is positive.

Prices

Reports from the

manufacturing sector are varied, with expectations playing an important
role in manufacturers' assessment of recent results.
expect 1985 to be a reasonably good year.

Most manufacturers

Capital spending plans are up,

but much of the money spent on equipment will go to foreign suppliers.
Price increases in the manufacturing sector are said to be negligible.
Retail
Most retailers contacted this month reported stronger-than-expected
sales in February on the heels of a fair-to-good January.

One chain,

however, reported robust sales growth in January followed by an anemic
increase in February.

Several merchants mentioned slow sales of women's

clothing and men's footwear; other items generally performed well.
Inventories are lean in those stores that enjoyed sales above
expectations from December through February.
moderately.

Prices are rising only

Some increases are attributable to commodity price increases,

such as leather and rubber for footwear.

Upgrading of merchandise has also

I-2

created the appearance of price increases.

Competitive pressures and

widespread promotions were cited as causes of the moderation in inflation.
One month into fiscal year 1985, the retail outlook is promising.
Projections of sales growth range from 6 to 12 percent over 1984; these
projections for 1985 equal or exceed 1984's strong growth rates.

Capital

spending plans support these expectations, with new stores and additional
warehouse space planned throughout the region.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturers contacted described business as fair, but a few
reported disappointing results.

To some extent, differences in

manufacturers' assessment of current conditions reflect differences in
expectations rather than differences in results.
one firm is disappointing for another.

A "decent" increase for

A number of firms have seen a

pickup in orders and production in the past 2 or 3 months; however, in the
computer and semiconductor industries, there is reported to have been a
marked slowing in the rate of growth.

This slowing is attributed to a

combination of factors, especially customers' uncertainties about economic
conditions and the tax environment and the delaying effects of
announcements of future new products.

The slowdown is not expected to

persist for very long.
In addition, manufacturers of capital goods report that orders are
not as strong as one would expect given the stage of the recovery and
business' ambitious investment plans.
the explanation:

Foreign competition is said to be

much of business spending is going for equipment produced

abroad.

Several firms confirmed this from the buying side; their capital

spending is up substantially but much of the equipment is coming from Japan
and Europe.

Interestingly, these contacts did not cite price as the

primary reason for buying from abroad.

Foreign equipment is said to be

state-of-the-art; also, according to one contact, lead times for complex
machinery are shorter if one buys from a Japanese rather than a domestic
supplier.
Inventories are said to be a little higher than desired.

This is a

legacy from the slowing in demand that many firms experienced in the second
half of 1984 rather than a recent development.

Most of the firms contacted

report that prices for materials and supplies are not increasing at all.
Most also report that they cannot raise their own prices; increases for one
product are offset by discounts for others.

A couple of firms report

keeping costs down by taking advantage of the strong dollar and importing
from their own overseas subsidiaries; these subsidiaries previously served
only overseas markets.
Manufacturing respondents expect 1985 to be a reasonably good year,
but they are uneasy.

The value of the dollar is the source of much of this

unease; contacts are concerned about both the level and the possibility of
large changes.

Two executives were particularly concerned about how

monetary policy would respond to a slowing in the foreign capital inflow.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--New York

Introduction
The
The pace

District's

uneven

economic

expansion

has

continued.

of consumer spending was mixed in recent weeks, with some

suburban retailers reporting continued strength and others noting weak
sales

even with

aggressive promotional

signs

that

pace

the

of

the

activity.

District's

business

There were a few
expansion

may

slowing, but so far the employment picture has been quite good.

be
The

housing market remained robust, with construction only delayed by bad
weather.
the

The demand for office space has been picking up in much of

District,

although

inventories

remained

high.

Small

banks

reported continued strength of commercial and industrial loan demand.
Consumer Spending
Retail business in the Second District was mixed in recent
weeks in a highly promotional environment.
in
Some

Most chains doing business

suburban areas,

especially discounters,

merchants,

reported

February.
despite

however,

continued

weakness

in

to

fare well.

January

and

into

Sales for one New York City merchant fell during the period
deep

indicated

price

that

snowstorms.

sales

markdowns.
rose

only

And

an

upstate

moderately,

in

New

York

part

due

retailer
to

heavy

Inventories have been brought down to desired levels--to

about 10 percent above 1984's holdings--at most stores contacted.

One

of

its

department

store

chain,

however,

reported

continued growth

stocks, to nearly 20 percent above last year's level, and has further
reduced its orders for spring merchandise.

II-2

Business Activity
The Second District's business expansion has continued but
its

pace

appeared to

be slowing.

While

a majority of purchasing

agents still reported either stable or improved business conditions in
January, there was also a sizable increase in the number of agents
whose

new

optimistic

orders
than

had
they

declined.
did

last

Businessmen
month.

seemed

Inventories,

somewhat

less

however, were

currently deemed by most to be at satisfactory levels.
The employment picture remained very strong, although there
were a few early signs of a possible slowdown.

Employment in both New

York and New Jersey remained at record high levels, unemployment rates
were well below the national average, and several major employers have
indicated their intention either to maintain or to increase employment
in the District during 1985.
become

somewhat

more

However, layoffs and plant closings have

prevalent.

included a drug manufacturer

Firms

announcing

contractions

in northern New Jersey, a typewriter

maker and a bottle manufacturer in upstate New York, and an aerospace
producer on Long Island.
Construction and Real Estate
Cold

weather

construction activity.
robust.

has

temporarily

slowed

residential

The demand for houses, however, has remained

Builders in many parts of the District expected 1984's record

levels of activity to continue throughout 1985.
The housing market may be affected by several bills pending
before state legislatures.
and

various

tax

In New York the renewal of rent regulations

incentives

are

being

considered;

New

Jersey's

II-3

legislature

is

debating

action

on

construction in suburban areas.
also

increase

subsidies

court-ordered

low-income

housing

Proposed bills in both states would

for

low-

and

middle-income

housing

construction, directly and through reduced-interest mortgages.
Real estate brokers in many parts of the area noted that
the nonresidential real estate market has stabilized in recent weeks,
even though inventories were on the high side.

The demand for office

space has increased in Downtown Manhattan, owing in part to the recent
strength of the stock market and the banking sector.
was high in Midtown Manhattan and on Long Island.

Leasing activity

In contrast, demand

was weak in northern New Jersey and Fairfield County in Connecticut,
and observers believed that the large extent of speculative building

underway in these areas has not been warranted by the current rate of
space

absorption.

intermediate

Westchester

case:

demand

was

County
viewed

(New
as

York)

has

satisfactory

been
but

an

large

additions of new space next spring may upset the current equilibrium.
Financial Developments
Commercial

and

industrial

loan

growth

at

small

banks

remained fairly strong in recent weeks, in contrast to the continuing
contraction at major New York City banks.

According

to the small

banks contacted, the strength of loan demand came in response to a
reduction in loan rates that was prompted by strong deposit inflows at
lower interest rates.
included
small

Industries with particularly strong loan demand

small manufacturers,

businesses.

Respondents

homebuilders,
expected

this

continue for at least the next three months.

and a wide variety
level

of

of

activity to

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Local

industries

in the Third

District

are

reporting

growth

in February.

Manufacturing activity has picked up speed, after several slow months; and retailing remains
quite strong, contrary to its usual slack performance in February. The financial sector reports
some sluggishness in both commercial and consumer loans relative to the beginning of the year,
but bankers attribute this to seasonal pressure and note that current lending volume is
substantially higher than it was last year at this time.
Overall, the outlook for Third District industries is bright.

The majority of

manufacturers expect to step up production further within six months. Retailers anticipate that
the early Easter will lead into a strong spring and summer selling season.

For bankers, the

generally healthy economic news signals increased loan demand.
MANUFACTURING
Local manufacturers responding

to this month's Business Outlook Survey say

business is rebounding slightly after several months of only modest growth. February's survey of
industrial activity shows a definite improvement over January as well as over the 4th quarter of
1984, with one-third of the executives polled reporting expansion of production in recent
weeks. The pickup in production is noted in both the durables and nondurables sectors. Close to
40 percent of the survey respondents say both new orders and shipments are turning in a strong
performance this month, while one-third indicate that inventories have held steady at January
levels. Employee payrolls and working hours are virtually unchanged, as are producers' backlogs
and delivery times.
The six-month outlook for both general industrial activity and specific business
indicators remains bright.

Over 60 percent of the executives polled anticipate stepping up

production by August, while only 10 percent expect to ease off activity. Manufacturers'

III-2
optimism is reflected in their projections for both new orders and shipments, with well over half
expecting further growth in these indicators. Over 40 percent of the survey respondents plan to
boost capital expenditures by August.
Current industrial prices are stable again this month.

Three out of four

manufacturers surveyed say there has been no change in either prices paid for raw materials or
in prices received for finished goods. Price hikes are expected in the future, however, as almost
three-quarters of those polled anticipate higher input costs and over half plan to charge more
for their final products.
RETAIL
Retailers say the strong sales performance in January has extended into February;
this reverses the normal seasonal slowdown which is usually attributed to the payoff of
consumers' holiday shopping bills. Extremely mild temperatures in the second half of February
helped to boost sales at area department stores by as much as 14 percent on a year-over-year
basis.

Valentine's Day in particular was a big success, with exceptionally strong jewelry sales.

Promotions continue to be important in attracting customers. Inventories are being held in line
with sales expectations.
The outlook for retailing in the spring and summer is upbeat. Merchants look for
overall first quarter gains of about 10 percent over last year, and expect this year's early Easter
to provide further momentum for consumer spending.

Department store executives are

guardedly optimistic; they continue to forecast further growth, but they do not anticipate
making the same "spectacular" year-over-year sales gains posted in 1984.
FINANCE
Loan demand, in general, has been flat in February.

Both wholesale and retail

loans have grown only about 1 percent since the beginning of the year. Bankers attribute this
sluggishness to seasonal effects. On a year-over-year basis, commercial loans, including

III-3
commercial mortgages, are up 10 to 20 percent, and consumer loans are registering hefty
increases, as local banks are still benefiting from promotional pushes in credit cards and auto
loans.
The outlook for loan growth is rosy with lenders expecting a strengthening in
demand through mid-year.

C&I loans are predicted to run about 5 percent, and consumer loans

about 10 percent, over year-ago levels. Continued healthy economic expansion and low inflation
are expected to drive borrowing higher, but bankers say growth, especially in the retail areas, is
not likely to attain the fast pace they grew accustomed to in the past year.
Local bank economists anticipate some gradual upward pressure on interest rates
over the next six months as a result of a healthy economy. The federal funds rate will rise but
should not exceed 9 percent, according to bank forecasts.

The prime rate, currently at 10.5

percent, will follow suit by rising 25 to 50 basis points by August.

IV-1

Fourth District--Cleveland

Summary
Economic activity in the Fourth District is reviving slowly after
several months of weakness.
falling.
sluggish.

Employment is rising and unemployment is

Durable goods are selling well but non-durable goods sales are
Manufacturing activity is weak but no longer declining.

Housing activity is improving slowly, and business and consumer loan
demands continue to increase.
District Labor Market Conditions
Ohio employment (s.a.)

increased in December and January, while

unemployment (s.a.) fell in January by more than it had risen in
December.

The unemployment rate (s.a.)

8.4% in January.

fell from 9.1% in December to

Surveys of manufacturers indicate little change in

manufacturing employment (n.s.a.).

Unemployment rates (n.s.a.) in

December in ten metropolitan areas in this District ranged from 6.4% in
Columbus to 15.1% in Wheeling, a steel-producing center.

Local indexes

of leading indicators of employment for the Pittsburgh and Cleveland
metropolitan areas have been flat for several months, suggesting that
employment in those areas is unlikely to grow much in the near term.
Retail Sales
February retail sales trends in the Fourth District have followed the
national pattern.

Hard goods, especially autos, continue to sell well.

Car dealers are intentionally carrying higher-than-normal inventories in
expectation of even stronger sales in the spring.

Electronics,

especially VCR's, are selling well, and competitive new imports are
keeping prices down.

The only weak durable goods are non-high-tech

IV-2
appliances and furniture.

Soft goods, especially apparel, fell prey to

bad weather and sales improved only marginally in the last half of
February when Fourth District weather conditions improved.

Nevertheless,

department stores do not plan further price cuts to reduce inventories
because their margins are already thin.

Instead, they plan to reduce

orders to eliminate excess inventories of soft goods.
Manufacturing
Surveys of manufacturers in the Cleveland and Cincinnati areas
indicate weakness in manufacturing activity.

Manufacturers in Cleveland

and northeast Ohio report their level of production has stabilized after
falling in January and new orders have stabilized after four months of
decline.

In Cincinnati, production is rising slowly, new orders are

flat, and order backlogs are declining.

Inventories of raw materials and

components are falling in Cleveland and are flat in Cincinnati while
inventories of finished goods are flat in Cleveland and rising slowly in
Cincinnati.

Prices paid by manufacturers continue to rise very slowly.

A major producer of industrial chemicals reports export markets
are weakening, while growing shares of strong domestic markets are being
absorbed by imports.

Producers of parts for the automobile industry

report demand is very strong.

A large steel producer reports orders for

flat-rolled sheet products used by the auto industry have surged to
capacity.

Steel prices are below published schedules and imports

continue to rise.
A survey of manufacturing firms in the midwest indicates they are
not changing their plans to increase capital spending this year.
producer of parts for trucks and autos is planning to invest

A

IV-3
significantly more this year to modernize production facilities and to
locate production plants closer to customers to meet growing demands for
just-in-time deliveries.

The firm reports that sales of smaller trucks

are at a record pace but sales growth of heavy-duty trucks has slowed and
manufacturers are asking suppliers to delay delivery of components.

A

major producer of material used in commercial construction reports record
demand, and believes that tax incentives must be stimulating construction
of office buildings because vacancy rates continue to rise.

The firm has

pushed back to late-1985 its forecast for a decline in its sales, and
expects a 3-year to 4-year slump in commercial construction, especially
office buildings, because of excess space.
Housing
Housing activity in Ohio is reviving, but more slowly than in many
other areas of the country.

Market participants generally expect that

sales will improve steadily during the first and second quarters because
of lower mortgage rates, but builders remain extremely cautious.
A large savings and loan association reports that applications and
inquiries in February were substantially higher than a year ago.
Fixed-rate mortgages are regaining popularity among borrowers because of
the narrowing rate spread between fixed-rate and adjustable rate
mortgages and tighter underwriting criteria for adjustable rate
mortgages.

A savings and loan association reports that its mortgage

delinquencies are rising, and higher delinquency rates are likely to
persist because slow appreciation of home prices has eliminated the
incentive for some buyers to reschedule payments with the mortgagee.
Most builders in this region had laid plans for strong sales in 1984
but had a poor year.

Builders are assuming that housing starts

IV-4
nationally will equal 1.5 million units in 1985.

They have reduced their

geographic market coverage, scaled down production facilities, and
reduced their inventories to maximize profits in a soft market.
Commercial Banking
Loan demand appears to have strengthened at District banks in recent
weeks.

Business loans registered the largest gain in outstandings, and

consumer loan volume continued to grow at a relatively good pace.
Contacts expect additional pick-up of business loan demand and continued
strength in consumer loan demand.

The market share of auto loans held by

banks, however, is likely to decline somewhat because below-market loan
rates are being offered on selected models by captive finance companies
of some auto manufacturers.
Overall deposit growth has been moderate at District banks in the
past six weeks.

Inflows of time and savings deposits have more than

offset reductions in demand deposits.

District banks also have increased

their reliance on purchased funds including large negotiable certificates
of deposit.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
While the thrust of economic activity in the Fifth District remains
positive, the evidence collected this month is less consistent than in other
recent months.

The manufacturing section in particular was spotty.

Textiles

and apparel continued to report many of the soft spots, but were joined by
scattered

firms

in such diverse

industries

as machinery and equipment,

furniture, and chemicals.

Other sectors, meanwhile, continue to show robust

performance

some

despite,

in

cases,

quite

adverse

weather

conditions.

Retail sales are making consistent, occasionally exceptional gains in most
areas and in a wide variety of product lines.

Construction of nearly all

types is also lending broad and substantial support to district economic
activity.

In the financial sector, loan demand is growing moderately and

deposits seem, more or less, to be keeping pace.

Manufacturing
For the second consecutive month, conditions in the manufacturing
sector of the District appear to have deteriorated.

Although the volume of

new orders was little changed in February, manufacturers report a rather
sharp contraction of shipments, and a substantial working down of order
backlogs as well.

In addition, there seems to have been widespread inven-

tory accumulation, particularly of finished goods,

in recent weeks, and

there is growing concern that perhaps current stocks are excessive.
Although manufacturing employment in the District has shown little
change of late, there are reports that the average work week may have been

-2-

shortened.

Also, manufacturers

continue

to

report weakness

in prices.

There are even suggestions that prices may have declined in recent weeks.
Despite the apparent slowing of demand, and an increasing sentiment
for retrenchment, District manufacturers actually seem to have become more
positive about the outlook.

They foresee little change in the level of

activity nationally in coming months, but, on balance, expect conditions on
their respective markets and firms to improve in that time frame.
Coal production has been disrupted by very bad weather since the
first of the year, and is running somewhat below year ago levels.

It is

likely though that even with good weather, 1984 output would be unmatched at
this point.

Production is still at relatively high levels by historical

standards.

Consumer Activity
Consumer activity is almost universally described as strong around
the District.

Sales at department stores, discount houses, and automobile

dealers are particularly good, but remain quite responsive to price cutting.
Generally, reports are that sales strength cuts across nearly all product
lines, non-durables, household

durables,

and automobiles.

For the most

part, retailers used the surge of buying in late 1984 to trim inventories
and in the face of continued sales strength find inventories quite lean, but
not restrictive.
The price discounting that became
continues

generally, although

rebuilding margins.

there

seems

so prevalent
to be

around year end

a modest

trend toward

It remains to be seen how successful these efforts will

-3-

be.

Retailers as a group seem to be quite optimistic, calling for little

change or modest increases in activity in coming months.

Construction
As in recent months, construction activity is quite strong around
the District, including most areas and nearly all types of construction.

In

addition, the outlook appears to be for continued strength in this sector.
Housing sales and construction are described nearly everywhere as moderate
or strong, strong in most areas.
housing market

Furthermore, evidence from the current

and from such indicators as building permits are taken to

suggest that this strength is likely to continue for some months.
Similarly, commercial construction is very strong, unprecedented in
several metropolitan areas.
dominate
Reports

the

activity.

suggest

The

Office buildings and shopping centers seem to
outlook

for

this

sector

that new projects are continuing

is

to come

also

positive.

on line

at

all

stages.

Financial Sector
Financial

institutions

are

generally

expanding loan demand for most types of loans.
growing

and there

is

little

evidence

emerge at District institutions.

that

experiencing

moderately

Sources of funds are also

any imbalances

are

likely

to

Although credit demands are expected to

continue to expand moderately, there is little concern that liquidity will
be strained, at least over the next several months.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
The southeastern economy continued to expand in early 1985.
has

increased

in

several

basic

manufacturing

industries

although

Employment
some

other

manufacturers remain burdened by competition from imports. Sluggish consumer spending
growth accompanied a severe mid-winter cold spell, but sales of new vehicles remain
very robust.

Housing markets are generally firm while still-booming office, retail and

industrial construction shows signs of outpacing high levels of absorption.

Business and

real estate lending growth corroborates the moderately strong economic advance of the
region.

Tourism activity measures indicate that current and expected business and

convention travel is strong.

The agricultural sector continues to be the major soft

spot, with prices for some important products falling and those for some others still
depressed.
Employment and Industry.

Business and labor market conditions generally

have improved since the last reporting period, spurred by continuing growth of defense,
construction,

and auto-related industries.

However, sluggish performance

of major

import-competing and energy industries continue to burden Alabama, Louisiana, and
Mississippi with double-digit unemployment rates.
The region's tire plants, which have been running near capacity, recently
increased their production schedules, and paper manufacturers are adding capacity to
meet demand.

A major steel producer has recalled 650 employees to its north Alabama

plant, including some who have been laid off since 1980.

Louisiana's petrochemical

industry is producing at high levels for the specialty chemical segment, but the larger
agricultural segment is not faring well due to foreign competition and the plight of
the farmer.

Petroleum refiners continue to trim operations.

VI-2
Record-breaking trade deficits for apparel and textile products have resulted
in mill layoffs throughout the region.
vulnerable to imports.
in early 1985.

Apparel fabric producers have been especially

The number of textile jobs declined by 2,000 in Georgia alone

Industry spokesmen fear that their heavy domestic investment in

productivity-enhancing equipment has not reversed the industry's declining trend.

In

contrast to other textile sectors, carpet sales are reaching record levels due to a sharp
upturn in commercial contract orders.

Carpet sales are expected to grow by 10 percent

this year based on the office building boom.
Consumer Spending.

Excluding autos, regional retail sales, as reported by

surveyed merchants, were generally up from 5 to 8 percent in February compared to
a year earlier.

Retailers viewed this sales pace as sluggish but did not report any

strong concerns about high inventory levels.

Cold weather earlier in this reporting

period limited overall shopping but helped to reduce the heavy stock of winter apparel
that accumulated during the unusually mild early-winter period.

Several retailers

reported that they were discounting prices more than usual to spur consumer spending
now that pent-up demand for some items has been met.

Continuing strong consumer

demand for new vehicles, particularly in Florida and Georgia, has encouraged dealers'
optimism for another good year despite the mid-winter cold wave that slowed sales in
some areas.
Construction.

Single-family residential sales, prices, and construction remain

strong in major southeastern markets, with the notable exception of New Orleans, where
home sales and prices are weak.

The region's multifamily residential market also

remains firm amid heavy construction activity.

Absorption of office building space is

at very high levels in most large cities but is not keeping pace with construction
activity.

Vacancy rates have increased most noticeably in Tampa and Miami.

High

VI-3

levels of shopping center and industrial construction activity are outpacing absorption
in some large markets such as Atlanta and Orlando.
Financial Services.

Business, real estate, and consumer lending by large

banks accelerated at year-end 1984 and continued to grow in January.
loan associations'
period.

Savings and

mortgage commitments also showed renewed strength during this

Preliminary bank and S&L information for February suggests some slowing of

consumer lending, with the business and real estate lending trends unchanged.
Tourism.

Tourist activity improved with the weather in February, following

an apparent cold weather-related slowdown in January. Moreover, the near-term outlook
is quite bright, especially because business and convention travel has continued to show
healthy growth.

A pickup in vacation travel solidified strong occupancy levels and

advance bookings in Palm Beach, Miami, and Daytona Beach.

Convention bookings in

Miami Beach, Mobile, and Knoxville are well ahead of last year, and air travel rose
12 percent at Atlanta's airport.
Agriculture.

Unfavorable prices for most crops and livestock products

continue to squeeze regional farmers' profits.

Broiler and cattle prices have shown

some improvement in recent weeks, but egg prices have fallen about one-fourth as
production has increased.

Crop prices also remain depressed, particularly for soybeans

and cotton, compared to year-ago prices.

Farmers currently plan to reduce soybean

acreage planted by one-half million acres this year and hold cotton planting to its 1984
level, but they intend to expand corn plantings.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

Conflicting trends in the Seventh District suggest that over-

all improvement, if any, in this region in 1985 will again lag the national
performance.

With total payroll employment still 7 percent below the levels

of 1978-79, job seekers far outnumber openings.

Severe distress is reported

throughout the Cornbelt, with many farmers complaining about availability of
credit "to get crops in the ground."
precedented since the 1930s.

Depression in the farm sector is un-

Producers of mechanical capital goods face very

weak markets with more plant closings announced and anticipated, especially
in farm and construction equipment.

On the favorable side, motor vehicle

output is scheduled above last year's high level in the first and second
quarters.

Steel output is improving, helped by new import controls.

Commercial

construction activity is vigorous, but both residential and nonresidential
construction remain substantially below the levels of the late 1970s.

Re-

ports on consumer purchases vary, but retailers are pushing hard for available
trade, with profit margins thin at best.
Plant Closings.

Various District manufacturers have announced further

plant shutdowns, some temporary, others permanent.

A diversified firm will

permanently close a construction equipment plant in Iowa.
close two pork processing facilities in Iowa.

A meat packer will

A producer of large farm

tractors is shifting operations to Europe from Michigan.

A large Detroit

brewery, dating to the nineteenth century, is to be closed.

Reasons for plant

closings include excess capacity, severe competition, the high value of the
dollar, and antiquated, high-cost facilities.
Motor Vehicles.

Auto sales in January and February have been vigorous

and production schedules through mid-year exceed 1984.

However, cutbacks

VII-2

have occurred in output of some small cars, and several companies are offering cut-rate financing to boost sales.
orders for steel

While auto producers have been placing

to support planned output through April, they retain flex-

ibility to lower schedules later in the second quarter. Industry observers
see extension of current restraints on Japanese imports as unlikely, but less
formal "guidance" may mean only moderately higher imports.

A leading truck

producer expects sales of medium trucks to rise 5 percent in 1985, with sales
of heavy trucks to be near 1984's high level, but weaker in the second half.
Steel.

Raw steel production in the Chicago area has improved in recent

weeks to the highest levels since mid-1984.
more workers recalled.
sharply."

More furnaces have been lit and

Orders for most types of steel have improved "fairly

Strongest lines are motor vehicles, appliances, office furniture,

and commercial buildings.
is still slow.

Demand for steel from heavy capital goods producers

New import restraints are taking hold.

Foreign steel in-

ventoried when imports surged last year probably is being drawn down.

One

analyst expects the restraint program to reduce imports by 5 million tons
from 1984's record 26 million tons.
Capital Goods.

Most heavy capital goods lines remain weak, partly be-

cause of the high value of the dollar.

Orders for construction machinery,

food processing, materials handling, and oil and gas exploration generally
continue slow.
first half.

Railcar orders have slipped from low levels in last year's

A District company which sold its domestic farm equipment lines

is liquidating finished inventories, offering large bonuses to dealers.
Another diversified company is seeking a buyer for its farm machinery business.
Gypsum and Paper.
1984's record level.

Gypsum board demand in 1985 is expected to remain near
Capacity in this industry has been shifting in recent

VII-3

years to the South and West as older plants have been closed and new plants
opened.

However, repair and remodel work--one-third or more of the market for

gypsum board--is concentrated in regions with more older buildings, the East
and Midwest.

Paperboard shipments are projected to rise two percent in 1985

from the 1984 record.
Construction.

Industry output is near capacity.

Bidding activity on nonresidential projects, especially

office and retail, in the Chicago area is vigorous, and activity should remain strong in 1985.

Highway work also is projected to continue at a high

level, depending in part on release of federal funds.

The decline in mortgage

interest rates since mid-1984 has improved the climate for new housing, but some
lenders have raised rates recently.

With the wide variety of mortgages now

available, some speak of 100 varieties, generalizations about terms are difficult.
Consumer Spending.

Reports on general merchandise sales recently have

been mixed, but mostly disappointing.
percent in January from year ago.

Airline passenger miles were up 12

Fare cutting has intensified since then.

A Chicago-based regional airline recently cut flights by one-fourth, froze
pay, and announced layoffs.
Agriculture.

District farmers expect to plant about the same acreage

in corn and soybeans in 1985 as last year, according to the USDA February
survey.

The report attracted more interest than usual because of concerns

that many farmers will be hard pressed to obtain sufficient production
financing.

Some analysts argue that current financial stress undermines the

reliability of this year's planting intentions report, which historically
has been fairly reliable.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary and Outlook
Little change is expected in business conditions through
mid-1985.

The volume of business is expected to rise marginally in the

next three months.

Respondents expect only modest increases in price and

employment levels.

Retail sales, though mixed, were up slightly overall

in February from the January level.

Growth in total loan volume slowed

in the first half of February, from the seasonally strong January rate.
There is evidence of additional erosion in farmland values, with the
decline expected to last at least through 1985.

Cattle and hog prices

are beginning to weaken seasonally.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales were up slightly overall in February from the
January level.

Though some respondents report strong sales, one

respondent said the retail industry as a whole is going through a period
of weakness, and estimated only a 2 to 3 percent growth in retail sales
over the 1984 level for the Louisville area.

Business Activity
Business activity as measured by an index of seven components has
increased in the District.

The index moved upward in Arkansas and

Missouri in January, at rates of 7 and 4 percent, respectively.

In

Kentucky and Tennessee, where data are available only through December,
the index rose 3 percent and 7 percent, respectively, for the month.
Business activity in all four states was 2 to 6 percent above 1984 levels.

VIII-2

The paper and paper products industry reports that sales since
mid-December have been only one-half as strong as previously expected.
They cite price weakness and inventory build-up as their main concerns.
Excessive inventory levels also were reported by other industrial firms
in early February.
essentially flat.

As a result, industrial employment has remained
Capital spending increases for 1985 have been reduced

from earlier estimates, though an increase over last year's level is
still planned.

Construction
Single-family housing starts remain sluggish despite lower
mortgage rates.
1985, however.

Respondents remain optimistic about the outlook for
Housing starts are expected to rise 10 to 12 percent

above the 1984 level in the Louisville area.

Multi-family housing

construction remains strong in the Memphis area.

The time required to

fill available office space in the District has lengthened, which
generally indicates an excess supply of nonresidential buildings.

Banking and Finance
Total loans outstanding at large District banks grew at a 30
percent annual rate in January over the previous four weeks (not
seasonally adjusted).

Through the first half of February, however, total

loan growth has fallen to a 10 percent annual rate, just slightly below
the long term trend rate.

Both the rapid January growth and the more

recent return to trend can be attributed to fluctuations in consumer and
real estate lending.

Commercial and industrial lending has risen only

VIII-3

Much of the January growth in consumer lending

modestly over the period.

can be attributed to the normal increase of the Christmas season.
A January survey found that bills to establish regional
interstate banking zones had been introduced into legislative committees
in 5 of 7 District states.

Of the two remaining states, Kentucky enacted

a regional interstate banking bill in 1984, while no such legislation was
pending in Mississippi.

More recently, the Missouri House banking

committee rejected the interstate provisions of a banking bill.

The

House action will hinder interstate legislation proposed in the state's
Senate.

A House spokesperson stated that interstate banking provisions

would be reexamined this year only if neighboring states adopt such
legislation.

Agriculture
Despite uncertainty over loan guarantees and the 1985 farm bill,
planting intentions surveys indicate increased feedgrain acreage and
reduced acreage in oilseeds.

With large surpluses still in storage,

normal weather this year would show large harvests, keeping prices near
loan rates.

Survey evidence shows additional erosion in land values,

further weakening the ability of some farmers to obtain credit;
expectations are for a continuation of this decline, at least through
1985.

Livestock producers, who currently face profitable marketing

opportunities, also are beginning to see some seasonal price weakness.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

With
ties,

the

year.

the exception of agriculture

Ninth

District

economy

Nonfarm employment

has

and some resource-related activi-

shown

indicators have

signs

of

strength

so

far this

generally remained good,

consumer

spending in diversified cities has picked up a bit, and loans and deposits at
large city banks have both grown.

Employment
Nonfarm
remained

good.

employment
The

conditions

seasonally

in

adjusted

fell a bit to 6.4 percent in December.

much

of

the

unemployment

Ninth

rate

District

for

the

have
district

In January, the Minnesota unemployment

rate also edged down to 6.4 percent, reversing a slight rising trend, with the
biggest employment gain coming in the trade and service sectors.

Employment

in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area was over 50,000 people higher than a
year

ago,

there.
areas

and

But
of

a

new

race

unemployment

northeastern

track

is

expected

remained over

Minnesota

and

the

20

to

employ

percent

Upper

in

another
the

Peninsula

500

people

mining-dependent
of

Michigan,

and

layoffs boosted unemployment in South Dakota.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general
pattern:

good-to-strong in

resource-dependent

held down its
up

6 percent

profit

diversified cities

smaller towns.

Cities had good traffic

in
margin.

merchandise has

January

continued its

and poor

One chain of department
and February,

although

in

This

Bank's

directors

agriculture- or

stores

in

the Twin

sales and discounts

January net sales tax receipts in

from a year earlier.

familiar

Minnesota were

report

that major

IX-2

malls were busy in the larger cities of South Dakota and in Duluth and Rochester, Minnesota.
After a slow start in January, motor vehicle sales picked up considerably in February.

The regional office of one large domestic manufacturer

reports that sales in late February were high enough to bring current year-todate sales up to levels of a year ago.
sold particularly well recently,
normal range.

Dealers in

Another manufacturer

leaving its

Sioux Falls,

says its trucks

inventory levels

South Dakota,

in

and Fargo,

the low-toNorth Dakota,

also report good auto sales.
The pace of home buying has been generally at or above that of a year
ago.

Through February, Twin Cities home sales were up 14 percent over a year

earlier.

Both listings and housing permits were up there, too.

According to

scattered reports, housing activity was fairly good in Rochester, Minnesota,
and Fargo, North Dakota.

But home sales in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, were

lower this January than last.
Tourist expenditures at ski resorts in northwestern Wisconsin and the
Upper

Peninsula

February.

of Michigan were

harmed somewhat

by warm weather

They are expected to pick up soon, though.

falls early in March.

late in

A lot of snow usually

And a new hotel was just finished in Escanaba, Michi-

gan.

Agriculture
Little
tor.

improvement

been

seen in the troubled agriculture

sec-

The Minnesota farm price index declined another 2 percent in February.

Crop prices

that month were

Dairy farmers

worried

to

15 percent below their levels a year earlier.

about the

federal diversion program.
profit

has

ramifications

of the March

31

end of the

Cattle prices weren't high enough to bring much

livestock operations

in

Montana.

But

the Minnesota

legislature

IX-3

recently passed a bill providing $25 million to subsidize interest payments on
additional loans to heavily indebted farmers.

And the Standard Oil Company of

Indiana's plan to substitute ethanol for lead in regular gas should somewhat
increase the demand and price for corn.

Resource-Related Industries
Performance
year.

among

resource-related

industries

has

been mixed this

After a big year for oil drilling and production in North Dakota's

Williston

Basin,

weather.

While the district's timber industry has continued to be hurt by

overproduction,

drilling

slumped

during

February,

partly because of poor

federal pricing, and Canadian imports, the damage has been

less in Montana than in other parts of the Northwest.
pulp and paper has
creased.

Demand for district

remained strong, but foreign import substitution has in-

Waferboard production

capacity has

increased, too.

Iron mining

operations have continued to call back some of the many workers laid off last
November.

Finance
Deposits

at

Ninth

District

banks

didn't

change much between

mid-

January and mid-February; decreases at country banks offset increases at the
four largest banks.
grew

Commercial and industrial loans at the large banks also

early this year.

In January, their outstanding loan volume was

percent above volume a year ago.

15.8

-X1-

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY
Overview.

With the notable exception of agriculture, the Tenth District

economy continues to show modest improvement.

Retail sales have picked up

somewhat recently, accompanied by stable prices.
generally judged to be satisfactory.

Inventory levels are

Housing starts are slightly lower than

high year-ago levels but well above 1983 levels.

Mortgage rates have shown

little change recently and little change is expected in the months ahead.
Problems remain in the agricultural sector, with 5 percent or somewhat less of
farmers expected to be forced out of farming this spring.

Most lenders are

wary of the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) program to restructure farm
debt.

Loan demand at district banks is mixed, as is deposit behavior.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers report that sales picked up recently.

Sales have been strongest in the area of women's wear.
remained stable in the past three months.

Retail prices have

More than half of the reporting

retailers are satisfied with current inventories and expect inventories to
expand later this year if sales strengthen.

Prices are expected to remain

stable in the next six months, and sales are expected either to remain flat or
increase slightly above 1984 levels.
Automobile Dealers.

Automobile dealers report sales ranging from

slightly ahead to slightly behind year-ago levels.

Credit market conditions

remain relatively attractive, and financing is available both for floor
planning and new car sales.

The inventory situation is mixed, with some

dealers satisfied while others are expanding.

Despite recent weakness in some

areas, dealers are optimistic that 1985 sales will prove even better than
strong 1984 sales.
Purchasing Agents.

Purchasing agents report that input prices remained

fairly constant during the last three months.

Slight increases are expected

-X2-

in the remainder of the year.

Agents report no problems in obtaining

materials, and none are anticipated.

Inventories are reported to be at

satisfactory levels, with no bottlenecks.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Homebuilders report that housing starts

are slightly lower than the high year-ago level, although starts are well
above 1983 levels.

Sales of new homes are about the same as year-ago levels,

and new home prices have remained stable.

Savings and loans report that

mortgage loan demand is about the same as a year ago.

Mortgage rates have

remained fairly stable so far in 1985, and few changes are expected during the
rest of the year.

Savings inflows have also been similar to last year,

despite lower minimum deposit requirements on MMDA's and Super NOW's.
Agriculture.

Estimates of the proportion of farmers and ranchers who

will not receive credit from their usual bank source this spring vary widely
across the district.

Bankers in ranching areas report that practically all of

their customers continue creditworthy.

In grain-producing areas, most bankers

report that 5 to 10 percent of their customers will not receive bank credit
for spring operating expenses, though estimates are higher in some parts of
the district, and as low as 2 to 3 percent in other parts.
farmers will obtain credit from the FmHA or from suppliers.

Some of these
Many farmers will

leave farming this spring, with the proportion estimated at 5 percent or
somewhat less.
The land market continues very soft, with very little land changing
hands.

Parts of Kansas, Nebraska, and Colorado report that about 15 to 20

percent of the land in the area is for sale.

Parts of Wyoming and Colorado

report much higher proportions of land for sale, though the proportion is
affected by nonagricultural uses of the land.

In Missouri and parts of

Nebraska and New Mexico, very little land is actually listed for sale, though

-X3bankers indicate that this is probably due to a lack of buyers, not an
unwillingness to sell.
Most bankers continue to be wary of the FmHA program to restructure farm
debt because of bureaucratic procedures that slow loan guarantee approvals.
Moreover, many loans require a significant interest rate reduction to achieve
a break-even cash flow.

Many bankers appear reluctant to lower rates enough

to meet the requirements.

Participation in the program is heaviest in Kansas

and parts of Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Colorado.

Some bankers continue to

ignore the program completely.
Banking.
demand.

Respondents at Tenth District banks give mixed reports on loan

Roughly equal numbers of banks report increased, unchanged, and

decreased loan demand.

Consumer loans have shown the greatest tendency to

rise, while residential and agricultural loans have shown the greatest
tendency to fall.
banks.

Deposits also have displayed mixed behavior across district

Super NOW accounts, MMDA's, and IRA's have registered gains, while

demand deposits and passbook savings accounts have registered losses.

The

prime rate stands at 10.50 percent at a majority of the banks, down from 10.75
percent last month.
slightly.

Consumer lending rates have either not changed or fallen

No further declines are expected.

All institutions sampled either

have lowered or will soon lower the minimum deposit on MMDA's and Super NOW's
to the allowable $1,000.

Lowering the minimum deposit is viewed as necessary

to match competitors but has not generated any growth in deposits.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The performance of the Eleventh District economy is flat, but many
respondents expect faster growth in the near future.

In manufacturing,

stable overall sales mask the conflicting effects of declining demand by
the energy sector and modestly increasing demand for building materials.
Drilling activity is declining as expectations of falling prices persist.
Auto sales remain high, but retail sales overall continue to be sluggish.
Nonresidential building remains the dominant construction sector.
District manufacturing sales and output show little evidence of
overall change, with most respondents reporting that business conditions
have remained stable since the start of the year.

One reason cited for the

lack of significant growth was the unusually cold weather in many parts of
the District in January and early February.

Manufacturers generally expect

orders to increase in the second quarter, and are building inventories in
anticipation.

Manufacturers have also lately accumulated some inventories

involuntarily, as a result of unexpectedly slow sales.

The steep decline

in the drilling rig count is starting to affect manufacturers of extraction
equipment and materials.

Respondents report the beginning of a rebound in

residential construction and strong nonresidential construction is
increasing output in lumber and wood products.

Stone, clay, and glass

production is also being buoyed by vigorous nonresidential construction.
Reduced orders of electronics have forced the industry to pare production
and inventories.

Refining output is advancing slowly.

Foreign competition

continues to depress demand for District apparel manufacturers.
allied products manufacturers report little change in demand, but
respondents expect orders to increase in the second quarter.

Paper and

XI-3
for multifamily units continue to decline almost twice as fast as those for
single family structures.

Permit totals do not yet reflect the slight

resurgence in activity that respondents indicate.
The value of nonresidential construction contracts rebounded
sharply in the fourth quarter of 1984 after slow growth or declines during
the rest of last year.

The number of projects declined slightly in

December, but the number of square feet increased.

Lenders report modest

increases in construction loans, portending continued strong activity.
Deposit growth at the District's large banks continues to
increase, exceeding ten percent on a year-over-year basis for each of the
last three months.

Deposit growth rates at member banks have been even

larger, though not accelerating.

Borrowings by large banks have declined

slightly in recent months, slowing the rise in total liabilities.
growth at these banks is slowing.

Asset

The exception is the business loans

category which grew in January at a faster yearly rate than December.
Agricultural land values declined slightly during the fourth
quarter of 1984, when compared with the third quarter.

Over the entire

year, however, ranch land and nonirrigated cropland did modestly increase
in value.

Eighteen percent of bankers reported bankruptcies among their

farm and ranch customers during the previous six months.

These bankers

reported that 1.7 percent of their agricultural borrowers underwent
bankruptcy.

A similar number of banks reported 1.4 percent of their

customers were foreclosed during the last half of 1984.

These data are

little different from the results of the same survey taken a year ago.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Introduction
The economy of the Twelfth District appears to be continuing its
recent pattern of modest, but steady growth.

Employment gains were

registered in most states in the district, but growth in the labor force
caused a slight increase in measured unemployment rates.

The aerospace

industries continued to provide momentum to the economy, but there has been
a slowing of activity in semi-conductor manufacturing.

Consumer spending

generally remains strong, reflected in steady retail sales growth.
Construction activity is strong, but has failed to revive fully the
region's wood products industry.

Agriculture and mining are the two

weakest sectors in the economy of the Twelfth District.

With the exception

of deterioration in quality of agricultural loans, the financial sector
displayed no major signs of weakness.
Consumer Spending
Growth in retail sales has been strong throughout the district.

In

Idaho, for example, retail sales have grown 12 percent in the past six
months.

In Utah, the figure for the same period is nearly 20 percent.

Sales growth also has been strong in California, Oregon, and Washington.
Reports of automobile sales activity are mixed, with a 23 percent yearover-year growth in sales in Idaho, but a decline of 3 percent over last
year reported in Oregon, for example.

Car dealers are reported to be

building inventories, however, in anticipation of renewed post-holiday
sales activity.

The continued strength of consumer spending has buoyed

employment in the services and trade sector of the Twelfth District
economy.

XII-2

Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate sales activity generally has been strong.
Commercial construction is proceeding at a particularly fast pace in
southern California and Utah.

Although permits for new construction of

single family homes in Oregon are off 3 percent from a year ago, permits
for multi-family construction are up almost 500 percent.

Sales of existing

homes also have displayed strength in most parts of the district, up
33 percent in the last month in Portland, Oregon, for example.

However,

construction activity in the region has failed thus far, to revive the
forest products industry of the Pacific Northwest.

At least 8 mmore paper

plants are closing, for example, plants, representing the loss of about
8,000 jobs.

The strong dollar and the consequent strength of competition

from Canadian imports is a major reason for the continued weakness of the
industry.
Manufacturing and Mining
The manufacturing sector generally remains healthy throughout the
district.

Aerospace-related activities are an important source of

strength, particularly in southern California and the Pacific Northwest,
but also in Utah.

Indeed, overall employment in the District is growing,

although unemployment increased in most states in the District slightly
between December and January due to rapid growth in the size of the labor
force.

The picture in the electronics industry is somewhat mixed; major

new plants are under construction in Oregon, but Silicon Valley chip
manufacturers report slow sales and there have been minor layoffs of
production workers.
The mining industry continues to be depressed by low world prices for
metals and minerals.

The situation in the state of Nevada is reported to

XII-3

be the worst in 40 years.

In Alaska, the recent declines in world prices

have reduced state oil revenues by several hundred million dollars.

In

both Nevada and Alaska, however, activity in other sectors -- particularly
services and trade -- have helped to maintain the general health of their
economies.
Agriculture
The agricultural sector in the Twelfth District is in a seriously
depressed condition.

In the Pacific Northwest, the eastern wheat-growing

regions have been affected most seriously by the strength of the dollar and
the weakness of export markets.

In California, raisin, grape and cotton

crops have been most affected but the weakness is quite widespread.
Unemployment rates in the eight counties of California's central valley
range between 10 and 15 percent.

Agricultural land prices, home sales, and

automobile sales are all depressed, reflecting the generalized impact of
deteriorating net farm income on the rural economy.

In the central valley,

for example, automobile sales are 20 percent lower than a year ago.
California's farm exports in 1984 may be as much as 1 billion dollars lower
than the year before.

The value of farmland -- particularly that in

vineyards and other permanent plantings have ceased to grow and are either
flat or declining.
Financial Sector
Both commercial and consumer loan growth generally were healthy in
January in the Twelfth District, although slight increases in home mortgage
and consumer loans were reported.

In Utah, for example, installment loan

delinquency was 2.4 percent at a major bank compared with 2.3 percent in
December.

However, this was down from 2.7 percent a year ago.

Savings

inflows at thrift institutions also were healthy as was deposit growth at

XII-4

commercial banks.

The deteriorating condition in the district's

agricultural economy is reflected in a high rate of nonperformance of
agricultural loans at commercial banks.

In California, agricultural loans

represent only about 5 percent of total loans at commercial but the
proportion of nonperforming loans is reported to be nearly twice that of a
banking industry nationwide.

In addition, smaller banks in rural

California, Oregon, and Washington have much less diversified portfolios.

