SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

December 1987

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY..................

........................................ i

First District--Boston ............................................... I-1
Second District--New York..........................................

-1

Third District--Philadelphia.......................................

-1

Fourth District--Cleveland.. ......................................... IVFifth District--Richmond ............................................. V-1
Sixth District--Atlanta.....................

................... VI-1

Seventh District--Chicago............................

.......... . VII-1

Eighth District--St. Louis .....................................

VIII-1

Ninth District--Minneapolis ......................................
Tenth District--Kansas City .......................................

IX-1
X-1

Eleventh District--Dallas ........................................... XI-1
Twelfth District--San Francisco..................................XII-1

i
SUMMARY*
Most Districts report overall economic expansion with particular
strength noted in Boston, Chicago, Minneapolis, and San Francisco.

Despite

general optimism among surveyed firms, there was also widespread evidence
of increased uncertainty about future growth in demand.

Furthermore, while

the majority of survey respondents said that the stock market crash had not
materially altered their capital spending plans, reports of at least some
deferrals of plans appeared in a number of District discussions.

The

manufacturing sector has been a prime source of recent expansion in most
Districts.

Retail sales are either flat or only slowly growing in most

Districts and auto sales are generally sluggish.
mixed.

Construction activity is

Mining is strong across a broad spectrum of extractive industries,

but reports of the possibility of future softening in oil and gas drilling
expansion were common.

The agriculture sector is in a generally favorable

condition among the Districts.

In the financial markets, some slowing in

the growth of loan demand was often cited.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity continues to expand.

No District reported

that a majority of surveyed firms had revised capital spending plans as a
result of the stock market crash.

Survey respondents generally had

positive expectations for the near future.

There was clear evidence,

however, that the stock market crash had led to increased uncertainty and
to a declining degree of optimism about future demands for manufacturers'

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and based on information
gathered before November 20, 1987.

ii
products.

St. Louis, San Francisco, and Chicago all cited the declining

value of the dollar as a significant factor in generating recent
manufacturing growth.

Cleveland and Dallas noted increased demands for

steel and St. Louis and Dallas mentioned rising demands for electrical
equipment and for apparel.

Despite the generally positive reports for

manufacturing, the Chicago and St. Louis banks both referred to layoffs at
auto assembly plants in their Districts and Atlanta reported that appliance
and furniture producers are concerned that the stock market plunge may lead
to reduced sales.
Consumer Spending
Retail respondents in most Districts report flat or at best
slowly growing retail sales.

The stock market decline appears to have had

little effect, even in areas where the drop was cited as a reason for
slower sales growth.
items.

The major effect seems to have been on big-ticket

New York, Cleveland, Richmond and San Francisco each reported

weakness in such items, while Kansas City noted markedly lower sales among
stores targeting upper income groups.

Those Districts reporting on them

cited reduced auto sales in October and November, although Philadelphia
respondents said sales were above a year earlier.

The withdrawal of

manufacturers sales incentives was cited as the reason for auto sales
declines more often than the stock market drop.
Construction
Construction activity varies considerably among Districts.
Chicago reported overall growth, while weakening was noted in the Dallas,
Atlanta, and St. Louis Districts and was expected in the Boston District.

iii
The drop in the stock market appears to have had a depressing effect on New
York, Richmond, and Chicago homebuying.

New York District office space

demands remain high despite softening in the downtown Manhattan market,
while high vacancy rates linked to past overbuilding have induced Atlanta
District office and industrial developers to put projects on hold.
Mining
The strength in the mining sector continues across a broad
spectrum of minerals, but several Districts report recent small declines in
oil and gas drilling and the possibility of future sluggishness in energy
extraction.

Atlanta cites recovery in the coal industry.

Minneapolis

notes that the boom in gold mining continues and copper production is
expanding.

Dallas, Kansas City and Minneapolis all note that the recovery

in drilling is slowing and report concerns that future expansion in
drilling may cease.
Agriculture and Forestry
Most reporting Districts note improved prospects for their farm
sectors, but several noted that recent dry weather has caused problems.
Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis and Dallas all report an improved farm
income outlook.

Richmond and Chicago cite widespread increases in farmland

prices, while farmland prices have bottomed out in the Minneapolis District
and price movements are mixed in the St. Louis District.

Agricultural

credit conditions are improved in most reporting Districts.

Some Districts

cited problems with soybean yields, in part, because of dry weather
conditions.

Cotton production and livestock prices are generally cited as

favorable in Districts that discussed them.

In forestry, demand for wood

iv
used in paper and pulp is generally up.

Lumber demand and prices are down,

in part, because of seasonal factors.
Financial Services
Growth in overall loan demand appears to have slowed in a number
of Districts.

Consumer loans are either growing more slowly or have been

unchanged at most reporting District banks, although New York cited strong
demand since the stock market crash.
widely noted.

Real estate loan expansion was fairly

Philadelphia and Kansas City reported essentially flat

business loan activity, while Atlanta cited stable to increased loan demand
and Cleveland noted recent expansions.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Most First District manufacturing contacts enjoyed a strong third
quarter.

A majority report no impact from the decline of the stock market,

but some manufacturers have had customers delay orders.
results have also been mixed.

Recent retail

Some retail chains, notably discounters,

have seen no fallout from the stock market; these chains continue to
register substantial sales increases compared to a year earlier.
report a noticeable weakness in November to date.

Others

There is a

near-unanimous expectation among manufacturers and retailers, even those
continuing to do well, that customers will be more conservative in coming
months as a result of the recent volatility in financial markets.
Retail
Among the merchants contacted, retail sales in October and November
ranged from 41 percent ahead of year-earlier figures to 7 percent below.
Those experiencing a slowdown could find no change in local conditions to
explain it - the slowing was fairly general across product lines and
geographic areas.

They attribute the weakness to national economic

conditions in general and to the stock market decline and rising import
prices in particular.

Only toys and children's apparel have been doing

better than expected.
Inventories are said to be generally satisfactory.

Orders are

being carefully scrutinized to assure "sufficient but not excessive"
Christmas merchandise.

The perception is widespread that suppliers have

I-2

additional merchandise available to fill late orders if business picks up
more than expected.
Plans for the future are characterized as "conservative,"
responding to the uncertainty generated by the stock market's volatility.
However, no drastic changes are projected.

New England merchants remain

moderately optimistic about the Christmas season and 1988.

Fourth-quarter

sales are expected to exceed last year's, in some cases by a modest amount,
in others by as much as 20 percent.

A similar growth range is forecast for

1988.
Manufacturing
Third-quarter sales for the fabricated metals and machinery firms
contacted were 3 to 25 percent above year-earlier levels, while earnings
were up 14 to 27 percent.
1986.

New orders also increased by double digits from

Among the strongest sources of demand were the food, paper, energy,

consumer hardware, and defense industries.

Sales were softer for products

destined for the oil and gas, auto and some parts of the construction
industries.
With respect to the period since the third quarter, one-third of
respondents report some fallout from the stock market decline.

They

generally cite delays rather than cancellations of orders and believe that
customers are drawing down inventories in order to avoid commitments.
Among the majority of firms that have seen no effects, two capital goods
makers caution that their orders tend to lag other economic changes.
First District manufacturers also report little evidence of
resurgent inflation.

A few respondents mentioned increases in copper,

paper, chemicals and trucking costs; however, most said their own prices

were steady or falling while a minority reported increases of up to 3
percent.
Employment levels are generally holding steady or are declining
through attrition.

Firms remain very reluctant to hire, although one large

firm plans a major hiring program.
Capital spending is at or, in several cases, well above last year's
levels.

While most respondents see no reason to change these spending

plans, two or three are holding back on discretionary purchases and are
considering ways to maintain their flexibility - by leasing rather than
buying, for instance.
A majority of First District manufacturers are looking forward to a
good 1988 with no adverse impact from the stock market.

However, one firm

that expects excellent sales growth in 1988 has reduced its forecast for
its industry's growth by about one-third.

Moreover, a significant minority

of First District firms expect a flat fourth quarter and very slow growth
in the first half of next year.

Even among those expressing confidence,

several contacts said they will be watching consumer spending very closely
and one tool maker expressed concern about the impact of stock buybacks on
its customers' capital spending plans.
Outlook
The New England Economic Project (NEEP), a non-profit organization
comprising businesses, government agencies, and educational institutions,
held its semi-annual outlook conference in mid-November.

The NEEP

forecasts for the six New England states, taken together, call for slower
employment growth in 1988 than in 1987, primarily attributable to slower

I-4

growth in the national economy in the aftermath of the stock market
decline.

In keeping with the national outlook, New England's rate of

growth will pick up in 1989.

Unemployment in the region will remain at

roughly 3-1/2 percent throughout the forecast period.

Growth is expected

to be more balanced than in recent years, with manufacturing employment
increasing modestly in both 1988 and 1989 while rates of growth slow
somewhat in nonmanufacturing, especially construction.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District varied among sectors in recent
weeks.

In most areas general business conditions improved somewhat further, and

office leasing was strong.

However, conditions in residential construction and

retail sales were mixed, and in the wake of the stock market crash, concern has
developed regarding the outlook for the New York City economy.

Small and mid-sized

banks report that demand for consumer installment loans remains strong.
Consumer Spending
The pattern of retail sales in the District has been mixed in recent
weeks.

While, in general, respondents reported that sales for the month of October

were on or above plan, their experience following the mid-month stock market crash
varied.

Some retailers had an initial falloff in sales--particularly for big

ticket items--which was followed by a rebound, while others noted continued
weakening since the crash.
sales.

Still others have thus far seen no effect on their

Reflecting this variation in sales, descriptions of inventory levels ranged

from "on target" to "4 to 5 percent above plan".
Over-the-year sales gains in October generally ranged from 9 to 13 percent
although one retailer reported a much smaller increase at his suburban stores in
the District.

Soft goods such as apparel and accessories, shoes, and jewelry were

mentioned as selling well, but some higher priced items like furniture, furs, and
rugs moved slowly.

II-2

District retailers are not overly optimistic concerning the upcoming
holiday season.

Several respondents have adopted a wait-and-see attitude in

response to what one termed "the new conservatism among consumers".
Business Activity
Some further improvement occurred in much of the District's economy since
the last meeting.

However, in the wake of the stock market crash, considerable

concern has developed regarding the outlook for the New York City economy where
several investment firms have already announced staff reductions.

The Rochester

survey of purchasing managers reported an increase in the number of firms with
improved general business conditions, and no respondents reported a worsening.
Also, nearly 90 percent of the survey respondents stated that their company's plans
for the future have not been affected by recent events in the stock market.

Those

reporting that the stock decline has affected plans indicated that it did so
because of the effect on their company's ability to raise capital and not because
of any change in business conditions.

Meanwhile, 85 percent of those surveyed in

Buffalo reported better or stable conditions.
Some planned projects, most of them announced since the stock market
crash, point to a positive impact on the District's economy.

After several months'

search, two large banks have chosen Buffalo as the location for their new
facilities.

Goldome announced that it will buy the former Bethlehem Steel regional

headquarters building for use as its new telecommunications center, while Marine
Midland will construct a $40 million back-office facility there.

In addition,

three manufacturing firms also announced plans to expand in the Buffalo area.
Groundbreaking ceremonies recently took place in the Syracuse area for the regional
distribution center of a package handling company which will provide several
hundred new jobs upon completion.

Meanwhile, in northern New Jersey, Hudson

II-3

County's first shopping mall opened at Newport City, the multibillion dollar
residential and commercial development under construction there.

Some 2500 jobs

are expected to be created at the mall with first preference going to county
residents.
Construction and Real Estate
Conditions in the District's residential construction industry remain
mixed.

In much of the New York metropolitan area the pace is described as slow

with few people out looking for new homes and a large inventory of existing homes
available.

Moreover, in some of these areas where the high prices of homes had

already been cited as a major deterrent, the drop in the stock market has
reportedly had a further depressing effect on potential homebuyers.

Away from the

New York metropolitan area, however, homebuilders are still quite active although
some slackening is anticipated as the holiday season and winter weather approach.
Office leasing activity continued strong in much of the District though
some slowing occurred in the downtown Manhattan market.

Analysts attributed this

slowdown to employment cutbacks at some brokerage firms and plans announced by
others to review their staffing needs.

Concern over the additional impact that the

stock market crash will have on the securities and financial services industries
added to the cautious tone in the downtown market.

Expansion in these industries

has been a major source of demand for new office space in recent years.
Financial Developments
Senior officers at small and mid-sized banks in the Second District stated
that demand for consumer installment loans has remained strong since the stock
market crash, and applications for mortgages and home equity loans have not fallen
appreciably.

One banker noted that the real estate market in her area has weakened

since the spring, but she did not see a pronounced reduction in mortgage activity

II-4

following the crash.

Most officers also reported no unusual deposit inflows as a

result of the steep decline in the stock market, contrary to the widespread
expectation that nervous investors would rush to deposit their funds in federally
insured accounts.

Most banks in the survey have cut their interest rates in recent

weeks, though some bankers voiced doubts that further declines would occur.
Because of the steady demand for consumer loans, bankers generally anticipated that
the crash would cause only a mild reduction, if any, in their lending activity
through the first half of 1988.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy was showing signs of moderate expansion in the
first half of November.

Manufacturing activity was up for the eighth month in a

row and factory employment increased for the fifth consecutive month.

Retailers

reported sales running above last year's pace in October and the first two weeks
of November, although the year-to-year increase fell below their expectations.
Auto dealers say sales have slipped in the last two months, following a good
third quarter.

Bankers note slowing growth in business and consumer lending,

but say real estate lending, primarily for residential construction, is still
strong.
While contacts in the region's business community express concern about the
effects of the October stock market drop, they have not altered their
expectations significantly.
than it was before the drop.

Manufacturers say the outlook is more uncertain
Nevertheless, they anticipate continued growth,

although possibly at a slower pace than in recent months.

Area retailers

generally agree with the industry consensus that sales in this year's last
fiscal quarter will be around 4 percent above the same period last year.

They

say that if a broad slowdown does develop, they would not expect to see it
dampen sales until the spring of 1988.

Auto dealers expect to maintain their

current rate of sales through the end of the year.

Bankers note that growth in

business and personal lending has been slowing for several months, and they
expect this trend to continue; they do not foresee a sharp drop in loan demand
in these categories resulting from recent volatility in the financial markets.
Lending officers say demand for real estate loans will remain strong, but that
lending for development is growing riskier.

III-2

MANUFACTURING
The region's industrial sector posted its eighth consecutive month of
expansion in November, according to the Business Outlook Survey.

Local

manufacturers' overall assessment of current economic conditions indicates
continuing moderate growth.

Measures of new orders, shipments, and employment

moved up in November, while order backlogs were unchanged.

Manufacturers of

nondurable goods are making gains, on balance, while producers of durable goods
are operating at a steady pace.
Industrial prices, both paid and received, are stable for a majority of
respondents.

Some upward pressure is apparent, however, as it has been for the

past few months: from October to November, input costs rose at about 40 percent
of the plants polled, and prices for goods sold were up at about 20 percent of
the plants.
The stock market's sharp decline in October appears to have prompted some
concern for the future among survey respondents.

While positive views still

edge out pessimistic expectations in the November survey, the overall level of
optimism is off from recent months.

Also, several survey participants say the

uneasiness of the financial markets in late October has increased the
uncertainty of their own short-term forecasts of business conditions.
Nevertheless, on balance, managers at area firms are planning to go ahead with
capital spending plans; 61 percent of the companies polled in November plan to
continue current levels of capital spending, and 25 percent plan higher outlays
for plant and equipment over the next six months.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in mid-November described sales as
running somewhat below plan, but "comfortably above" the rate at this time last
year.

Stores in the Third District generally have not resorted to unplanned

III-3

discounting, and results of scheduled promotions have met or exceeded

expectations.

Most product lines are selling satisfactorily, but some weakness

has developed in womens' apparel.

Merchants say this may be due to rising

prices for imported clothing.

Store executives are cautious in their forecasts of Christmas sales,
although regional department stores that have mailed Christmas catalogs to
customers say the response so far has been good.

Retailers say the industry

consensus is that sales will be up about 4 percent from last year, in dollar
terms, and they have built up stocks for the holiday season consistent with this
estimate.

Thus, inventory buildup was moderate even before the stock market

decline in October prompted concern about consumer spending.
Auto dealers say their third quarter sales were above those of the same
period a year ago, but that sales declined during September and have been
running at a slower rate since then.

They say manufacturers' incentives for

over-stocked models will probably be introduced by all domestic companies by the
end of the year.
FINANCE
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks in October was
Real estate lending has been on a strong

7 percent higher than in October 1986.

upswing since the year began, but growth in other loan categories has been
slackening since June.
continuing.

Bankers contacted in mid-November said these trends are

Several described commercial and industrial loan volume as "flat"

over the past two months.

Lending officers said growth in consumer credit has

been slowing regularly for months; none observed sharp or unanticipated declines
following the October stock market drop.
Commercial bankers expect business and consumer lending to grow slowly in
the months ahead.

Lending officers say there is no indication of resurgent

III-4

growth in business loan demand despite signs of a pickup in manufacturing
activity, and most believe consumer credit card lending will continue to grow
slowly while other personal loan categories will remain virtually flat.

The

October turmoil in financial markets is not expected to put any additional drag
on lending.
Bankers expect real estate lending to remain strong.
residential real estate markets are still healthy.

They say the region's

However, financing needs of

developers--for land acquisition, site development, and model home construction
--are rising as demand for more expensive homes increases.

As a result,

builders' borrowing needs are growing in relation to their capital.

Bankers say

up-front lending to developers is therefore becoming more risky, and that some
banks may begin to limit their exposure in construction lending.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
Business

activity in the Fourth District appears

unaffected by the
strong

as

increase

recent stock market decline.

production,
and

remain

low.

Capital

unaffected by the stock market decline.

remains

Manufacturing

employment, new orders, and

inventories

to be relatively

prices continue

spending

plans

to

appear

The effect of the stock market

turmoil on retail sales is uncertain at this point, but many retailers
expressed concern about its impact on Christmas sales.

Automobile sales

are down, but appliance and electronic sales are reported to be

about

normal for this time of year.

Retail Trade
The stock market
retailers.

Several

experiencing

slower

turmoil

automobile

local
sales

has generated mixed responses

in

recent

retailers have noticed little change.

dealers

weeks.

said

that

Appliance and

from
they

electronics

luxury items,

which they attribute to a perceived cautiousness among consumers.
the stock market decline, one retailer revised downward his
sales

are

However, some respondents expect a

slow Christmas season, particularly in the big-ticket and

Christmas

local

from 7 percent to 3.2 percent.

After

estimate of

Markdowns of many items

are already planned and some have been implemented prior to the Christmas
shopping season.

IV-2
Labor Markets
unemployment

Ohio/s

5.8

to

September

in

percent

up

edged

A

October.

percent

in

similar increase occurred

for

slightly

from

5.5

In both cases, this modest increase was due primarily to a

Pennsylvania.
stronger

growth

rates

the

in

rate

in

labor

the

Lexington

force

than

continued

area

in

to

employment.

fall as

Unemployment
grew

in

range

of

resurgence

in

employment

textiles and apparel.
In Ohio, employment
including

sectors,

recent months.

continued to increase
which

manufacturing

a

across

broad

has experienced a

Over the year, total employment in Ohio rose 2.5 percent,
Despite the overall

while the number of unemployed decreased 34 percent.

improvement in employment, the number of manufacturing workers fell 6,000

over

the

year

to

date.

Losses

were

concentrated

durable-goods

lumber and wood products,

Modest gains in primary metals,

industries.

in

food and kindred products, and chemicals were not sufficient to overcome
losses

in

fabricated
hand,

transportation
metal

increased

products.
3.5

equipment,

nonelectrical

Nonmanufacturing

percent,

with

the

machinery,

employment,

largest

on

the

percentage

and
other

gains

in

construction and services.
Earnings of production workers
increase

in manufacturing

industries

in

Ohio

continued

to

overtime.

Their average workweek of 42.5 hours in September was .2 hours

through

September,

primarily

due

to

increased

longer than the previous month.

Manufacturing
Purchasing managers
prices,

and employment.

reported
While

increases

in

production,

remaining optimistic

about

new

orders,

the continued

IV-3
expansion

in

activity,

manufacturing

purchasers

many

complained

escalating prices and very poor vendor delivery performance.

of

Inventories

of commodities and finished products declined from already low levels and
many

items,

including

steel and

aluminium

increased

sharply

remained in short

products,

supply.
Steel

production

earlier declines.
for

example,

October,

rebounding

from

Production in the Youngstown and Pittsburgh districts,

increased

Some respondents

in

by

commented

roughly
that

25 percent from the previous

this

production

increase

is

month.

taxing an

already high capacity utilization rate.
The recent stock market decline appears to have had little effect of
capital spending plans of area businesses.
and

other

their
for

industrial
are

customers

reported

planning to

investment

large-scale

furnace

tools

that

A supplier of drills, valves
they

see no

indication

cutback or reduce expenditures.

projects,

in the Youngstown area and

such as

the

relining

of

that
Plans

a blast

of a mill in western

the restarting

Pennsylvania, appear to be moving along as scheduled.

Housing
House sales in the area do not appear to be adversely affected by the
recent stock market decline.
higher

priced

homes

have

Real estate

improved

since

agents
October.

report
Some

that

sales

agents

of

expect

sales to steadily improve as mortgage rates decline in response to lower
stock prices.

IV-4
Banking
District loan demand has been moderate.
large banks

rose at an annual

Total

loans outstanding at

rate of 4 percent during October.

lending was down from the pace experienced in August and September,

This
but

up compared to loan growth registered during the same period a year ago.
Real estate
loan growth.
gains

in

and business

lending accounted for nearly all of October's

Consumer installment lending has been relatively flat with

home-equity

financing

offsetting

traditional consumer installment credit.

a

slight

contraction

in

V-1

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
economic

District

activity

rose in some sectors in November and stayed

about even in most others, while optimism about the economic future
softened.

Manufacturers and department stores reported increases in activity.

Other retail activity and residential construction were also
generally firm.
while

generally

reported

to

be

City bankers reported loan demand to be even with last month,

agricultural

were

bankers

optimistic

about

and

financial

income

prospects for farmers.
The

decline

in the stock market has apparently had a significant effect
Our business

on business expectations, but not on plans for capital spending.
and

financial contacts are now less optimistic than they were a few weeks ago

about prospects for economic growth.

Also, a

percentage

higher

now

expect

Only a small proportion, however, indicated changes in

inflation to increase.

their capital spending intentions.

Consumer Spending
Most department stores reported that their sales were higher in
November

than

they

were

in

late

mid-

October and at this time a year ago.

In

general, store managers expect a good Christmas season.
The combined responses of all kinds of
that

sales

have

been

about

flat

retail

establishments

overall in recent weeks.

indicated

Several retail

executives reported declines in the sale of big ticket items, and nearly
of the respondents reported increases in their inventories.
was steady.

half

Retail employment

V-2

Most retailers said the stock market decline had had no effect
business,

although

on

their

a few thought it had reduced consumer demand somewhat.

A

small number of retail respondents said their firms had decided to postpone
some planned fixed investment.

Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity expanded in early November, although at a
slower

pace

than earlier this year.

Forty percent of the respondents to our

regular mail survey reported increased shipments in November, as compared with
52

percent who reported increases in September.

The responses also indicated

that new orders and employment grew less rapidly, the workweek increased less,
and

the

backlog

of

orders

was unchanged.

Manufacturers reported somewhat

higher inventories of materials and finished goods.
The prices of raw materials and
according

to

District

finished

manufacturers.

percentage of producers reported experiencing
Perhaps

because

manufacturers

of

have

these
raised

shortages
their

A

products
small

continued

but

shortages

to

rise,

higher-than-normal
of

some

materials.

and rising input prices, two-fifths of

estimates

of

inflation

in

1988.

Only

one-sixth have lowered their estimates.
The fraction of manufacturers expecting growth in their firms in the next
six months declined from our previous survey.
their

About

one-third

now

believe

shipments and new orders will rise, compared with about one-half in the

previous survey.

Most manufacturers indicated that they plan to reduce

their

inventories of both materials and finished goods in the next six months.
District

manufacturers

participating

in our survey also appear to have

become less optimistic in their outlook for the national economy.
percent

Thirty-four

of the respondents now believe the level of general business activity

V-3

in the nation will decline in the next six months while 24 percent
to

increase.

expect

it

In our previous survey of manufacturers, these percentages were

18 and 43, respectively.
Capital Spending.
current

and

expected

Our survey regularly asks

manufacturers

capital

month

spending.

This

about

their

we included a second

question regarding how the stock market crash had affected their plans.
The distribution of responses to the regular questions showed
from the two previous surveys.

no

change

About one-fifth of the manufacturers indicated

that they had increased their current capital spending from a month
about three-fourths reported no change.

ago,

and

Looking ahead six months, about three

of ten producers expect to increase spending, while about two in ten expect to
reduce

it.

It bears repeating that these numbers are virtually identical to

those from the previous survey, conducted in late September.
Regarding the second question on

the

impact

of

the

market

crash

on

spending plans, 80 percent of the respondents indicated that the crash had not
affected their plans.

However, six percent--all of them producers of durable

goods--reported that they had decided to scale back their plans.

Residential Construction
A survey of builders and realtors in
firm

demand

for

single-family

homes

the
over

District

indicated

the last few weeks.

generally
Some firms

reported that the October stock market decline decreased customer traffic
a week or two, but others saw no noticeable effect.

for

Most respondents agreed

that recent declines in mortgage rates have helped stimulate their business.

Agriculture
A mail survey of District agricultural banks indicated increased optimism
about the financial and income prospects

for

agriculture.

Farmland

prices

were

reported

to be higher than in the previous quarter, and all respondents

expect land prices to be stable or to move higher in the
Respondents

next

said that loan repayment rates had increased, and over two-thirds

of the agricultural banks indicated that they were actively seeking
loans.

months.

three

new

farm

Several banks attributed the improved income prospects for farmers to

farm price support programs.

Financial
A

survey

of

District financial institutions indicated that the demands

for commercial, consumer, and home equity loans have not changed in
month

from

previous

levels.

Opinions

about

the

last

the outlook for the next six

months were mixed, with more than half of the bankers expecting increased loan
activity.
Looking

ahead

to

economic conditions six months from now, most bankers

are optimistic that the trade deficit will be

lower.

However,

they

expect

slower economic growth, higher inflation, and a higher unemployment rate.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
The Southeast's economy continues to show a mixed performance. Auto sales and
residential construction have slowed but tourism, financial services, and most other
industries have improved or remained stable.
October but have since rebounded.

Retail sales declined briefly in late

For the most part, capital spending plans have not

been altered recently. The prevalent attitude seems to be one of cautious optimism. In
this report we have concentrated on developments since the stock market crash in midOctober.
Employment and Industry.
industries are mixed.
year.

Reports on the market's effects on southeastern

Many firms indicate no impact is expected before early next

There have been a few reports of expansion plans put on hold and initial stock

offerings for some companies have been postponed but not cancelled.

However, most

manufacturers are optimistic and are proceeding with expansion projects.
The region's appliance and furniture producers are concerned that the stock
market plunge may result in more conservative spending patterns.
carpet

industry

are

also

uneasy about

possible

consumer belt

Spokesmen for the
tightening

and a

construction slowdown.
Textile companies are leaner and more competitive than in the past as exports
have bolstered the industry.

The lower value of the dollar is also stimulating domestic

sales by making imports more expensive.

There have been no signs of slowing in the

paper industry. If lower domestic new car sales and output persist, district tire and auto
part producers expect increased replacement goods demand to make up for some of the
loss of original equipment business.
Consumer Spending. The plunge in stock prices has elicited mixed reactions from
retailers.

Sales across most product lines, particularly durables, decreased during the

week of the crash but subsequently rebounded. There is some indication that the impact
on discount stores was less severe than on full service department stores. Sales ended

VI-2
the month flat or slightly above last October, and early indications for November are
moderately favorable.
Expectations for the holiday season were not adjusted significantly after the
market's fall since retailers throughout the District had already been expecting only
slight increases over last year's sales.

Promotional activity will be increased compared

to last year, but most retailers report they are not at this point giving price discounts.
They also have not altered their hiring plans for the holiday season.
Auto sales in October and early November slowed according to dealers but they
believe the behavior had more to do with the removal of factory incentives than the
plunge in stock prices.

Despite concern over weakened consumer confidence, dealers'

plans remain largely unchanged.
Construction.

Most

contacts

reported

downturns

in

overall

residential

construction which they attribute to seasonal factors as well as economic uncertainty.
Birmingham sources noted a small uptick in sales of existing homes in late October, but
no change occurred in Mobile. Florida contacts report mixed trends in the state's housing
markets.

Mississippi and Tennessee sources indicate general slowing in sales activity in

larger cities.

Multi-family markets have been gloomy throughout the year in the Sixth

District, and there is an inventory overhang.
Metropolitan office vacancy rates during 1987's third quarter remained steady
but high ranging from 18 percent to almost 30 percent.

Only Jacksonville showed

significant improvement in absorption, as vacancy rates decreased by more than eleven
percent since last quarter.

Office and industrial developers in the region report a

number of projects are on hold, reflecting earlier overbuilding.

Meanwhile retail

construction has sustained its strength throughout the region as mall construction
flourishes.
Financial Services.
recent weeks.

Banks and thrift institutions report mixed experiences in

While small net increases in deposits have occurred, loan growth has

VI-3
slowed at large commercial banks. Some banks in Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee note
a drop off in loan volume while most Florida, Mississippi, and Louisiana banks report no
changes.

The rate of growth in consumer loans slipped in October while business and real

estate loans have remained stable or increased.
Tourism.

District travel agents report no appreciable changes in advance

bookings and cancellations in recent weeks. The dollar's decline, however, has spurred a
shift away from foreign vacations.

Officials expect slight increases in tourism activity

throughout the District this winter spurred mainly by convention business.
Mining and Agriculture.

Estimated yields of late-harvested crops such as

soybeans are lower as a result of dry weather. Damaged pastures are causing farmers to
purchase feed for their animals.
Spokesmen in the pulpwood industry report a thriving industry.
indication of slight capacity expansion but caution prevails.

There is some

The lumber industry is

experiencing a seasonal softening in markets and slight price declines.
District crude oil production fell in October to a level almost 10 percent lower
than the peak in early 1986.

Production capacity has declined with the cutbacks in

exploration since the early 1980s and with the closing of numerous inefficient stripper
type wells. On the other hand, drilling activity increased, reaching its highest point since
March of 1986.
District coal production rose modestly in October making the third consecutive
month of higher output, supplying evidence of a beginning recovery in the coal industry.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary. Business activity continues to expand in the District with few signs of
significant effects on aggregate activity from the stock market crash. Employment has been
trending upward. Apart from autos, industrial activity generally is rising. Nonauto consumer
spending appears to be holding up well, overall, though reports are mixed. Capital spending is
expanding in a number of industries. Sales of basic industrial supplies have strengthened.
Machine tool orders have picked up recently. Lead times have lengthened considerably, and
prices of industrial materials and intermediate products continued to press upward after the
stock market crash. Building contracts in District states have risen this year, in contrast
with a decline in the nation. District farmland values rose for the third consecutive quarter
in the July-September period.
Effects of the Stock Price Drop. Reports from District contacts indicate that effects of
the stock price drop, so far, are limited. Some retailers saw a slowdown in sales beginning
October 19, but only for a couple of days. A few real estate transactions were cancelled
shortly after October 19, and inquiries about selling homes rose from some worried participants
in Chicago's financial exchanges (though few appear to have listed their homes as a result).
The possibility was noted by our sources that sizable cuts in consumer or capital spending
could still take place, leading to inventory adjustments and a more general slowing of
activity, but they see no evidence that this is occurring. A contact at a large retailer, who
has seen no sustained adverse effects on the firm's sales, suggests that, contrary to the
recent trend to lower forecasts, projections for activity should be raised in view of the fall
in interest rates and the dollar since October 19, and ample liquidity.
Purchasing Managers. Chicago-area purchasing managers reported that orders, backlogs,
and production continued strong in October. Vendor delivery times lengthened, and price
increases were widespread. Milwaukee purchasing managers indicated that lead times have
lengthened considerably, resulting in a slower rate of rise in production and drawdowns of

VII-2

inventories of some materials. Orders and backlogs continue to increase. The lower dollar has
sharply boosted exports. Buyers are concerned about the threat of higher inflation at the
finished goods level from continued increases in prices of basic industrial inputs "across the
board." Firms are still cautious about capital spending commitments.
Capital Spending. One source describes metals producers as on a "capital spending spree"
for process improvement. Their more efficient plants are operating at or near capacity. Glass
and paper makers are also investing in new equipment, and some cement makers are building new
plants. Japanese motor vehicle and parts manufacturers are investing in numerous plants in the
U.S., and additional spending is thought likely due to the dollar's further fall over the past
month. There are no signs that the fall in stock prices is leading to delays or cutbacks in
capital spending projects already underway.
Construction and Real Estate. Residential real estate sales are slow, and few loan
applications are "in the pipeline." Rates quoted in the Chicago area for 30-year fixed-rate
home mortgage loans have fallen from around 12 percent a month ago to 10.5 percent, with a few
lenders at 10.25 percent. Loan applications are typically low at this time of year, but may
also be held down in part by hopes that rates will fall further or by households' responses to
the drop in stock prices. In contrast, a commercial mortgage banker reports that applications
increased following the recent drop in mortgage interest rates; lower rates are viewed as a
window of opportunity for refinancings and new projects. Residential construction contracts
(in square feet of floor space) in the first nine months of 1987 were up 8 percent from last
year in District states, compared to down 8 percent in the nation. Year-to-date mobile home
production in District states (mainly Indiana) was 2 percent above last year, in contrast with
5 percent lower for the U.S. Contracts for nonresidential buildings were 14 percent higher in
the District and flat in the U.S.

A large Chicago-area supplier of ready-mix concrete expects

shipments in 1988 to be at a good level but less than this year, mainly reflecting cuts in
office buildings and other commercial structures.

Numerous projects are in the planning

VII-3

stage. Public works and highway construction will be strong in 1988.
Motor Vehicles. Slow car sales are leading to further production cuts. Three Michigan
assembly plants will be shutdown for 1-3 weeks in January with two of these plants then
reopening at reduced line speeds. In part, the auto production cuts reflect the shift in
consumer preferences toward small trucks, including vans, and the continued strength of
imported cars--both truck and imported car sales in October were highest ever for the month.
Sources in Michigan remain concerned that announced auto production plans are too optimistic
and that further cuts will be needed, adversely affecting suppliers and communities in that
area.
Other Manufacturing. A diversified maker of consumer and industrial products reported
that sales remained strong in October, with no weakening in any of its lines. Steel production
at Chicago and Detroit area mills has continued to rise in recent weeks. Demand is relatively
strong for gypsum board and cement in District states. Gypsum board pricing may have
stabilized after a drop earlier this year.
Consumer Spending. Recent cool weather has boosted sales of apparel. In the view of one
retailer, the outlook is favorable for Christmas. Inventories of nonauto consumer durables and
many nondurables are low and unlikely to pose problems for merchants. However, sharp increases
in prices on imported women's apparel have led to cuts in consumer spending and extra
promotional efforts by retailers to sell excess inventories.
Agriculture. Our latest survey of agricultural banks indicated that District farmland
values, on average, rose more than 3 percent in the third quarter, the third consecutive
quarterly rise since the downtrend ended in late 1986. Among District states, the third
quarter trend in farmland values ranged from no change in Michigan to a rise of nearly 5.5
percent in Iowa. A large proportion of the surveyed bankers noted that demand to acquire
farmland is up from a year ago, both among farmers and nonfarmer investors. However, there has
been no apparent pickup in foreign investor interest in U.S. farmland.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District's economy improved slightly in the most recent
period.

Employment growth, particularly in the manufacturing sector, and

an agricultural turnaround are positive developments.

Slowing

construction, flat retail sales and declining consumer loan demand remain
weak points in the economy. There is no evidence yet that the stock
market volatility has had a major effect on economic activity.
Employment
District unemployment rates edged downward in the third quarter,
with few reports of shortages in skilled trades.

A shortage of skilled

construction workers in the St. Louis area eased this year as a number of
large projects were completed.
Regional nonfarm employment grew at a 2.2 percent annual rate in
the third quarter, matching the national rate.

While employment in most

District sectors grew more slowly than the national average, the
financial, government and manufacturing sectors grew more rapidly.
District manufacturing employment grew at a strong 4.2 percent pace in
the third quarter with gains concentrated in industries sensitive to
foreign competition, particularly textiles and apparel, electrical
equipment and transportation equipment.

Several thousand auto workers

began a layoff of indefinite length in late November.

