SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

JUNE 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Summary .......................................................

i

First District - Boston....................................... ISecond District - New York...................................IIThird District - Philadelphia..............................III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland .................................. IVFifth District - Richmond.....................................V-i
Sixth District - Atlanta....................................VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago..................................VIIEighth District - St.

Louis............................... VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis.................................IXTenth District

- Kansas City................................. X-1

Eleventh District - Dallas..................................XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco...........................XII-1

SUMMARY*

Most Federal Reserve Districts report sustained economic growth, but
some note a somewhat slower pace of growth than earlier in the year.
facturing remains strong in most
grow.

Retail

sales

have

Manu-

Districts, and export demand continues to

generally

been

somewhat

sluggish

construction and real estate activity have been mixed.

recently,

and

In the resource sector

a further pickup in oil drilling has occurred, but conditions in the forest
product industry vary and the lack of rainfall is a concern in crop-growing
Several Districts report a recent increase in loan demand.

regions.

Consumer Spending
Most Districts report that retail sales were sluggish during April
and May due in part to the early Easter and unseasonable weather.

Minneapolis

and Richmond had favorable sales results, however, and Boston, Cleveland and
San Francisco noted some improvement late in the period.
apparel

was

frequently

mentioned

attributed

and

to

Weakness in women's
styles

unpopular

and

Despite the recent sluggishness of sales, retail

resistance to higher prices.

inventories are generally at acceptable levels, primarily as a result of tight
monitoring
described
stores.

and

generous

inventories
Views

on

markdowns

as

concerning

generally satisfactory sales

excessive,
the

outlook

slow-moving

however,
are

items.

particularly

mixed.

Those

Philadelphia
at

specialty

Districts

with

anticipate more of the same, while those with

weaker gains are less optimistic.

For example, although

some improvement

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and based on information
gathered prior to June 7, 1988.

occurred

late

in

May,

Cleveland

department

store

executives

believe

the

economy is in a consumer recession and expect no improvement before the fall.
Atlanta reports that autos are selling well, while San Francisco has
had strong sales of used cars but only moderate new car results.

Cleveland

and Kansas City found auto sales to be steady but not robust, while Dallas had
mixed results.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity remains strong in most Districts though Dallas
and

Atlanta

report

a

slowing

of

new

orders

in

some

industries.

Boston,

Chicago, and Cleveland cite export demand as a factor in their manufacturing
strength

and

Philadelphia notes

that

a

year-long

uptrend

in manufacturing

employment has continued.

Chicago and Cleveland report sustained strength in

the

Cleveland

steel

industry

industry

is

Francisco

mentioned

reportedly

states

constraints

with

but

rising

that

getting
a

input

close

number

plans

that

noting

to

of

to

its

are

particularly

the

Great

cargo-handling

industries

expand

prices,

that

are

Several

paper,

shipping

capacity.

experiencing

cautious.
for

Lakes

San

capacity
Districts

petrochemicals

and

steel, and Philadelphia reports an increase in factory wages resulting from a
shortage of basic production workers.

While Boston and Kansas City find that

materials are still generally available,

San

Francisco reports

shortages

of

raw materials, farm equipment and heavy machinery.
Boston
satisfactory
changes
falling,

and

levels,

in the

next

Richmond
and

report

Kansas

six months.

textile producers

find

City

that
states

However,
that

factory

their

that

Atlanta

inventories

firms

plan

notes,

inventories

are

no

with

are

at

inventory
new

building.

orders
Most

iii
other

manufacturers

chemicals,

remain

in

Atlanta,

strong.

and

Factory

especially

employment

producers

levels

are

of

paper

and

satisfactory

or

rising in Boston, Cleveland, Philadelphia and Richmond, but St. Louis reports
that,

for

except

equipment,

transportation

all major

sectors

manufacturing

have reduced employment recently.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction

and

real

activity

estate

While residential construction is relatively
and

Richmond,

however,

that

Districts

most

other

the

prospect

of

report

rising

has

varied

Districts.

among

strong in Chicago, Minneapolis,
some

interest

weakening.
rates

may

Boston
stimulate

notes,
some

activity in its currently slowing residential real estate market, and Kansas
City

states

there.

that

observers

most

anticipate

an

increase

in

housing

Commercial construction shows a more consistent pattern.

starts

Chicago and

New York note a substantial amount of new office building underway and Atlanta
and

St. Louis

report

an

expansion

in

nonresidential

construction

as

well.

Plans for several big projects have recently been announced in the Minneapolis
and

District,

Dallas

reports

some

recent

stability

in

its

nonresidential

sector though at a low level of activity.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Districts reporting on agriculture present a mixed picture.

The lack

of rainfall is a concern in all of the crop-growing regions, but only Dallas
and St. Louis spoke of reduced yields as a major threat thus far.

Atlanta and

Richmond have good crop conditions and Chicago, though noting a surge in crop
prices as a result of the drought, states that the extent of irreversible crop
damage is

believed small at this time.

Cattlemen in the San Francisco and

Atlanta Districts are getting sharply higher prices and enjoying substantial

income

gains.

However,

livestock

producers

in

Dallas

and

Richmond

expect

lower profit margins due to falling demand and increased feed costs.
Oil

production
in

has

both

stablilized
Dallas

and

in

Atlanta

Kansas

City

and
is

Kansas
above

City

drilling

activity

levels.

While Minneapolis describes a booming paper mill industry,

and

year-earlier
Atlanta

reports that prices for lumber and building products have declined, and San
Francisco also notes some slowing in its forest products industry.
Financial Developments
More

than

half

the

Districts

mention

an

increase

in loan

demand.

Phildelphia notes an acceleration in business loans and strong growth in real
estate lending.

An increase in real

estate loans was also reported in

the

Atlanta, Cleveland, Kansas City and St. Louis Districts and Richmond, Kansas
City and St.

Louis note

stronger demand for business loans as well.

Dallas

states that the rates of decline in assets and liabilities at its large banks
have moderated.

New York and San Franciso note that higher interest rates are

causing a shift to adjustable rate mortgates.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Manufacturers in the First District report that business is strong,
in part because of a

pickup in exports.

Retailers experienced a slowdown

in May but attribute the pause to poor weather rather than to any
slackening in underlying consumer demand.

Rising costs are a concern:

rapid increases in selected materials prices have pinched manufacturers and
rising payroll costs may force some retail price increases.

Capital

spending plans are more modest than in recent years, but both retailers and
manufacturers are optimistic about the second half of the year.
Retail
The First District retailers surveyed reported slower sales in
May.

However, they universally blamed the softness on raw weather during

the first three weeks.

Materials for outdoor projects and seasonal

merchandise moved especially slowly.

Bright sunshine on the Memorial Day

weekend, however, brought spirited shopping.

Most retailers are thus

confident that they will recoup their lost sales.
Supplier prices are basically flat, although imported goods and
plastics show some increases.

Far more troublesome are labor costs.

While

New England's tight labor market is driving up wages, insurance expenses
(such as Social Security, workmen's compensation, and medical coverage)
which reflect national trends, are reportedly rising even faster.
Profits are showing signs of slippage as a result of softer sales
and rising expenses.

Nonetheless, expansion plans are proceeding, though

at a slower pace than in 1987.

I-2

Manufacturing
Most First District manufacturers report that business is strong,
with shipments generally up 8 to 25 percent and orders up 8 to 15 percent
compared to a year ago.

(As exceptions, one machine tool maker's sales

have doubled while business is flat at two fabricated metals firms.)

Sales

of packaging materials and sales to customers in computers and electronics
were described as particularly buoyant.

Moreover, for the first time in

months, a majority of contacts mentioned increased exports.

Exports of

specialty textiles, hobby equipment, electronics and instruments rose
significantly.

By contrast, firms serving the auto industry and the

Department of Defense have mixed views about the strength of these
markets.

In addition, several respondents mentioned signs of caution among

their customers:

one firm is being asked to hold inventories for its

customers; another said customers are taking a "just-in-time approach" to
adding capacity; and a third is experiencing "continuing deferrals" of big
ticket items.
Almost without exception, First District manufacturers indicate
that certain materials prices are rising rapidly, even "alarmingly."
mentioned paper, petro-chemicals, steel, copper and nickel.
have doubled since February.

They

Nickel prices

No one expressed any concern about the

availability of these materials, however.

Only a minority of respondents

have been able to pass these price increases on to their customers.

Most

report that their own prices are up 1 to 2.5 percent.
Inventory and employment levels are broadly satisfactory at First
District firms.

Only a few contacts indicate that inventories are

uncomfortably high.

Employment is generally stable or declining slightly,

reflecting productivity increases.

While most respondents report "normal"

wage increases, a small number think wage pressures may be developing.
Most manufacturers contacted are not engaged in expansive capital
spending programs.

The majority had made major capital expenditures over

the last several years and have adequate capacity.
The outlook for 1988 remains very positive.

Most First District

firms expect a strong, even a "banner" year, although a manufacturer of
discretionary consumer goods expects a "rough retail year."

Two

respondents expect a recession in 1989, but most are reserving judgment
until after the election.
Residential Real Estate
First District residential real estate sales were unusually slow
this spring.

Some realtors report that activity rose significantly at the

end of May but others have seen no change.

No contacts are experiencing

more activity now than last year at this time.

The prospect of rising

interest rates, however, may encourage some acceleration of sales.
Preferences for small versus large homes is mixed, but buyers appear to be
far more interested in houses than in condominiums.
Outlook
The New England Economic Project (NEEP), a nonprofit organization
comprising businesses, government agencies and educational institutions,
held its semi-annual outlook conference early in June.

The NEEP forecasts

for the six New England states call for nonagricultural employment in the
region to increase somewhat more slowly in 1988, 1989, and 1990 than the

I-4

2.6 percent growth rate experienced in 1987.

Growth will be more balanced

than in the recent past; manufacturing will contribute positively to
projected employment gains through the beginning of 1990 but
nonmanufacturing industries will still account for most of the additional
jobs.

Unemployment rates may rise slightly, but will remain almost 2

percentage points below the national average, according to the forecasts.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Overall

Economic

activity

business

conditions

in

the

were

activity was moderate to good.

Second
stable

Retail

District
to

has

improved

continued

and

mixed.

office

leasing

spending remained sluggish,

however,

and demand for new homes varied somewhat among areas.

Small-and medium-sized

banks raised their mortgage rates following the May 11 prime rate increase.
Consumer Spending
Retail spending in the Second District continued somewhat sluggish in
recent

weeks

with

moderately above.

April

sales

ranging

below

year-earlier

levels

to

The earlier Easter this year was noted as one factor in the

slow April performance,

but partial

well.

commented:

As one

from

retailer

really don't know why".

Women's

results

for

"Customers
apparel sales

May were

just

aren't

have

disappointing as
spending and we

remained weak

and the

gains which occurred in other lines were not particularly strong.
Year-to-year

changes

at

District

stores

in

April

ranged

from

-6.9 percent to +3.3 percent, results which were "well below" to "just about
on" plan.

Partial data for May show some over-the-year gains but smaller than

were expected.

Inventories were generally at comfortable levels, however, due

to close monitoring and aggressive markdowns, though one respondent reported
an undesired buildup.
Business Activity
Economic
moderately

conditions

improved

in

the

in recent weeks.

Second

District

The proportion

have

been

of Buffalo

stable

to

purchasing

II-2

managers reporting higher new orders rose by 13 percentage points in May while
the latest Rochester

survey indicated little overall change.

In both areas

the percentage of surveyed firms with lower inventories has declined.

As was

true

nationally,

unemployment

rates

in the District were

somewhat higher in May.

However, rates of 4.2 percent in New York and 3.7

percent

represented

in

New

Jersey

percentage point, respectively.
available,

it appears that,

May-to-May

declines

0.7

of

and

0.4

While May data for New York City are not yet

through April,

the employment

declines

resulting

from the stock market crash were offset by job growth in other sectors.

Several

recent

District's economy.

announcements point

to

continuing expansion

in

the

The Defense Department awarded a $236 million contract to

a team headed by General Electric for the development and initial deployment
of the "Star Wars" defenses.
substantial

growth

and

In addition, a number of firms are planning

modernization

here.

These

include

firms

making

products ranging from radial tires and fiberglass insulation to aerospace and
telecommunication equipment.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Residential

construction

activity has

varied within

the

District

since the last report.

In some areas the prime homebuilding season began

strongly with little or

no slowdown from the year-earlier pace, while

in

others, builders are busy but activity has declined to a more normal level
compared with the past few years.
however,

particularly where

Things remain sluggish

home prices

are quite

in

some areas,

high and where layoffs

resulting from the Wall Street cutbacks have occurred.

The rise in mortgage

rates was reported to have had little impact on homebuilding thus far.
Developments
been mixed.

in the District's commercial real estate market have

Office vacancy rates have declined in areas such as northern New

II-3

Jersey and Long Island while remaining at virtually unchanged high levels in
Westchester
moderate

and

counties.

to good, particularly for

good design.
continues

Fairfield

Leasing

activity

has

generally

buildings in desirable locations

been

and of

The major exception is downtown Manhattan where leasing activity

weak.

Given

the

large

number

of

buildings

currently

under

construction in midtown Manhattan and northern New Jersey, however, there is
concern that vacancy rates will rise as this new space becomes available.
Financial Developments
Small-and medium-sized banks in the Second District survey generally
raised their mortgage rates in response to the May 11 increase in the prime
rate.
have

However, rate increases on non-prime based business and consumer loans
been more

spotty.

Most

of the bankers

expect

further

rate

increases

during the second half of 1988, though none predicted sharp rises.

A few of

the surveyed officers believe that interest rates have already reached their
1988 highs and should stabilize at current levels.

While many analysts link

rising

our

interest rates to inflation fears,

most

of

respondents did not

expect a surge in inflation though nearly all believe their local economy is
strong.

The rise in mortgage rates has reduced mortgage activity somewhat,

but the response to date has not been pronounced.

Mortgage activity in the

New York City metropolitan area remains more sluggish than in other parts of
the District.

With the rise

in interest rates, many mortgage officers have

noted a shift back to adjustable rate mortgages.
with caps on

future rate increases were

One banker said that those

particularly popular.

Business in

home equity loans, usually priced separately from mortgages, continues to be
brisk.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy is continuing to grow in June, although some
softness has developed in the consumer sector.

Manufacturing activity remained

on an upward trend as the month began, with continuing gains in employment
noted.

Retail sales, however, have been only steady in recent weeks, and

retailers say the year-to-year comparision is also flat.

Bankers report real

estate lending growing at a strong pace, an acceleration in business lending,
and slow but steady growth in consumer lending.
The consensus forecast in the Third District business community is for a
continuation of current trends.

Manufacturers predict more growth over the next

six months, at around the current pace, but they say cost and wage pressures
will mount.

Retailers expect summer doldrums that might extend into fall.

Bankers forecast growth in commercial and industrial loans in line with overall
economic growth, but they say real estate lending may slacken as commercial
development in the region tapers off.
MANUFACTURING
The Third District industrial sector continues to advance, according to
preliminary results of the June Business Outlook Survey.

Among local

manufacturers contacted early in the month, 26 percent said overall business was
moving up while only 7 percent said it was slower.

Makers of durable goods

reported stronger business than did nondurable goods manufacturers, with the
latter operating at a steady pace.

On balance, among all surveyed firms, most

measures of business conditions showed improvement: new orders and shipments
were rising and order backlogs were moving up.

III-2
Factory employment is continuing on its year-long upward trend this month.
Manufacturers say the labor market for basic production workers is tight, but
there is no shortage of skilled labor; thus, while they have been able to hire
new skilled workers without boosting wages, they have been raising wages at the
lower end of the pay scales.

Large firms said that while labor market

conditions in general have not been pressuring their wage bills, contract COLAs
are being triggered by inflation and are likely to increase later this year and
next, unless month-to-month increases in the CPI subside.
A negative note in the most recent survey is the continuing increase in
reports of higher input costs.

With 65 percent of surveyed firms reporting

increases in the prices of purchased goods, this index is registering its
highest reading since May 1981.

Survey respondents expect further increases in

costs: 83 percent of the companies polled in early June predict input costs will
rise during the second half of the year.
Forecasting general business conditions for the next six months, local
firms generally foresee further growth at around the current pace, with gains in
both shipments and orders.

Overall, area industrial companies are planning

moderate increases in employment and capital spending between now and year-end.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in early June said sales in May were
only even with May of last year, in real terms, and the trend in recent weeks
remains flat.

Generally lackluster sales have backed up inventories to

excessive levels, particularly at specialty stores, according to local
merchants, and some describe stocks as significantly higher than they should be.
Sales of home furnishings are healthy, but women's apparel sales remain weak,
and sales of seasonal items have been poorer than expected, which merchants
attribute to cool, rainy weather.

Discounting and promotional efforts to move

III-3

both lines are widespread.

Most retailers expect sales in general to remain

flat over the summer, and they are less than optimistic for the balance of the
year.

Many stores have cut back on orders for fall merchandise.
Despite the slackening trend in sales, store officials say they are having

difficulty maintaining adequate staffing levels.

With a shortage of qualified

applicants for store jobs, wage and training costs are rising.
In order to maintain profit margins in the face of rising dollar costs of
imported merchandise, many stores are turning to domestic suppliers, especially
for apparel.

In other efforts to reduce costs, several retailers plan to close

marginal and money-losing stores in the area.
FINANCE
Loan growth at major Third District banks has been running at a fairly
steady pace of about 10 percent (annual rate) in the last few months, and
bankers contacted in June say growth will probably accelerate in response to an
increase in business loan demand lately.

According to bank lending officers,

some of this demand represents an attempt by borrowers to lock in fixed-rate
funds in anticipation of further hikes in the prime rate; but bankers believe
most of the recent spurt in business loan demand stems from healthy growth in
the regional and national economies.

Lending to consumers is growing steadily,

according to area bankers, but at a slower rate than other credit categories.
Real estate lending continues to advance strongly, but bankers say this
growth may taper off soon.

With growing softness in commercial real estate

markets, permanent financing for projects is becoming more difficult to obtain,
and area banks generally do not extend loans to developers unless such financing
has already been arranged.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
Economic activity in the Fourth District has changed little from the last
report.

The region's economy continues to benefit from the export boom.

Labor market indicators are uniformly positive, with the unemployment rate in
Ohio resuming its downward trend over the last two months to 6.2 percent in
Production, employment, and orders are generally up at manufacturing

May.
firms.

Although department-store sales remain sluggish, auto sales continue

at a steady pace.

Banks report relatively strong growth in consumer

installment and real estate lending.

Retail Sales
Department-store sales in the Fourth District continue to be sluggish, and
are falling short of targets.

Although sales improved somewhat in late May,

it is unclear whether that reflected a true pickup in demand or just a
temporary response to increased markdowns.

Some retailers say that sluggish

sales reflect unpopular styles, especially in women's wear, rather than
consumer unwillingness to spend.
Higher prices for apparel have also hurt sales.

Merchants don't expect

much more strength in sales this summer, although some expect stronger results
in the fall.

There is a sense among department-store executives that they are

in a consumer recession, and they are puzzled by reports of strong growth of
overall personal consumption expenditure.
generally at comfortable levels.

Department-store inventories are

However, some contacts complain that they

IV-2
have had to offer unusually generous markdowns to avoid an inventory buildup,
contributing to weak earnings.
Auto sales have been steady but not robust.

Dealers comment that

financing and rebate incentives seem to have lost their power to stimulate
showroom traffic and sales.

Several dealers report that an unusually high

number of inquiries have recently been coming from qualified buyers (those who
can afford to buy).

Dealers do not sense any tendency among consumers to cut

down on their spending.

Dealer inventories are at comfortable 55- to 60-day

levels, with occasional shortages of popular models.

One import dealer

reports being down to a 10-day supply.

Labor Markets
In

Labor market indicators in the region were uniformly positive in May.
April and May, the trend toward narrowing the gap between the national
unemployment rate and the Ohio rate was reestablished.

The seasonally

adjusted unemployment rate for Ohio fell from 7.7 percent in March to 6.3
percent in April and 6.2 percent in May.

The decreases came primarily from

fewer unemployed workers, rather than from employment growth.
Nevertheless, May surveys of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing companies
in Cleveland, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh metropolitan areas consistently
reflect an increase in workforce expansions and/or a decrease in employment
reductions.

For all three areas, the number of surveyed firms that reported

employment expansion outnumbered those that reported a contracting
workforce.

Cleveland-area factories reported hiring additional workers to

reduce overtime, adding second shifts, and adding salaried personnel.

The

Cleveland help-wanted index (which tends to lead unemployment changes by three
to six months) was also up in recent months.

IV-3
Manufacturing
The export boom continues to boost economic activity in the District.
Surveys by Cleveland and Cincinnati purchasing managers indicate that
businesses continue to experience a favorable economic climate.

Production,

employment, and orders are all up, and few see a recession occurring in the
rest of 1988.

The groups report problems in obtaining a variety of materials

and supplies, including aluminum, bearings, electric motors, paper products,
and ethylene-based chemicals.
Raw steel production in Ohio rose 5 percent from March to April, as the
steel industry continues to enjoy strong demand for its products.

In the

three-month period from March to May, raw steel production in the Youngstown,
Pittsburgh, and Lake Erie regions rose almost 6.5 percent over the same
three-month period a year ago.

Purchasing managers in Cleveland and

Cincinnati report price increases and shortages in stainless steel, steel
plate, and sheet steel.
Another positive sign of the strong regional economy is the rising number
of freighters sailing the Great Lakes.

Eleven more freighters are now flying

the U.S. flag than at this time a year ago.

These freighters are primarily

used to haul iron ore, stone, cement, sand, and other construction materials.
Sources report that the U.S. lake shipping industry is getting close to its
cargo-handling capacity, particularly in iron ore.

Banking
Loan growth has been moderate at District banks.

Total loans outstanding

at large banks grew at a 2.2 percent annual rate between the end of March and
mid-May.

After expanding at an annual pace of 22 percent during the first

IV-4
quarter, business loan growth has been relatively flat so far in the second
quarter.

In contrast, real estate and consumer lending has picked up even

though loan rates have increased.

Real estate loans outstanding grew at an

annual rate of more than 20 percent, and consumer installment loans
outstanding rose at an annual clip of 19 percent.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND
Overview
The Fifth District economy continued to grow in May.
increased at about the same pace as in March and April.

Retail sales
Tourism was stronger

than usual this spring and is expected to remain high through the summer.
Manufacturing activity increased in May, although shipments rose less rapidly
than earlier in the year.

Exports at major District ports increased faster

than imports in May, as was the case in March and April.
robust.

Housing remained

Generally, District farmers are enjoying good growing conditions.

At

District banks, commercial and industrial loans rose sharply in May, and real
estate and consumer loans also increased.
Manufacturers and retailers expect inflation to rise in the coming
months.

They also look for improvement in the U.S. trade balance.

Most

District bankers expect strong to moderate economic growth.
Consumer Spending and Tourism
District retailers responding to our regular mail survey reported
increased activity in the ten business days ended June 3, compared with the
previous ten days.

Half of the respondents reported increases in sales, while

only 16 percent reported declines.

Twenty-six percent of the respondents said

their inventories declined compared with 60 percent who said their inventories
did not change.
Over 50 percent of the retail respondents expect their sales to increase
in the next six months.

Retailers look for inventories to decline over the

same period.
Most District resorts and hotels contacted by telephone reported spring
activity was higher and summer bookings were running well ahead of last year.

About one-fourth of our contacts in the tourist business expect the lower
foreign exchange value of the dollar to encourage more U.S. vacations and
boost their revenues.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity expanded further in May, according to our regular
mail survey.

New orders, backlogs of orders, employment, and the length of

the workweek increased at about the same pace as in March, but the rate of
increase in shipments apparently slowed.

Forty-seven percent of the

respondents reported increased shipments, down from 54 percent in the previous
survey.

Reports of reduced shipments increased to 12 percent in this survey

from 10 percent in the previous survey.
reported generally unchanged.

Inventories of finished goods were

About one-third of our respondents reported

increased inventories of materials and about one-half percent reported no
change.
Prices in the manufacturing sector continued to rise.

Twenty-two percent

of the respondents said they had raised the prices of finished products, and
70 percent reported higher prices for raw materials, compared with almost no
respondents who reported declines.

Most respondents said they expect further

price increases in the next six months.

One of our contacts said that because

of the lower dollar, domestic producers of plastic resins and other
petrochemical products are exporting more, which is reducing supplies and
raising prices for these materials in the United States.
District manufacturers expect their businesses to expand further in the
next six months.

About 40 percent of the respondents believe their shipments

and new orders will rise, compared with about 15 percent who anticipate
declines.

The majority of producers do not plan to change their inventory

levels in the next six months.

Inflation and Trade Expectations
We asked manufacturers and retailers in the District to indicate their
expectations about rates of increase in U.S. prices, wages, exports, and
imports in the next six months as compared with the last six months.

The

results are summarized in the table below.
Respondents Expecting Rate of Increase to
Rise
Slow
Not Change
50%
10%
40%
23%
16%
61%
56%
19%
25%
9%
52%
39%

Prices
Wages
Exports
Imports

One of our manufacturing contacts said that inflation worries were
exaggerated.

Wages were in check, he said, and only a few agricultural

commodity prices had risen recently because of drought reports.
Port Activity
Representatives from the three major District ports--Baltimore, Hampton
Roads (Norfolk), and Charleston--reported moderate increases in export
shipments in May.

Import shipments in May were reported lower at Hampton

Roads and Charleston, but higher at Baltimore.

These contacts anticipate

further increases in net exports during the next six months.
Housing
The District housing market remained relatively robust in May according
to a survey of realtors and builders.

The pace of new home sales apparently

increased from early spring; none of our contacts reported overall declines in
May, although one-fourth reported declines in speculative building.
Agriculture
Growing conditions for crops have been excellent over much of the
District.

However, some dry spots were reported in the Carolinas and one

contact said soybean planting had come to a halt in the northern part of South

Carolina because of dry weather.

Scattered heavy rains and hail caused some

localized crop damage and planting delays in other parts of the District.
Across the District, farmers are holding large acreages out of production
to qualify for government price supports.

One crop producer said that so much

land was out of production that he could not see any way that farmers
nationwide could produce a surplus of soybeans.

Higher market prices,

however, could cause some of the acreage to be planted late.

Livestock

producers anticipate lower profit margins this year as feed costs rise.
Financial
Most major District banks contacted in our telephone survey indicated
increased loan activity in May.

According to our respondents, increases in

consumer lending were mainly in auto loans, which respondents attributed to
the decline in loans by automobile finance companies.

Commercial, industrial,

and real estate loans grew substantially in the past month according to most
bankers, but some West Virginia respondents reported declines.
The majority of bankers contacted anticipate strong to moderate economic
growth in their areas.

They expect the continued growth in residential and

commercial building to raise loan demand.

Most believe interest rates will

rise slightly over the next four months.
Small Business
Some financial institutions have reportedly become less willing to make
small commercial loans.

According to one report, small businesses are

increasingly using consumer credit for their credit needs.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The growth of the regional economy has slowed a bit since the beginning of the
year.

While most manufacturing industries exhibit strong growth, business services and

trade are slackening.

With the exception of autos, retail sales remain lackluster.

Although residential construction continues to sag, nonresidential construction has picked
up.

Bank loan activity in May varied across the District but in most states modest

growth occurred. Higher crop prices should help farmers prosper, however, the potential
for yield losses from dry weather is increasing.
Employment and Industry
since the last reporting period.

Business activity in the region has slowed somewhat
Employment growth in some sectors has cooled while

others continue to operate at capacity levels.
producers and inventories are building.

New orders are falling for textile

Business services as well as trade are off the

pace of previous months due in part to slower consumer spending.
In contrast, most manufacturing, and particularly companies producing paper and
chemicals, continue to report strong business activity.

In the paper industry, price

increases were noted in both kraft sheet from which corrugated shipping containers are
manufactured and in chemicals used in the paper production process.
Consumer Spending Retailers in the region report that disappointing spring sales
continued in May.

Memorial Day weekend sales ranged from poor in Mississippi to good

in Florida. However, most areas found sales mediocre and at about the same dollar level
as last May. Inventories remain at acceptable levels.
Car sales continued to be helped by extended manufacturers incentives and
intense competition among dealers through mid-May.

Domestic car and truck sales in

particular are benefitting from the recent surge in buying. The first quarter's new motor
vehicle

registrations

in the Southeast

rose

13 percent over 1987's level.

This

performance represents a marked improvement over the sluggish sales pace registered in
the first quarter of 1987.

VI-2

Construction

Home sales in the Sixth District were mixed throughout May as

mortgage interest rates turned up. Residential construction value in the region was down
13 percent through April, well below the 8 percent decline for the nation. Construction
is expected to decline further in the months ahead.

Alabama and Florida report that

home sales have been strong as mortgage interest rates have bottomed out. Tennessee's
housing market has improved steadily in 1988, but still is down from last year's pace. In
Louisiana and Mississippi, home sales remain depressed.
In contrast, nonresidential construction has regained momentum in the Southeast
this spring, posting a 3 percent rise in construction value over the first four months of
1987.

Much of the District's increase has been in Georgia, which was boosted by

Atlanta's 64 percent increase through April.
ahead of last year's pace.

Tennessee's construction has also surged

Downtown office construction in Jacksonville and in New

Orleans have led the way for their respective states over the last two months.
Financial Services

Large banks in the Sixth District experienced flat to

moderate growth in loans during May.
loans were strong.

Business loans were sluggish while real estate

All contacts agreed that it is too early to discern the impact of

higher interest rates on loan demand.
Bankers throughout Florida agree that loan growth was flat in May, but lenders in
Georgia reported steady growth in total loan volume.
majority of Georgia's loan growth.
business loans.

Consumer loans accounted for the

Louisiana is the only state to register strength in

Other states generally reported flat or declining trends in both business

and real estate lending.
Tourism
June.

Tourism was slow in May but rapid increases were expected by mid-

Foreign visitors have been flocking to the Southeast, especially Orlando, Daytona

Beach, Miami, and New Orleans.

Reasons for this include the weak dollar, direct

marketing abroad, and increased international flights directly to Miami and Orlando.
Despite the increased traffic, hotel occupancy has either been holding steady or declining
throughout the Southeast partially due to the fact that more travelers are staying with

VI-3
family and friends while on vacation.

National Park attendance is already up 4 percent

this year and is expected to climb even more.
Agriculture, Forestry, and Mining Pork and egg producers are experiencing sharp
declines in revenue as a result of weak prices.

Cattlemen, however, are enjoying

substantial gains from sharply higher prices. Crops are in good condition at present but
soil moisture levels are perilously low.

Further dry weather will quickly reduce yields.

Crop prices are much higher than a year ago and could increase even more if weather
damage occurs.
Lumber and building products industries are experiencing weaker prices due to
the decline in housing starts in the Southeast.

One bright spot, however, is a further

decline in competition from Canadian lumber as price differences widen.
Oil production stabilized in recent weeks after falling slowly throughout the
winter.

Nonetheless, production remains down 5 percent from the same period last

year. Conditions in the coal industry are stable; coal production is up 4 percent over last
year thus far.

VII-1

SEVENTH

Summary.

DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Expansion is continuing in the Seventh District, paced by strong

exports and rising capital spending.

Total employment growth in the District

states so far this year has been in line with the nation.

Purchasing managers

in Chicago, Indianapolis, and Milwaukee reported strength in activity at their
companies.

The vigorous pace of activity in the industrial sector reflects the

rise in demand for equipment.

Orders for steel have been boosted by the

expanding equipment markets as well as strength in motor vehicles and an upturn
in industrial construction.

Office construction, at a high level, may slow

somewhat, and further slippage is expected in apartment building.
have been mixed.

Retail sales

Conditions in the farm sector have continued the upturn that

began last year, but persistence of a lack of rainfall could cause considerable
damage to crops.
Manufacturing.

Industrial firms in the District continue to report

vigorous demand, in part reflecting the lower dollar and stronger capital
spending.

Manufacturers indicate sizable gains in shipments abroad, and some

are exporting products previously sold entirely to the domestic market.

This

increased business is boosting demand at firms providing related services such
as freight forwarders, foreign trade consultants,

and banks.

Makers of

components used in a wide range of machinery indicate sizable increases in
sales, ranging from 10 percent to 30 percent above a year earlier for various
lines.

Purchasers placed on allocation are reported to be double ordering, as

are others concerned about problems with availability of materials, parts, and
supplies.

Customer inventories have been increased to guard against problems

in obtaining supplies.

Steel mills in the District remain

at capacity.

Strength in steel orders--booked into next year according to a source at one

VII-2

modern mill--reflects the upward

adjustment in auto production plans, the

record pace of truck output, stronger markets

for industrial

and farm

equipment, an upturn in construction work on factories, and a continued high
level

of work on

other types of construction.

Motor Vehicles.
May.

Sales of motor vehicles continued

at a healthy pace in

Domestic trucks have shown particularly strong gains, and appear headed

for a record year.

Some heavy truck makers are not scheduling vacation shutdowns

second shifts.
this summer.

Two pickup truck assembly plants in Michigan are adding

A Michigan auto assembly plant is adding a second shift to help

meet demand for cars, and the scheduled closing of the Kenosha, Wisconsin,
plant is being deferred until early 1989.
September are above year-earlier
Construction.
is

Planned auto assemblies through

levels.

The pace of construction activity in the District, overall,

expected to remain relatively high in 1988, but appears to be slowing.

Contracts for construction of nonresidential
through April were 2 percent lower (in

buildings in District states

square feet) than a year earlier, and

residential contracts were 19 percent lower.

was

The decline in housing

sharpest early in the year, reflecting unseasonably strong construction starts
in early 1987.

For all of 1988,

starts on homes in the Chicago area are

projected to be near the 1987 pace, but apartments will be lower.
completions expected, construction

With few

activity on large Chicago-area

office

buildings already underway will continue at a strong pace, but there may be a
lull in new starts.

The mix of nonresidential

building

construction

shifting toward industrial structures, including warehouses, though
construction in downtown Chicago is also strong with several
hotels

in

the planning

stage.

is

hotel

additional major

VII-3

Retailing.
months.

Stores in the District report mixed sales performance in recent

Sales at a large general merchandise retailer were excellent in the

first week of June after only a small year-over-year
basis, in May.

Another general merchandiser reported somewhat slower sales in

May than a year earlier.
weather.

rise, on a same-store

Lackluster May sales were attributed

partly to

A survey of over 200 Illinois retail stores showed sales in April

only fractionally higher than a year earlier, attributed to the early Easter,
and February-April was about 2 percent above last year.
weakest, both in April and the latest three months.

Specialty stores were

A large retailer reports

increasing upward price pressures from suppliers, especially on plastics.

A

maker of large home appliances expects sales this year to be only slightly
below the 1987 record,
Agriculture.

but

is

concerned

about

1989.

Improvement in the agricultural

sector of the District is

continuing this year, helped by government programs.

Farmland values have been

rising, after a protracted decline.
low level.

Equipment purchases have increased, from

The amount of problem farm loans has declined considerably in the

wake of improved

sector earnings.

Drought conditions throughout much of the Midwest have triggered a surge in
crop prices.
small.

To date, the extent of irreversible crop damage is

believed to be

But the risk of extensive crop damage has been heightened considerably

if timely rains are not forthcoming through mid-August.
in the farm sector would suffer a substantial
drought.

The recovery underway

setback in areas hard-hit by a

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The Eighth District economy is slightly weaker than in recent
reports.

After several months of rapid growth, employment in most

sectors declined.

Construction activity expanded moderately, despite

declines in residential building.

District manufacturers reported

moderate-to-sharp increases in input prices, but no strong wage
pressures.

Bank lending continues to be slow, particularly in the

consumer and real estate areas.

Crops face a shortage of rain at a

critical point in their growth.

Employment
District nonfarm employment fell at a 2.6 percent annual rate
during March and April after growing at a 8.4 percent pace between
November and February.

This trend was evident in most District states

and industrial sectors.

Manufacturing employment declined at a 4.3

percent rate following a 5.6 percent rate of expansion during the same
periods.

Except for the transportation equipment sector, all major

manufacturing sectors reduced employment between February and April.

This reduction was particularly severe among textile and apparel
producers, who enjoyed moderate growth in 1987.

Manufacturing
District manufacturers generally report higher input prices, but
no strong wage pressures.

The largest price increases were reported by a

VIII-2

shoe manufacturer, who is faced with leather prices 15 percent higher
than a year earlier, and a fertilizer supplier, whose input prices were
up 18 percent from a year earlier.

Both manufacturers have sharply

raised their prices.
The reasons for the lack of wage pressures varied.

Some

District businesses, located in rural areas, still have abundant supplies
of surplus labor, reflected in county unemployment figures well above 10
percent.

In addition, expanded automation has allowed some manufacturers

to increase output substantially without hiring many new workers.

A

major appliance maker reported that wage pressures are not currently a
problem, but could be in the fall, when union labor contracts are
renegotiated.
Construction
District construction activity has expanded in recent months,
though more slowly than the national average.

The value of building

contracts issued in the District rose 2.8 percent in the three months
through April compared with a 4.1 percent national gain.

While contracts

for nonresidential buildings rose more rapidly in the District than in
the nation (11.5 vs. -1.4 percent), District residential growth was
weaker (-3.4 vs. 8.4 percent).

Only Tennessee, among the District

states, showed an increase in the residential sector.

Compared with a

year earlier, District residential contracts in the February-April period
were down 9.7 percent.

In the St. Louis area, residential building

contracts issued this year are down 6 percent from a year earlier, with a
sharp drop-off in multifamily construction.

VIII-3

Banking
For the three months ending in May, total loans at large, weekly
reporting District banks grew at a 6.3 percent annual rate, down from a
7.1 percent rate for the same period last year.
lending, in particular, have fallen considerably.

Consumer and real estate
Consumer loans

declined at a 0.6 percent annual rate, after expanding at an 8.2 percent
for the same three-month period a year ago.

Real estate loans grew at a

7.8 percent rate, well behind the 20.6 percent rate for the same March May period last year.
Agriculture
Dry weather has begun to threaten crops throughout the District
as they enter a critical growth stage.
lowest ever recorded in many regions.

Rainfall in April and May was the
Farmers in northern Missouri have

been allowed to graze cattle on acreage previously kept out of production
by the price support programs.

Other states anticipate taking the same

action if dry conditions persist.

Projections for the upcoming wheat

harvest have been scaled back because of dry conditions.

Many speculate

that continued bad weather could push soybean prices to $10/bushel,
double the 1987 price.

Although the long-term outlook calls for more hot

and dry weather, good rains in the coming weeks could lead to large crops
because of the early planting progress.
Farm loan performance at District agricultural banks improved
significantly in the first quarter of this year compared with the same
period in the last two years.

The percentage of nonperforming

agricultural loans fell from 9 percent in the first quarter of 1987 to 6
percent this year.

Most District states showed comparable improvement.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Economic trends in the Ninth District continued to be favorable this
spring.
ingly

Unemployment declined again, and consumer spending held up surpris-

well.

Some

important new construction projects were announced.

forest products and mining sectors benefited from increased demand.

The

Except

for excessive dryness, agricultural conditions remained stable.

Labor Markets
Labor market conditions remained favorable in the last few months.
Minnesota's unemployment rate dipped to 3.8 percent in April, its lowest rate
in more than eight years.

The state's initial unemployment claims were about

3 percentage points lower this April than in April 1987.

In Montana and North

Dakota, unemployment rates were also estimated to have fallen significantly in
April.

For

South Dakota, March data show that

job growth

continued, with

manufacturing leading all other industries.

Consumer Spending
Retail spending on general merchandise has borne up well recently.
One retail

chain reports

that

its department stores' sales in the district

were 9 percent higher this May than last.

Another chain reports that Memorial

Day sales were brisk and that its sales were up 14 percent so far this year.
This chain
others.

is continuing to remodel some stores

while building additions to

Contrary to experience over the last few years, sales growth has not

been confined to just major metropolitan areas.

A Bank director notes that

retail sales were holding up well in most North Dakota cities, with spending
by Canadian visitors helping retailers in Minot and Grand Forks.

Inventories

are at acceptable levels, and no significant credit problems have been reported.

IX-2

Motor vehicles continued to sell well throughout the district this
spring.

The car and truck sales of one domestic manufacturer were around 10

percent higher
ago.

during

the

first three weeks

Another domestic manufacturer reports

even more than 10 percent during May.

in May than

they were a year

that its truck sales were up by

Smaller dealers in outstate areas have

done particularly well this year, but sales at larger dealers in metro areas
also surged in May.

The rapid sales growth has left inventories a bit tight.

While housing activity this spring fell from its record-setting pace
of a year earlier, sales haven't been bad.
sold

In April, the total value of homes

in the Minneapolis-St.Paul metro area was only 6 percent lower than in

April 1987.

A representative of Minnesota realtors proclaims the market to be

"healthy across the board."
Sioux

Falls,

South

Dakota,

Supporting
observes

this claim elsewhere, a reporter in

that

the

city's

housing

market

was

"stable, but not booming."

Nonresidential Construction
Several significant

A large computer company released plans to add 76 stories of office

cently.
space to
suburb

construction projects have been announced re-

downtown Minneapolis.

A financial

forms maker

(over five other sites outside the district) as

chose a St.

Paul

the location for a

large office and factory complex, which could employ another

1,500 workers.

Contracts for the construction of public infrastructure in Minnesota were up
substantially this March, while contracts awarded for other types of construction were down.

Resource-Related Industries
More favorable news was generated by the district's important forest
products and mining sectors.

A paper industry consultant notes that the paper

IX-3

business has

been

with all

booming,

Minnesota

Prices for printing paper are particularly firm.
installed later this year.

mills

running

"flat

out."

More paper machines may be

Plants producing waferboard, a paper-based build-

ing material, are also running at full tilt, although prices are weak.

After

five years of hard times, the district's iron ore industry is recovering a
bit.

During April, iron ore shipments from Duluth and Superior to steel mills

across the Great Lakes were 27 percent higher than a year earlier.

An iron

ore facility in northeastern Minnesota will recall around 80 laid-off workers
to reopen a production line last used six years ago.

Iron ore output is also

up in Michigan's Upper Peninsula, where hiring has

sometimes exceeded the

number of workers laid off.

And in Minnesota a plan has been spawned to

convert abandoned iron mine pits into farms for salmon and trout production.
Agriculture
Excessive dryness has become a major concern for district farmers,
although most other developments have been favorable.

Topsoil moisture is

short in Minnesota, northern South Dakota, and eastern North Dakota.

But a

Bank director from Montana reports that some rains in May helped a lot in that
state.

More favorably, prices of important district crops and livestock have

risen.

The Minnesota farm price index rose in April.

wheat rose

10 cents over the previous month.

The price received for

A Bank director from North

Dakota notes that soybean prices have been particularly strong, and another
from Montana notes that cattle prices have reached record levels.

Through

mid-May, grain exports shipped from Duluth and Superior ran three times higher
than last year.

But a director from Wisconsin reports that dairy milk produc-

tion has grown to levels that preceded the federal herd buy-out program--a
program intended to curb excess production.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Summary.
gains.

The economy of the Tenth District continues to make modest

Variation across the district and among industries is evident,

however, in comments of directors and small business council members.

Retail

sales overall are generally weak, although new car sales are steady to
Prices of manufacturers' inputs continue to rise, and lead

slightly better.

times have increased somewhat for some materials.

Conditions are generally

New home sales have slowed and housing

stable in the district energy sector.

starts are at or slightly below last month's levels.
commercial banks are up from a month ago and
stronger.

generally weak.

Tenth District retailers report that overall sales are

Competition and slow sales are tending to restrain price

Nearly all respondents report some trimming of inventories as well

as continued tight inventory management.
further.

demand is generally
loan

Dry weather is now the principal concern for district crop farmers.

Retail Sales.

increases.

Total deposits at

Most hope to reduce inventories

Sales are expected to show little improvement in the months ahead.

Automobile Sales.

Automobile dealers generally report that sales are

holding steady to increasing slightly.
expanding slightly.

Inventories are generally stable to

Adequate financing is available for both dealer

inventories and customer purchases.

Overall, dealers are fairly optimistic

about sales for the rest of the year.
Manufacturing.

Input prices have continued to rise over the past three

months, and most respondents expect further increases in the period ahead.
While materials are generally available, lead times have increased somewhat
and some materials are becoming harder to get.

Respondents are generally

satisfied with inventory levels, with few plans to change them.

Capacity

utilization rates vary widely, ranging from 70 percent to nearly full
utilization.

Energy.

Conditions in the district's energy industry have been

relatively stable, reflecting recent stability in crude oil prices.

The

average weekly number of operating drilling rigs in the Tenth District was 279
in April and March, but fell to 254 in May.

Despite the recent decline in

drilling activity, the rig count remains about 6 percent above the average
recorded in May 1987.
Housing Activity and Finance.

After strengthening the last few months,

housing market activity has leveled off recently.

New home sales are reported

Most homebuilders report housing starts at or slightly below last

slow.

month's levels and down significantly from a year earlier.

Although housing

starts have leveled off, most respondents expect improvements in the near
future.

No problems are reported regarding prices, availability, or delivery

times for construction materials.
Nearly all thrift institution respondents report that savings deposit
inflows are near or above year ago levels.

Most respondents expect flat or

slightly increasing inflows in the near future.
activity has been weak.

In general, recent mortgage

Mortgage rates are reported to be trending higher and

are expected to stabilize or rise slightly further in the near term.
Banking.

District commercial bankers report generally stronger loan

demand over the past month.

Demand for commercial and industrial loans,

residential real estate loans, and commercial real estate loans have shown the
most strength, while demand for consumer loans and agricultural loans have, on
balance, shown little change.

All but one of the respondents report they

increased their prime rate one-half percentage point in the past month.
Slightly more than half expect to increase their prime rate again in the near
future.

The rest expect to make no change in their prime rate.

respondents report consumer lending rates have been stable.

Most

Expectations

X-3

about consumer lending rates are about evenly divided between no change and
some increase.

Total deposits are reported up over a month ago.

MMDA's,

passbook savings accounts, and small time deposits account for almost all of
the growth.

Demand deposits, conventional NOW accounts, Super-NOW accounts,

IRA's/Keough's, and large CD's are, on balance, little changed.
Agriculture.

Dry weather is the principal concern across the Tenth

District as farmers prepare to harvest the winter wheat crop and finish
planting spring crops.

A lack of moisture early in the year and a virus-

caused disease, wheat streak mosaic, are likely to cause wheat yields in parts
of Kansas and Nebraska to range from average to well below average.

Late

spring rains, however, boosted prospective wheat yields in other areas of the
district and will likely sustain the crop to harvest.

Respondents in

Oklahoma, Colorado, and central and western Kansas report that wheat yields in
their areas could be average to just above average.
Spring planting is nearing completion across the district.

Corn planting

is virtually completed and planting of other crops is on schedule.

Moisture

conditions have improved and are now adequate, following a period of drought
stress for the spring-planted crops.
Respondents report that 90 to 100 percent of district farmers are
participating in government wheat and feedgrain programs this year.

Despite a

recent surge in soybean prices, very little land was switched from corn
production to soybean production.

Farmers are likely to be very cautious in

switching land out of corn production because that would reduce the acreage
eligible for participation in future farm programs.

In addition, planting

decisions had generally been made before the sharp rise in soybean prices
occurred.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

After a period of modest, but steady growth during the second half
of 1987, the District economic expansion has begun to show signs of
increased sluggishness.

Growth in manufacturers' orders has ebbed.

Drilling activity has entered a period of slow, although persistent
increases, after declining during last year's fourth quarter.

Retail sales

are weak and previously strong auto sales growth has faltered somewhat.
Construction activity is still falling.

Prices of District farm and ranch

products have been edging downward, but they remain above a year earlier.
Although deposits at District financial institutions continue to slide, the
rate of decrease has moderated.
District manufacturing activity remains strong relative to the
rest of the economy, but respondents report slower growth in the first half
of 1988 than in 1987.

Although construction-related manufacturers

generally note weak demand, orders in Houston are said to be up modestly.
Nonelectrical machinery sales are increasing.

Primary metals producers say

that reduced competition from imports has resulted in rising sales and
higher prices for their products.

Orders to transportation equipment

manufacturers, particularly aerospace and defense-related firms, are
expanding.

Electric and electronic equipment respondents report continued

strong demand.

In some segments of this industry, notably semiconductor

manufacturing, supply constraints are placing significant upward pressures
on selling prices.

In contrast, weak-to-negative sales growth has resulted

in declining employment in the apparel industry.

XI-2
District drilling has recently expanded moderately.

After

declining from October 1987 through January of this year, the rig count
rose from February through May.

Although rig activity is above the

depressed levels of a year ago, recent increases have been quite modest.
Gains in District well permit applications, however, are said to suggest
that drilling may grow somewhat more strongly over the next few months.
District retail sales have fallen below a year earlier, but some
respondents say recent declines may reflect the effects of the early
Easter.

Sales strength varies significantly among areas in the District,

with marked growth in the Houston area, and particular weakness in Dallas
and Austin.

Several retailers said price increases in women's apparel have

reduced sales of that product line.
Although District automobile sales have generally shown
year-over-year expansion in the first half of 1988, signs have recently
been mixed.

While sales growth continued in Dallas during April and May,

some slippage has occurred in early June.

In Houston, April and May sales

were below a year earlier, following expansion during the first quarter.
Dealers express optimism about auto sales for the balance of 1988 because
they expect the Texas recovery to continue.
Declines in District construction activity have abated somewhat in
The

recent months, but the industry shows little evidence of a rebound.
total value of construction contracts continues to fall.

Nevertheless,

nonresidential building contract values appear to have stabilized, though
at very low levels.

Residential contract values are still falling,

however, and nonbuilding contracts have lately declined markedly.

The

weakness in residential construction is concentrated in single family

XI-3
building.

Multifamily activity is extremely low, but is said to have

little room to fall further.

Previous sharp declines in contracting

activity continue to push construction employment lower; these declines may
abate should construction activity continue to stabilize.
Weather conditions and reduced cattle supplies have led to
moderate reductions in District farm revenue expectations for 1988.
Nevertheless, agriculturalists anticipate higher income this year than what
they received during most previous years of the present decade.

Although

recent rains have alleviated problems in some areas, dry conditions
predominate in much of the District and have reduced corn yields.
Conversely, the cotton crop has been battered by high winds and hail in
isolated areas, but replanting is underway.
marketing are expected to fall

Revenues from livestock

in 1988, as placements of cattle on feed

decline and as the impact of falling demand continues to affect lamb
prices.

District agricultural product prices have slipped lately, but are

still above the levels of a year earlier.
Although April deposits at District financial institutions
remained below a year earlier, they were above March levels and recent
rates of year-over-year decline have been markedly slower than those
predominating in 1987.

Deposits at thrifts continue to grow and

year-over-year rates of change are accelerating.

At the large banks,

assets and liabilities continue to ebb, but the rates of decline are more
moderate than those of the second half of last year.

Loan volumes at the

large banks are declining in most categories, including business, real
estate, and other loans.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The Twelfth District economy continues to expand, although the pace of growth
appears to be slowing. The business sentiment survey reveals that, on average, growth
expectations were higher than in the last report, although an increasing number of
respondents are concerned about the possibility of recession.

Capacity constraints are

noted in a number of industries, and investment plans to expand capacity are reported to
be cautious.

Agriculture and resource industries continue to strengthen, although the

forest products industry is threatened by possible cutbacks in housing starts and the
reduced availability of raw materials.

Interest rate increases are causing concern in

several sectors, but the expected decrease in loan demand has not yet materialized.
Business Sentiment
Respondents to the Twelfth District business sentiment survey expect real GNP
growth to be about 3 percent over the next four quarters, although 8 percent now expect
a recession during that period.

Respondents have become slightly more optimistic

about the trade deficit and more pessimistic about inflation, with 77 percent now
expecting a slight worsening in inflation.
Capacity Constraints
Respondents noted capacity problems in a variety of industries.

There is concern

about shortages of farm equipment, with demand expected to rise 5 percent this year.
Delays are noted in obtaining chemicals, and respondents report chemical production in
excess of stated capacity in some areas.

Additional delays in manufacturing are

blamed on shortages of raw materials and heavy machinery (including printing
machinery).

Aerospace manufacturing in the Northwest also is reported to be at

capacity, and back orders for computer parts have been increasing.

XII-2
Respondents report a reluctance to expand capacity by those firms facing
constraints, although our survey found that most respondents continued to expect an
improvement in total business investment spending this year.

Manufacturers are

reported to be retooling some plants to increase capacity, but are reluctant to make
large investments.

Several respondents report that manufacturers are seeking

additional capacity through mergers and acquisitions rather than through new
investment.

Vacant plants in Idaho and eastern Oregon are being converted to new

uses, and two aluminum plants idled last year have returned to production.

Agricultural

producers are using their increased incomes to reduce debt, rather than to expand
operations.

Some investment is reported in western food processing plants.

Resource Industries
Agricultural conditions continue to improve in the District, led by a strong cattle
market.

Cattle producers report the best conditions in 15 years and expect continued

strong growth in prices and demand this year.
fruits, grapes, and grains.

High prices also are reported for tree

The lack of moisture is causing some cattle producers to

reduce herd size and may reduce crop yields in the Northwest, but sufficient supplies of
irrigation water are expected in California.
Respondents in the forest products industry are beginning to note a slowdown.
Shortages of logs remain a problem for small mills, and recent environmental actions
are further reducing available supplies of timber.

Concern about future demand also is

mounting because of a possible slowdown in housing starts and a decrease in Japanese
demand for lumber.
Mining continues to perform well, with increased exploration and investment noted
in Arizona and Nevada.

Energy extraction remains stable and above year-earlier levels.

Construction
Construction appears to be slowing in the District.

Weakness is reported in

single-family and multifamily construction in Utah and Arizona, and construction

XII-3
remains depressed in Alaska.

Although construction activity remains strong, some

slowing of residential construction is being reported in Oregon and Washington, and
continued high levels of construction in California are attributed by some respondents to
attempts to beat threatened growth moratoria.
Retail Sales
Retail sales have remained relatively sluggish, although recent trends suggest
some improvement.

Retailers report increased costs of foreign soft goods, but the

major weaknesses are in women's apparel.
and a shortage of trucks.

Auto dealers report strong sales of used cars

Dealers also report deteriorating competitiveness of foreign

cars vis a vis domestic cars.

Sales of new cars remain moderate, although some

respondents report slow sales as consumers wait for new incentive programs.
Banking
Respondents in the banking sector report few effects of higher interest rates at
this point.

The number of loan applications has slowed in Utah and Arizona, and a

slight decrease in loan originations is reported in Oregon and some parts of Southern
California.

Increased loan demand to lock in current rates is reported by some bankers.

Overall, however, higher mortgage rates appear to have caused a shift from fixed-rate
mortgages to ARMs, rather than a decline in total demand.

