SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

AUGUST 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

First District - Boston .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Second District - New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i

I-

.

II-

Third District - Philade' hia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III-

Fourth District - Cleveland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Sixth District - Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City

S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

X-l

Eleventh District - Dallas .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco . . . . . . .

. . . . .

.

.

. .

.

V-l

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Economic expansion continues at a pace varying from sluggish in two
Districts to moderate or strong elsewhere.

Employment levels are stable or

rising, with tight labor market conditions noted in some areas.

While

retail sales are generally lackluster, auto sales have picked up.
Manufacturers report moderate to healthy gains in sales and orders,
although four Districts note signs of a possible slowing.

Capacity

constraints and shortages have developed in some Districts and materials
price increases are widespread.

Construction activity is mixed, with home

construction reported to be weaker than nonresidential building.

While the

impact of this summer's drought varies, even within states, the corn and
wheat crops have suffered extensive damage.

The recent rains may save much

of the soybean crop, however.
Consumer Spending
Most Reserve Banks find retail sales to be sluggish, with only
Atlanta and Minneapolis reporting any real vigor.

Respondents cited

apparel and furniture sales as particularly weak; moreover, the rising cost
of imported clothing has reduced margins as well as sales volumes.
Inventories, however, are said to be in balance:
St. Louis Districts were buildups reported.

only in the Cleveland and

Boston and San Francisco

retailers attribute this healthy inventory situation to careful
monitoring:

retailers in New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis,

are reportedly resorting to heavy promotions to clear the shelves.

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and based on information
gathered prior to July 26.

Retailers expressed mild optimism about the next six months, with
those in the Atlanta, Minneapolis, Richmond and Dallas Districts expressing
greater confidence in the future than merchants in Philadelphia, Cleveland,
Kansas City, and St. Louis.
In marked contrast to general retail conditions, many Districts
characterize auto sales as strong and above dealer expectations.
Richmond finds car sales declining.

Only

Domestic makes, aided by manufacturer

incentives, are said to be moving briskly.

Foreign autos, by contrast, are

reportedly rising in price and languishing in the showrooms.

San Francisco

finds inventories of unsold imports now standing at "unsustainably high
levels."
Manufacturing
Manufacturing sales and orders continue to grow at a moderate to
healthy pace in most Districts.

Respondents credit manufacturers'

investment and export activity for much of this growth.

While contacts in

Philadelphia and Dallas see some pick-up in demand from earlier months,
Boston, New York, Richmond and San Francisco report recent signs of
Strong sectors include steel and other primary metals, machinery

slowing.

- particularly machine tools - fabricated metals, commercial aircraft and
railcars.

Atlanta and Chicago also see strength in autos, tires and some

other consumer goods.

Among the weaker sectors were agricultural equipment

and most defense goods, as well as energy-related and construction-related
products.
Increases in the prices of such materials as metals, paper and food
were widely noted.

While a few contacts expect these prices to stabilize,

more think they will continue to rise.

Kansas City, Cleveland, Richmond

and San Francisco report that shortages of steel, valves, castings, motors
and chemicals have developed.

Cleveland, Dallas and San Francisco also

mention capacity constraints, especially in petro-chemicals and pulp and

paper.

In this environment, manufacturers are reportedly choosing to hold

higher inventories and are finding it easier to raise their own finished

goods prices.
Manufacturing employment is generally stable or increasing
slightly.

Cleveland and Philadelphia report healthy gains while Atlanta

and Boston report recent layoffs.
acceleration in wage pressures.

Most contacts foresee little or no
San Francisco respondents were evenly

divided on this issue, however, and Dallas and Minneapolis noted some
industry-specific pressures.
Construction
Residential construction is down from year-ago levels, although the
Richmond District reports strong housing construction and sales.

In the

San Francisco District residential building is very healthy along the coast
but weak in some of the inland states.

Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis and

Kansas City also observe substantial variations in the strength of housing
sales and construction within their districts, with larger cities
experiencing stronger activity than more rural areas.
Reports on nonresidential construction and real estate activity
were positive for the most part.

Although nonresidential construction

contracts were down from a year ago in the St. Louis District, office
building construction has surged in some cities in the Atlanta District and
leasing has picked up in New York.

Office building construction has slowed

somewhat in Chicago, but remains at a high level; industrial real estate
and construction activity in the District has strengthened.

Dallas reports

that both nonresidential and residential construction contracts have
stabilized, a development suggesting that a prolonged downturn in
construction may be at an end.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
The impact of this summer's drought varies considerably by crop even within a given state.

In the Kansas City District, winter wheat

matured on time and the harvest was normal, but in the Chicago and
Minneapolis Districts recent rains were too late for the spring wheat,
barley, oats and hay.
corn crop.

The July rains were also too late for much of the

In some parts of the Kansas City, St. Louis and Minneapolis

Districts, corn yields are expected to be down 50 percent or more.
However, if the recent improvement in the weather holds, Chicago, St.
Louis, Atlanta and Minneapolis suggest that the soybean crop could recover
to near normal levels.

Cotton, rice, sugar cane, peaches and citrus fruits

are also in good shape, but the state of vegetable crops varies.

In the

Chicago District (an important source of processing supplies), vegetables
were severely damaged, but in Atlanta the crop is satisfactory.

While

ranchers have sold more animals than usual and cattle prices have fallen,
no large-scale liquidation has occurred.

Instead, according to reports

from Dallas, Atlanta and Kansas City, record numbers of cattle have been
put on supplemental feed; as a result, ranchers' profits will be squeezed.
Nevertheless, the Kansas City and Minneapolis Districts point out that
improvements in the financial positions of farm borrowers and lenders over
the last two years will help most withstand the impact of the drought.

Atlanta reports that demand for forest products has weakened
recently with the slowdown in building activity, while San Francisco sees
no such decline.

Both are experiencing strong export activity.

With the price of oil below $15 per barrel in mid-July, Atlanta
finds oil production slipping and Dallas and Kansas City report or expect a
fall in the rig count.

Atlanta and Richmond see coal output rising with

help from the weak dollar and strength in steel.
Financial Activity
Except in the Dallas District, loan demand is healthy.

Business

lending is reported to have accelerated in the Philadelphia and Atlanta
Districts, while consumer lending has grown vigorously in Cleveland, Kansas
City and San Francisco.

In the Cleveland District consumer installment

loans have recently increased at an annual rate greater than 50 percent.
Consumer lending is said to be rather weak in the Philadelphia and New York
Districts, but demand for home equity loans remains very strong.

New York

respondents also note that delinquency rates on consumer loans are equal to
or lower than year-ago levels.

Reports on commercial real estate lending

are mixed, with Cleveland reporting relatively strong growth and Atlanta
and Philadelphia seeing some tapering off.
Richmond bank executives report substantial increases in deposits
in July; Philadelphia bankers have also seen a pickup.

In the Dallas

District, however, deposits and assets - particularly business loans - both
continue to decline.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Retail sales in the First District ranged from fair to "OK" in
recent weeks with early July somewhat weaker than June for most stores.
Retailers have kept inventories in line without extensive markdowns and
margins have not eroded significantly.

Manufacturers report a good first

half, with profits rising more than sales.

Prices of both inputs and

finished goods are generally rising faster than a year ago, with selected
commodities and imports leading the way.

The outlook for the rest of 1988

and the first half of 1989 remains positive, but recent signs of weakness
have generated some concern.
Retail
Sales are running at or below planned levels in many First District
chains.

Planned levels varied widely, however, from 5 percent to more than

20 percent ahead of last year.

All but one of the merchants contacted

reported slower growth in early July than in June; the exception
experienced some pickup after several months in the doldrums.

Respondents

carrying ladies' apparel described this area as weak; several attributed
their problems to the failure of short skirts to catch on.

Hot weather

makes it difficult to assess consumer interest in the "more traditional"
transition and fall apparel now available, but merchants expect a good
response.
Most contacts reported that careful monitoring had kept inventories
from getting too high.

While some markdowns have been taken, the careful

control of inventories has enabled contacts to avoid extensive
price-cutting and hence to maintain margins.

I-2

Price increases are averaging about 5 percent overall.

All

contacts noted that price increases are greater this year than last.
Rising import prices have caused merchants to seek out alternate foreign

and domestic suppliers.

Wage costs are also rising in the region, as

retail employers attempt to deal with high turnover and the tight labor
market.
Sales in the remainder of 1988 are expected to increase 5 to 20
percent compared to 1987.

This range is similar to actual results to date,

but merchants seem cautious.

One mentioned a lack of exciting new

products; others lamented female customers' reluctance to buy.

Store

openings and remodelings proceed on schedule, however, and several contacts
said they could scale up quickly if sales are more buoyant than expected.
Manufacturing
For most First District manufacturers the first half of 1988 proved
"very good," even "a boomer to date."

Sales in the first half were up 5 to

15 percent from year-ago levels while profits rose even more.
increased 3 to 20 percent.

New orders

Respondents experienced strong demand from a

broad range of customers, including makers of commercial aircraft, autos,
machinery and sports equipment.
and military aircraft.

The only weak markets were construction

Despite these strong results, half the respondents

noted very recent (May or June) slowdowns in sales, orders or responses to
marketing efforts.

While all the declines could be explained away, these

signs of possible weakness introduced a note of caution.
Reports on inventories were mixed.

Half of the respondents said

inventories were comfortable while half found them a little high.

Two

mentioned that the longer lead times required in ordering paper had
contributed to larger inventories.

I-3

Three-fourths of the manufacturers noted big price increases for
basic materials such as steel, copper, aluminum and paper.

A few thought

that metals prices had stabilized, but most foresaw continuing upward
pressures on commodity prices and cited increases already announced for
August and September.
these rising costs.

Most manufacturers could pass on at least part of
While price increases have become "more acceptable,"

in some markets competition still makes them difficult; thus,
manufacturers' price increases ranged from "very little" to "10 to 15
percent and sticking."
Many contacts described labor markets as tight, with technical
workers and minimum-wage teenagers said to be in particularly short
supply.

However, most respondents do not sense that wage pressures are

picking up in the manufacturing sector.

Workers continue to give priority

to job security and preserving work rules rather than to wage gains.

In

general, contacts report that employment levels are stable or up slightly,
but according to press accounts, two major regional employers have recently
announced lay-offs.
Most First District manufacturers characterize their capital
spending programs as "strong."

Expenditures for 1988 range from slightly

less than last year's level to increases of 20 percent.

Capital programs

continue to emphasize cost reduction, productivity gains and replacement
needs, but three firms are expanding their U.S. capacity.
Expectations for 1988 as a whole fall between "OK" and "good."
Sales and profits are generally forecast to end above last year's levels.
Nevertheless, half the respondents noted recent signs of weakness, and two
expect a slowdown in the second half.

Several contacts forecast a

recession for late 1989, and half expect inflation to accelerate.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

The expansion in the Second District economy seems to have slowed

somewhat in recent weeks.

The latest purchasing managers' surveys showed

slightly fewer firms reporting stable to improved business conditions and
retailers experienced lackluster sales.

The pace of residential

construction continues below the year-earlier level and demand for luxury
housing is down.

Office leasing activity has picked up, however.

Most

small- and medium-sized banks have not raised interest rates on consumer
loans since the prime rate increase.
Consumer Spending
Sales at District department stores have continued sluggish since
the last report.

May was especially weak with over-the-year sales changes

ranging from -5 percent to +2 percent.

Although June brought some

improvement, year-to-year sales results of -1.4 percent to +8 percent were
all below respondents' targets.
Various kinds of apparel were cited as problem areas in recent
weeks.

Sales of women's apparel remained poor and sales of young men's

sportswear were soft as well.
a year earlier.
however.

In addition, furniture sales were down from

Accessories, cosmetics and housewares moved fairly well,

Inventories are comfortable for the most part, due to heavy

promotional activity.

Retailers do not anticipate much improvement for the

rest of the summer but are cautiously optimistic about the fall season and
the new fashion lineup.

II-2

Business Activity
Some slowing of the District's economic expansion occurred in
recent weeks.

In both Buffalo and Rochester the percentage of purchasing

managers reporting improved business conditions declined and the percentage
reporting a worsening increased.

Nonetheless, by far the majority of

firms--95 percent in Rochester and 79 percent in Buffalo--report stable to
improved conditions.

Inventories were generally satisfactory following a

paring of stocks by some Rochester firms with unintended accumulation.
Foreign corporations figured prominently in recent District
developments.

Groundbreaking ceremonies were held in New Jersey for the

U.S. headquarters of Jaguar Cars, Inc. and, in its second major expansion
project in New York in two years, Swiss Bank Corp. bought a 27-story
building in lower Manhattan to house a training center as well as
headquarters and offices for some of its U.S. operations.

In addition, a

Japanese firm announced that its new U.S. subsidiary will begin producing
printer ribbons on Long Island, and a subsidiary of a Swedish company plans
a $10 million capital expansion in Utica.
Residential Construction and Real Estate Activity
The pace of homebuilding activity in the Second District generally
remains somewhat slower than a year ago.

Most pent-up demand has already

been met and buyer resistance to the high level of new home prices has been
noted in several areas.

A few upstate communities report strong buying and

high levels of residential construction, however.

While demand for luxury

housing has slowed somewhat, a number of projects to provide more
affordable housing in the New York metropolitan area have recently been
started or announced.

Work was begun this spring on a new, 1,200-unit,

middle-income townhouse complex in the Bronx, the largest low-rise

II-3

development ever undertaken in that borough of New York City.

On Long

Island in an area where 430 moderate-income units are already being built,

plans are being finalized for 600 more moderately-priced single and
two-family homes on the site of a former, large state hospital complex.
Finally, in Brooklyn some 300 low-income, low-rise units are being built
under a new New York City tax abatement program for private developers of
such housing.
A pickup occurred in commercial real estate activity.

Westchester

County witnessed one of its largest transactions in the past two years when
a communications company purchased a large office building in order to
expand operations there.

Elsewhere in that county, brisk leasing was

reported at an office park which is under construction.

The signing of

several large transactions boosted office leasing activity in midtown
Manhattan recently, and some signs of stabilization were noted in downtown

Manhattan as well.

Finally, what is reportedly the largest office lease

ever taken by a Japanese firm in the U.S. was signed at the $10 billion
Newport City mixed-use project under construction in Jersey City.
Financial Developments
A survey of small- and medium-sized banks in the Second District
indicated that most have not raised interest rates on loans to consumers
since the July 14 increase in the prime rate.

Though some officers

anticipate that their bank may raise mortgage rates, few expect an increase
in rates on consumer installment loans.

One banker commented that interest

rates on consumer loans generally fluctuate much less than those on home
mortgages.

Nearly all respondents anticipate rising market interest rates

in the second half of 1988, though some predicted only minor increases.
Most bankers said the current market for auto and other consumer

II-4

installment loans is rather weak, with demand either flat or down compared
with last year.

Those with an increase in applications noted that their

banks had recently mounted aggressive marketing campaigns.

Several bankers

mentioned that home equity loans have eroded the popularity of conventional
consumer financing due to the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and the demand for
them continues very strong.

Delinquency rates on consumer loans have

remained steady or declined from this time last year, and many respondents
were pleased with the low delinquency rates on their loan portfolios.
Demand for bank credit cards was described as good and comparable to last
year.

Some bankers believe future demand will not be as strong due to tax

law changes reducing interest deductons.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy is continuing on a moderate expansionary trend
in July.

Manufacturing activity is growing modestly and area firms are adding

to payrolls.

Retailers report a slight pickup in sales after a May-June lag,

and auto dealers say sales are running above expectations.

Bankers report that

demand for business loans improved in June and is continuing to grow in July,
but they say consumer loan growth is being maintained only by easier credit
terms.

Home equity lending remains strong, however.

Bankers also note a pickup

in deposit growth during June extending into July that is easing pressure on
their cost of funds.
Most business contacts in the Third District look for a continuation of
current trends through the end of the year.

Manufacturers forecast further

expansion in the next six months, and they plan additions to payrolls and
increases in capital spending.

Retailers expect sales in the second half to

slightly exceed the same period last year.

Domestic auto dealers believe sales

will remain strong through fall but import dealers fear price increases will
result in a year-to-year drop in sales.

Bankers see the region's expanding

manufacturing sector bolstering business loan demand but they expect little
growth in consumer lending.
MANUFACTURING
The region's industrial sector remains on an upward path, according to the
latest Business Outlook Survey.

Twenty-nine percent of the firms participating

in the July survey said business improved from the prior month, while only
5 percent indicated that business had slowed.
producers are experiencing moderate growth.

Both durable and nondurable goods
On balance, area manufacturers

III-2
report increases in new orders that are being matched by higher shipments,
leaving order backlogs virtually unchanged.

Delivery times were increasing

marginally in July, reflecting a step-up in the volume of business, but a slight
inventory buildup indicates that area firms are more than able to meet rising
demand for their products.

Employment remains healthy: although most firms are

holding payrolls steady, one-fifth of those surveyed in July were adding
workers.
Price pressures in the industrial sector show no signs of abating.

Half of

the firms polled in July report higher input costs and one-fourth are raising
prices on their own products.

Looking to the future, 87 percent of the survey

respondents expect to pay more for the goods they purchase in the next six
months, and 65 percent plan to charge more for the products they make.
Looking ahead, area manufacturers see a continuation of current trends.
Overall, firms polled in July expect business to expand further during the next
six months.

They forecast gains in orders and shipments, and some firming in

order backlogs as well.

On balance, survey respondents are planning to boost

capacity over the next six months by hiring more workers and investing more in
plant and equipment.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in the second half of July reported a
slight improvement in sales continuing from June.

Based on comments from store

officials, the current sales rate is running around 5 percent above the year-ago
pace, in dollar terms.

Hot weather has boosted sales of seasonal items,

including summer apparel, according to local merchants.

However, they also say

they have been making more extensive price reductions in recent weeks in order
to stimulate sales.

The strong demand for seasonal goods and consumer response

to discounts are bringing inventories down to more satisfactory levels.

III-3

Looking ahead, most retailers in the Third District say current trends give
them no cause for pessimism, but they remain cautious in planning for the fall.
The local consensus is for second half results somewhat above last year's.
However, merchants say they are prepared to cut prices and cancel orders if
there are early signs that consumer spending this autumn will be below their
forecasts.
Auto dealers report a pickup in sales in June that has carried into July.
Sales are currently running above their expectations, and dealers attribute much
of the gain to manufacturers' rebate programs.

Domestic auto dealers are

optimistic that sales in 1988 as a whole will exceed 1987 sales.

Import dealers

indicate that foreign manufacturers who have not yet raised prices to fully
compensate for the dollar's decline may do so later this year, and they believe
this year's sales could fall below last year's as a result.
FINANCE
Loan volume at major Third District banks increased in June and bankers
contacted in July generally report further growth in most categories of lending.
Bank loan officers say commercial and industrial lending has been accelerating
and is likely to remain healthy for the near future.

Demand for consumer credit

is not strong, although home equity loans are still popular; nevertheless, area
banks have been able to increase installment lending by offering more attractive
credit terms.

Growth in real estate lending, while still at a healthy pace,

continues to taper off, and bankers see this trend continuing.
Deposit growth at major Third District banks picked up in June, and bankers
say this growth was being maintained in July.

In particular, demand deposits

appeared to be reversing the year-over-year decline of the last eight months.
Bankers indicate that growing demand for business loans in combination with
increased deposit growth is bolstering net interest margins.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
The Fourth District's economy continues to grow.

Ohio's unemployment rate

fell for the fourth straight month to 5.9 percent as a result of employment
gains in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors.

Manufacturing firms

report steady gains in production, new orders, and employment.
auto sales remain sluggish.

Retail and

Banks report relatively strong growth in

commercial and consumer installment loans.

Retail Sales
Retailers report sluggish sales, and they continue to be cautious about
prospects for improvement in the fall.

Furniture and appliance inventories

are higher than a year ago, and stores have had to resort to considerable
discounting of summer merchandise to trim large inventories.

Merchandisers

expect that rising interest rates will keep furniture and appliance sales soft
in the months ahead.

Retailers generally are ordering very cautiously for the

fall because they expect to have difficulty passing through to their customers
the large price increases being paid on imported goods, especially apparel.
Retailers report that, where possible, they are shifting to domestic sources.
Auto dealers report that sales picked up in the last half of June but
turned sluggish in the first half of July.

Some suggest the early July

slowdown is seasonal and will be reversed in the last half of the month.
Recent minor adjustments in incentive programs seem to be having little impact
on sales.

Dealers generally see no indications that customers are becoming

IV-2

less willing to spend, and one dealer reported that customers seem to be
choosing more expensive models and options.

Some dealers complained they have

lost sales because inventories are too low while others expect to have
difficulty clearing out some models at the end of the model year.

Foreign

cars continue to sell well.

Labor Markets
Labor markets showed broad-based improvements during the last several
months.

Overall, Ohio's unemployment rate fell to 5.9 percent in June, the
The decrease resulted from both a decrease

lowest in the last several months.

of 10,000 unemployed workers and an increase of 23,000 workers.

Much of the

increase came from the service sector, especially business services, hotels,
and recreation services.

However, manufacturing employment has increased

steadily, with durable goods employment showing strong improvement,
particularly in the smaller cities.

Recent employment projections indicate

improved job prospects for these cities, which were recently severely affected
by the decline in manufacturing.

Most of the employment gains in the large

urban areas were outside the manufacturing sector.
The average workweek for Ohio production workers increased by .2 hours in
May to 43.2 hours.

Weekly earnings were up $2.84.

The largest increases in

earnings were in motor vehicles and equipment and blast furnace and basic
steel products.

IV-3

Manufacturing
Manufacturing in the Fourth District continues to rebound, with increases
reported in production, new orders, and employment.

Comments from purchasing

managers in Cincinnati and Cleveland indicate that production levels are
taxing capacity and that orders are being scheduled into next year.

The

increase in production and new orders continues to exert pressure on the
prices and availability of a wide range of commodities, particularly bearings,
electric motors, and a variety of chemical and steel products.

The higher

prices and the unpredictability of lead times have led some purchasers to
increase raw material inventories.

However, most businesses report that the

high volume of new orders and the steady backlogs of existing orders should
absorb the additional stockpiling.
Favorable exchange rates continue to benefit many industries in the
region.

For example, through the first five months of 1988, orders for

machine tools have increased 83 percent from the same period last year.

Raw

steel production in the Youngstown, Pittsburgh, and Lake Erie regions rose
15.8 percent during the last three months over the same three-month period a
year ago.

Improvement in the steel industry has prompted several large

steelmakers to modernize and expand existing plants in the District.

Banking
District loan demand has been quite strong.

Total loans outstanding at

large banks rose at an annual pace of 22 percent from mid-May to the beginning
of July.

Consumer installment loans, which grew at an annual rate of more

than 50 percent, accounted for much of the overall loan growth.

Nevertheless,

IV-4

the demand for business credit and mortgages was also relatively strong with
commercial and industrial loans growing at an annual pace of 11 percent and
real estate loans growing at 13 percent.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
The District economy continued to expand through the first half of
July but apparently at a slower pace than earlier this summer.
sales were generally firm but auto sales were weaker.

Retail

Manufacturers

reported moderate growth in activity, although some softening was noted in
the demand for textiles and furniture.

Producers continued to report

shortages of raw materials and upward pressure on prices.
was strong and import activity was mixed at District ports.

Export activity
Depository

institution executives reported generally firm loan demand and increases in
deposits.

months.

They expect interest rates to be flat to rising in coming

District farmers welcomed the recent rainfall which has provided

some relief to many drought-stressed crops.
Consumer Spending
District retailers responding to our regular mail survey reported
higher sales in the first two weeks of July compared with the preceding two
weeks.

About half of the retailers reported increases in sales while 34

percent reported declines.

Increased sales were reported at department

stores and furniture stores while most car dealers reported a decrease.
Among department stores, sales of big ticket items were unchanged
according to about 80 percent of the respondents while one reported an
increase.

Half of the department stores said their inventories declined

compared with one-third who said their inventories were unchanged.

Nearly

80 percent of the department store respondents expect sales to increase in

the next six months, while none expect sales to decline.

In comparison, in

our May survey, 56 percent expected sales to increase and 11 percent

expected declines.
Tourism
With the exception of West Virginia, states in the District report

that summer tourist and convention activity have been higher than a year
ago.

West Virginia's activity is reported to be unchanged from

year-earlier levels.

All states expect their tourist business to continue

to improve.
Manufacturing and Coal
Manufacturing activity expanded in the first three weeks of July,
according to our regular mail survey, although not as sharply as reported
in our last survey.

Thirty-eight percent of the respondents reported

increased shipments, compared with 46 percent in the previous survey.
Reports of reduced shipments increased to 23 percent from 12 percent.

New

orders, backlogs of orders, employment, and the length of the workweek
increased, although at a slower pace.

About three-fifths of our

respondents reported no change in inventories of finished goods and
materials, and about one-fourth reported increases.
Prices of inputs and finished goods continued to rise at about the
same pace as reported in our previous survey.

About one-third of the

District manufacturers said they had raised the prices of their finished
products, and two-thirds reported higher prices for raw materials.

Almost

half of our respondents reported difficulties in obtaining raw
materials--especially steel and chemicals.
District manufacturers expect their businesses to expand further
in the next six months.

About 40 percent of the respondents believe their

shipments and new orders will rise, compared with about 15 percent who
anticipate declines.

The majority of producers do not plan to change their

inventory levels in the next six months.

One-third of the respondents,

compared to about one-fourth in our previous survey, expect to increase
capital expenditures in the next six months.
District coal production for the first half of the year is up
about two percent from the first half of last year.

Industry analysts say

the decline in the value of the dollar and increased steel production has
increased demand for West Virginia coal.

These analysts foresee little

effect of a decline in oil prices on coal demand because only a small
number of domestic coal-fired electric power generators can be converted to
oil.
Finance
In conversations with us, executives from several major Fifth
District financial institutions indicated continued strength in their
sector.

Most institutions posted large increases in deposits in July.

Generally institutions experienced modest increases in consumer and real
estate loan activity through mid-July.

The executives reported little

change in loans for commercial construction, but the volume of these loans
would have risen, they said, had their institutions not become more
conservative in their lending policies.

Bankers and thrift executives

expect interest rates to hold steady or increase slightly over the next
three to four months.
Housing
The District housing market remains strong according to a
telephone survey of realtors and builders, and according to reports from
our directors.

Most of our contacts are optimistic about market conditions

for single-family homes in the coming months.

However, one realtor said

V-4

the current surge in sales may reflect buyer anticipation of higher
mortgage rates in coming months, which could leave the market depressed
this fall.

On a down note, market activity in multi-family units is almost

nonexistent according to our survey.
Ports
Representatives from the three major District ports--Hampton Roads
(Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore--noted general increases in export
shipments for June over May.

The import picture was mixed, however, with

shipments reported to be lower at Hampton Roads, higher at Baltimore and
unchanged at Charleston.

All ports expect strong export activity to

continue during the next six months.

Compared to a year ago, export

activity was outpacing that of imports.
Agriculture
Recent rainfall across District states has brought some relief to
crops, but more rain is needed, especially in the western portions of the
states.

Analysts believe the drought has reduced District corn yields, but

expect most other crops to show only minimal damage if rainfall is normal
for the rest of the growing season.

The South Carolina peach crop, for

example, is said to be one of the best on record.

Hay conditions are poor,

but as yet, District livestock liquidations do not appear to be above
normal.

Agricultural banks responding to our quarterly survey indicate

that, as of June 30, demand for farm loans in the District were at normal
levels and farm loan repayment rates were above average.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The Sixth District economy showed signs of moderate expansion in June.
Expansion in key manufacturing industries was tempered by layoffs in other sectors.
Retail sales have picked up and recent dealer incentives have boosted auto sales. While
residential construction has slowed, nonresidential construction and home sales are
strong in major regional markets.
activity throughout the region.

Tourism is benefiting from increased convention

Recent rainfall has improved prospects for crops and

livestock in many drought-affected areas.
Employment and Industry
reporting period.

Industrial activity has been mixed since the last

While the fabricated metals sector is experiencing a surge in exports,

orders for energy-based equipment remain sluggish and the drought has hurt the sale of
agricultural equipment.

Appliance producers expect a noticeable falloff from last year's

record setting pace as a result of the slowdown in housing starts.
Layoffs continue in the region's auto assembly plants, as well as at a large
producer of military aircraft, and at Tennessee Valley Authority.
spending

remains

under

pressure,

regional

companies

producing

Although defense
defense

related

electronic equipment continue to report favorable business conditions.
Plant expansions have been announced for the region's tire manufacturing
industry as a result of strong demand.
the replacement market.

The carpet industry is doing particularly well in

Carpet makers are concerned, however, that the drought may

force them to cut back on their water intensive processes such as dyeing and finishing,
possibly causing temporary layoffs.
Consumer Spending In June and early July retailers in much of the Southeastern
region experienced a pick-up in department store sales. Merchants surveyed mentioned
the warm weather, renewed consumer confidence, and more emphasis on marketing as
factors boosting retailing of summer items. Retailers expect that the improvement in
sales will continue through the fall and into the Christmas season.

VI-2
Car sales continued to strengthen in the District in June and early July, boosting
prospects that 1988 sales will be significantly better than expected earlier this year.
Renewed incentives offered by domestic manufacturers have contributed to the improved
sales experience, and disappointing import sales are intensifying competition across the
board.

Through May 1988, new vehicle registrations in the Southeast were up 6 percent

over the comparable period in 1987, matching the gain in registrations nationally.
Construction

Nonresidential construction in the Sixth District remains healthy,

increasing by 5 percent through May over the comparable period in 1987.

However,

residential construction in the Southeast region is down 11 percent for the year and
continues to lag behind national levels.

Atlanta has seen a surge in office building

construction in the northern sector of the city. High-rise office construction in Tampa is
booming,

spurred by a downtown office vacancy rate that has dropped nearly 10

percentage points in three years.

Interestingly, this expansion was fueled by existing

downtown tenants, rather than relocations.
Declining values in residential construction in the District have been associated
with moderate to strong home sales.

Miami and Atlanta report strong existing home

sales in June and early July, spurred mainly by consumer expectations of further rises in
interest rates. In Louisiana and Mississippi, soft demand coupled with intense scrutiny of
loan applications is making business difficult for homebuilders.
Financial Services

Overall loan growth in the District edged upward in June,

largely as a result of an uptick in the rate of growth of business loans.

Contacts in

Florida and Georgia attribute the improvement in commercial loan growth to a surge in
export sales and the growing emphasis on middle market companies. Bankers in Alabama
and Tennessee reported that consumer installment and indirect retail lending were very
strong during the quarter just ended, as were residential mortgage and home equity
lending.

Several commercial mortgage lenders are noticing a definite slowdown in the

number of new deals added to their pipeline.

VI-3
Tourism
last year.

The number of visitors to the Southeast has increased marginally over

However,

convention activity should get a boost this summer.

The

Democratic Convention in Atlanta hosted over 30,000, and New Orleans is expecting
45,000 for the Republican convention.

Hotel occupancy in the region is holding steady

with the exceptions of Jacksonville which is experiencing a 10 percent drop from last
year due to overbuilding, and New Orleans which showed a 5 percent increase in April
due to heavy convention activity.
Agriculture, Forestry, and Mining

The drought has arrested crop growth and

curtailed the expansion of southeastern livestock production. An increasing frequency of
showers has been noted across much of the region since early July.

Soybeans, cotton,

peanuts and grain sorghum can still recover with the resumption of adequate rainfall.
However, most of the early corn crop is beyond help.

Crops in the southern portion of

the region including rice, sugarcane, citrus and vegetables, have received near-normal
rainfall and are showing good prospects.

Pastures and forage crops are reviving where

recent rainfall has occurred and most cattlemen have held on to their herds by
supplemental feeding.
Demand has weakened in the forestry industry during the past month and prices
have softened.

The uptick in interest rates has slowed building activity but the home

repair boom and increases in lumber exports to South Korea and Japan have provided
some offsetting support for the lumber market. Coal production continues to rise but oil
production has slipped 7 percent from the same period last year.

VII-1
SEVENTH

Summary.

DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Most reports on business activity in the District indicate

continued strength.

So far this year, total payroll employment in the five

states has trended upward at a somewhat slower pace than in the nation, mainly
due to first quarter layoffs at auto makers and suppliers.

Production cuts and

stronger sales cleared excess car inventories, and were followed by increases
in production.

Purchasing managers in Chicago reported strong gains in

activity through June, with widespread price increases.

Reports are similarly

robust from contacts in various industries, with the main exception being
office and residential construction.

Steel demand continues strong, reflecting

the rise in auto production, improved markets for a wide range of equipment,
and vigorous demand for construction steel reflecting in part rising industrial
construction.

Severe drought, relieved by scattered rains in mid-July, has

caused serious problems for many farmers and adversely affected agricultural
suppliers.

Production cuts, or the possibility of cuts, resulting from low

water supplies have been reported in a few other industries, including
papermaking and petroleum refining, but do not appear to be widespread.
Motor Vehicles.
forecasters.

Sales of cars have exceeded the expectations of many

The first half sales rate outpaced sales in all of calendar year

1987, though trailing 1986.

Inventories are in good balance.

expected to stay relatively strong in the second half.

Production is

Truck sales have

trended upward and are likely to exceed 5 million units, a record, for all of
1988.
Steel.

Production of steel is slowing in the third quarter to allow for

needed maintenance and to keep output in line with seasonal slowdowns at
customers' plants.

Robust orders should support a high level of output over

VII-2

the rest of the year.

Sales at steel service centers, which have been growing

very strongly, are slowing less than usual at this time of year.
steel to motor vehicle makers are expected to stay strong.
consumer goods makers is holding up well.

Shipments of

Purchasing by other

Demand from some equipment makers is

the strongest since before the 1981-82 recession.

Orders for construction

steel continue robust, overall, helped by the upturn in factory construction.
Equipment.

Manufacturers of various types of equipment are seeing good

demand for their products.

Some machinery makers report double-digit increases

in orders and backlogs, with particularly large increases in sectors which had
been depressed.

Orders for metal-cutting machine tools this year have been

about double the year-earlier pace, though still well short of the high levels
of the late 1970s and 1980.

The upturn is broad-based and inquiries suggest

that further gains in orders are likely.

Railcar orders are up sharply after

having been very depressed since collapsing in the early 1980s.

A lift

truck

manufacturer is shifting some production from a European plant to Illinois.
Makers of other materials handling equipment, food industry machinery, and
other types of business equipment have seen sizable gains in orders.

Demand is

described as very good for various types of fabricated metal parts.

Consumer

goods sales are holding up well, including appliances as well as other
types--buying of boat trailers, for example, is quite strong.

However, there

are indications that the recent strengthening in agricultural equipment is
starting to abate.
Construction.

Construction activity in the District this year is at a

fairly high level but shows signs of slowing.

Contracts for residential

construction (measured in square feet) in the first five months were 15 percent

VII-3

below a year earlier in the five states.

The sharpest year-over-year declines

occurred early in the year, reflecting adverse weather, but contracts in the
spring continued below a year earlier.

Pouring of concrete at Chicago-area

residential construction sites this summer is reported to be at a good pace but
below last spring despite favorable weather.

Nonresidential construction

contracts in the first five months were 5 percent lower in District states.

In

contrast, shipments of gypsum board in the District states for five months were
1 percent higher than last year, reflecting finishing work on structures begun
earlier.

Chicago office building construction, still at a high level, is

described as having slowed somewhat, bringing the market for office space into
better balance.

The industrial real estate market and construction of

factories and warehouses have strengthened.

Work on highways and streets in

the District will be strong this year.
Agriculture.

With no respite until recently from extremely dry and hot

conditions, prospects for this fall's crops deteriorated sharply.
throughout much of the Midwest,

Hot weather

coinciding with the start of the pollination

stage for the corn crop in early July, inflicted irreversible damage.
Estimates of the resulting reductions in per acre yields, however, are still
subject to considerable uncertainty.

Scattered rain and cooler temperatures

beginning in mid-July appear to have halted the deterioration in corn condition
ratings in much of the

District.

Soybeans remain under stress but the

improved weather will temper the overall decline in production.

During June,

most of the irreversible damage was concentrated on spring wheat, barley, oats,
and hay.

In addition, the grazing capacity of range and pasture land was

seriously depleted and vegetables in the Great Lakes region, an important
source of processing supplies, were hit hard.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District's economic growth has been sluggish.

District

employment has leveled off in recent months, growing more slowly in all
sectors than in the nation.
activity have also been weak.

Both consumer spending and construction
Meanwhile, it appears that the drought

will reduce District corn yields by as much as 50 percent, but recent
rains will help the soybean crop.
Employment
Following rapid growth earlier in the year, District
nonagricultural employment rose at only a 0.4 percent annual rate in the
three months through May, while rising at a 3.6 percent rate nationally.
District employment growth trailed the national average in all sectors.
Employment in District services and trades sectors--major sources of
earlier growth--expanded at only a 1.2 percent rate in the March-May
period, while in goods-producing sectors, including mining, construction,
and manufacturing, it declined at a 2.5 percent rate.

Nonelectrical

machinery was the only manufacturing sector in which employment grew
substantially.

Consumer Spending
District department store sales have been weak in recent
months.

Retailers in Memphis and St. Louis report second-quarter sales

VIII-2

slightly below year-ago levels, while Louisville and Little Rock sales
were flat to 5 percent higher.
particularly weak.

Sales of shoes and women's apparel were

Inventories, however, are only slightly higher than

desired because of heavy discounting to liquidate summer goods.
outlook is one of cautious optimism:

The

retailers generally feel that sales

in August and September will be 2 to 6 percent higher than a year
earlier.

In line with these restrained expectations, inventory growth of

fall goods should be more limited than in recent years.

Construction
District construction activity declined in recent months and was
considerably weaker than the national average.
concentrated in Arkansas and Kentucky.

Much of the decline was

The value of District residential

building contracts awarded in the three months through May fell 6.9
percent from the previous three-month period and was 8.9 percent lower
than a year earlier.

Nonresidential building contracts fell by 12.7

percent in the March-May period and were down 18.6 percent from a year
earlier.

Banking
Total loans at weekly reporting District banks increased at a
7.7 percent annual rate in the second quarter, somewhat slower than in
the same period last year.

Commercial lending, which has picked up in

recent months, expanded at a 9.3 percent annual rate in the second
quarter, slightly higher than in the same period last year.

Much of the

acceleration in commercial loan growth, however, can be attributed to
purchases of loan participations by large District banks.

VIII-3

Agriculture
Widespread rains arrived too late to prevent significant damage
to the District's corn crop.

Corn yields are expected to be down 50

percent or more in Missouri, southern Illinois and central Tennessee.
Western Tennessee received timely rains in early July; still, corn yield
losses of 25 percent are anticipated.
Farmers' have turned their attention now to the soybean crop
which accounts for over 30 percent of District crop receipts.

Some

damage to soybean yields has already occurred but the crucial period of
growth--from late July to mid-August--is yet to come.

With enough rain

during this period, further damage to soybeans can be minimized and a
near-normal crop harvested.

The drought caused some soybeans to be

planted much later than normal, however, increasing the risk that an
early frost could damage the crop.

Cotton and rice in Arkansas have

suffered only minor drought damage, with over 90 percent of these crops
in fair-to-good condition.
The Mississippi River remains open to barge traffic, but travel
times from St. Louis to the Gulf of Mexico have doubled.

So far, the

river network has been able to meet export commitments because grain
shipping is normally slow at this time of the year.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

General economic conditions have held firm in the Ninth District.
Employment demand has remained high, and consumer spending has continued to
grow moderately.
crop,

livestock,

Recent rains should eventually help some drought-stricken
and dairy operations.

And agricultural bank conditions,

while not improving, have not yet deteriorated either.

Labor Markets
The most recent statistics indicate that district labor markets have
experienced some additional tightening.
rate dropped

During May, Minnesota's unemployment

to 3.2 percent, its lowest level in 9 years.

The unemployment

rate in its Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area fell to just 2.8 percent.
In that area,

temporary help agencies report

rising wages paid to clerical workers.

some spot labor shortages and

Both the labor force and total employ-

ment reached record highs during May in South Dakota;
was only 3 percent.

its unemployment rate

Also, North Dakota's unemployment rate dropped to 3.7

percent during May, almost one full percentage point below its level a year
earlier.

During past years, the Upper Peninsula of Michigan has experienced

very high unemployment; this has eased in the 12 months ending in May:

from

10.6 to 7.7 percent.

Consumer Spending
Retail spending has continued to grow moderately in the district.
One chain reports that its department store sales were 7 percent higher this
June than last.

One chain plans to significantly expand two of its stores in

the Minneapolis-St.

Paul

metro area.

A chain with stores

throughout

the

district reports much stronger growth during this period, but a higher market
share probably accounts for much of that strength.
inventory or credit problems.

Neither chain reports any

IX-2

District sales of motor vehicles have continued
One

domestic manufacturer

reports

that

to hold up well.

its car sales during

percent over their level a year earlier.

A district manager

June rose

17

for a popular

domestic line reports that car sales during June were strong at virtually all
its dealers.
well.

A recent arena sale in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, went quite

But district truck sales have slowed relative to car sales, perhaps due

to drought-induced buying resistance in farm-dependent areas.

Still, vehicle

inventories haven't risen above normal levels.
Housing activity has held firm.

Home sales in the Minneapolis-St.

Paul area during May and June were 13 percent ahead of a year earlier.

Resi-

dential building contracts in Minnesota were up 5 percent during May.

But as

has been true for some time, housing activity was stagnant in many cities and
towns of Montana and North Dakota.
District tourist spending has increased sharply this summer.

De-

spite burning bans at campgrounds, all tourism industry representatives contacted

report

activity.

increased

business was way above
Upper Peninsula.

the

For

example,

expectations of

Independence

industry sources

Day

weekend

in Michigan's

A source in northern Wisconsin says that tourism there has

been running 10 percent ahead of last year.

And the Black Hills area of South

Dakota has also done well.

Agriculture
Rain during July came too late to significantly help some of the
district's wheat, barley, and oats crops but has helped its soybean and corn
crops.

For example, during the third week in July, the Minnesota Commissioner

of Agriculture estimated that 80 percent of Minnesota's soybean crop would
survive.

Soybeans are Minnesota's

second-largest cash crop.

crop, corn, is not expected to do so well:

Its

largest

only 60 percent may survive.

IX-3

Crop insurance will
output.

help district farmers

cover part of the lost

Compared to last year, federally sponsored multiperil coverage is up

83 percent in South Dakota, 77 percent in North Dakota, 41 percent in Montana,
and 31 percent in Minnesota.
More help has come from prices of farm products, which have continued to rise.

Mid-July prices of corn and soybeans on the cash markets were

over 70 percent higher than a year earlier, while barley and wheat prices were
up around

50 percent.

These high prices imply lower government deficiency

payments to farmers under current law, but some form of disaster relief might
be

enacted

to

replace

that

loss.

Furthermore, farmers

with

stored

crops

carried over from last year will benefit from sales at these high prices.
Livestock and dairy operations have been significantly hampered by
higher feed prices and a shortage of pasture growth.
has been sold than normal, which has
cent.

lowered

As a result, more stock

its price as much as 20 per-

Recent rains should help stimulate grass growth, though, and slow the

sell-off in some parts of the district.

Financial Conditions
The safety and soundness of district banks do not seem to have been
hurt by the drought yet.

Members of this Bank's Advisory Council on Small

Business, Agriculture, and Labor report that banks are still liquid and looking for good lending opportunities.

A prominent banker in Sioux Falls, South

Dakota, says that most serious farm debt problems won't be noticed until next
year.
cate

This Bank's latest survey of district agricultural bankers does indithat many bankers are expecting low farm income and slow repayment of

farm debt during the third quarter.

Still, the condition of district agricul-

tural banks substantially improved during 1987, which should help them weather
the drought.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.
improvement.

The economy of the Tenth District continues to show slight

Retailers, including auto dealers, report steady to slightly

higher sales.

In the manufacturing sector, lead times for some materials are

increasing and some firms report problems finding certain kinds of skilled
labor.

Housing starts, however, remain at or below last year's levels and

lower oil prices are expected to reduce drilling activity.

Effects of the

drought vary widely across the district with some farmers in drought-free
areas harvesting normal crops and benefiting from higher crop prices.

Neither

loan demand nor deposits have changed much at district commercial banks over
the past month, while savings inflows to thrift institutions have risen in
recent months.
Retail Sales.

Retailers generally report sales steady to slightly higher

compared with a year earlier, as well as with a few months ago.

Most

respondents have been trimming their inventories recently, and are generally
satisfied with current inventory levels.

Retailers generally expect only

modest sales increases in the near term, apart from seasonal items.
Automobile Sales.

Automobile dealers report that sales are steady to

slightly higher over the last month.

Adequate financing is available for

qualified buyers and for dealer inventory purchases.

The sales outlook has

generally improved since the first of the year.
Manufacturing.

Input prices have risen moderately from a year ago, but

increases have tapered off some in recent months.

The recent slowing in price

increases is expected to continue in the next few months.
generally available, but lead times have risen.

Materials are

Steel inputs have become

harder to get.

Most respondents have been expanding inventories, but now plan

some trimming.

Some firms report problems finding enough skilled labor,

particularly machinists.

X-2

Energy.

Recent weakness in oil prices is eroding some of the stability

in the district's energy industry.

High output from OPEC producers caused

domestic crude oil prices to fall below $15 a barrel in mid-July.

While the

level of exploration activity remained stable in June, and slightly above a

year earlier, the lower oil prices in July and the outlook for continued soft
prices are expected to cause some decline in the district rig count.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Area homebuilders report that housing

starts are at or below last year's levels.

Relative to a month ago, however,

housing starts have varied across the district depending on local conditions.
New home sales are steady to weak.

Most respondents expect housing market

performance to remain steady or improve slightly.

In addition, most

respondents report no problems with construction materials availability or
delivery times.

A lumber wholesaler reports weak sales compared with both a

year earlier and three months ago.
Most savings and loan respondents report that savings deposit inflows
have risen in recent months, reversing the weakness observed earlier this
Inflows are expected to increase slightly in the near future.

year.

Mortgage

demand has been solid, but most respondents expect weaker demand in the fall.
Mortgage rates have been stable to slightly higher, and some respondents
expect a slight increase in the second half of this year.
Banking.
past month.

District commercial bankers report steady loan demand over the
Consumer loan demand has shown the greatest strength, while

demands for other types of loans have, on balance, been stable.

Most

respondents increased their prime rates by half a percentage point on or
shortly after July 14, following a period of steady rates in June and early
July.

A majority of the respondents expect no further movement of the prime

rate in the near future.

Consumer loan rates have been relatively stable.

X-3

Deposits have changed little at Tenth District commercial banks over the past
month.

Although small time deposits increased at more than half of the

responding institutions, demand deposits were flat to slightly down.

Other

deposits were generally unchanged.
Agriculture.
district.

The effects of this summer's drought vary widely across the

The winter wheat crop matured before the drought worsened, and its

harvest is nearly complete with yields and quality normal to above normal.
Plentiful rainfall in some parts of the district--especially Nebraska and
western Oklahoma--have provided excellent growing conditions for crops and
range conditions for cattle.

Farmers in these areas are likely to harvest

normal crops and benefit from prices forced higher by the effects of the
drought elsewhere.
In those areas most severely affected by the drought, however--especially
southeastern Oklahoma, eastern Kansas, and much of Missouri--non-irrigated row
crops are under severe stress, irrigation costs are rising, and range and
pasture conditions are deteriorating.
yields may be reduced by half or more.

In some areas, non-irrigated corn
Ranchers are providing cattle herds

supplemental feedstuffs where pastures have been scorched.

Although the

drought has not yet forced the large scale liquidation of district cattle
herds, net returns to cattle ranchers and feeders are likely to be squeezed by
lower cattle prices and sharply higher feed costs.
Effects of the drought on farm borrowers and lenders will vary widely
across the district.

However, the general improvement in the financial

positions of farm borrowers and their lenders during the last two years will
likely allow most to withstand this summer's drought.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy remains sluggish overall, in contrast to the
steady growth it posted during the second half of 1987.

Nevertheless,

survey respondents are now somewhat more positive about business conditions
than they have been in the recent past.

Manufacturers' orders continue to

grow, although the expansion is slower than during last year.
slipped lately.
optimistic.

Drilling has

Although retail sales are low, merchants are becoming more

Construction activity has stabilized.

abated the District's drought problems somewhat.

Recent rains have
Deposits at District

financial institutions continue to ebb.
Orders to District manufacturers are generally up from earlier
this year.

Sales growth for some industries is slower than during the

second half of 1987, however.

Despite the ongoing expansion, upward

pressures on wages beyond normal cost-of-living increases were almost
uniformly reported as insignificant.

The only notable exception was the

electronics industry, where orders are expanding and are expected to
continue to pick up for the rest of this year.

Demand for primary metals

has also been rising, and product and input prices are up.

Defense

contracting activity for some District aircraft-makers has fallen, but
these firms say they are continuing to work through previously issued
contracts, so that production has not declined.

Although sales of oilfield

equipment are growing, the rate of increase is much diminished and
respondents anticipate little further expansion.

Some firms in the

District petrochemicals industry are reaching capacity constraints and they
say that high demand has resulted in undesirably low inventories.

Apparel

XI-2
producers generally report very modest sales growth.

Orders to

construction-linked stone, clay and glass manufacturers continue to fall.
Food processing firms anticipate further rises in input prices because of
the drought and they expect to pass these price increases on to consumers.
District drilling has recently declined.

After a period of modest

gains from March through May, the District rig count fell in June and again
in the first half of July.

Nevertheless, respondents generally expect

drilling activity to show little significant variation in the near future
and they say that drilling plans will not change much unless oil prices
remain below $15 per barrel for an extended period.
Although retailers report sluggish demand, most of those surveyed
believe that the bottom has already been reached.
growth in the future, particularly in Houston.

Respondents expect

The patterns of demand for

different types of retail merchandise vary greatly.

Apparel sales remain

weak while demand for home products is strong.
District auto sales have lately been increasing overall, and
dealers have begun to express more optimism about future demand than they
have in the recent past.

In Dallas, sales are unchanged from a year

earlier while Houston has recently shown noticeable growth.

Dealers say

inventories in Dallas are adequate but that Houston inventories are tight.
District construction activity is flattening after a prolonged
downturn.

In May, a three-month moving average of District construction

contract values posted its first increase in twelve months.

Both

nonresidential and residential contract values have begun to stabilize.
Values of residential building permits have also shown little change of
late.

Office vacancy rates in major District cities remain among the

highest in the nation and respondents do not view the recent stability in

XI-3
construction contract values as foreshadowing any significant upturns in
building activity this year.
Income prospects for District agriculture are said to be mixed.
Prices received by Texas farmers and ranchers in June averaged 6 percent
above a year earlier, but livestock prices dropped 4.3 percent from the
previous month.

Some cattle-producers have been selling off their breeding

herds in response to drought conditions.

Movement of cattle from dried-out

pastures to feed lots contributed to a record 705,000 placement of Texas
cattle on feed in May.. Since then, recent rains have diminished the
already-moderate drought in the Eleventh District and have raised cotton
production expectations to high levels.

The additional moisture was too

late for some drought-damaged corn and for some ranchers, however.
Total deposits at District banks continue to show accelerating
year-over-year rates of decline.

These declines are dominated by

significant reductions in large time deposits and MMDAs.

Despite dropoffs

in these same liability categories at thrifts, overall deposits at thrifts
are expanding.

Among District banks, particularly high rates of deposit

slippage are being posted at the large banks, and these reductions in
liabilities are accompanied by falling asset levels.

The highest rates of

asset declines are taking place in loans and, chiefly, in business loans.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The Twelfth District economy continues to expand at a healthy pace.

The

Business Sentiment survey reveals that expectations are somewhat more modest than in
the last report, although most respondents continue to anticipate healthy economic
growth.

Auto sales are satisfactory, but retail sales growth remains sluggish.

Manufacturing activity continues strong, with most respondents reporting inventories
close to desired levels.

The drought has not affected most western farmers, although

profit margins on cattle are being squeezed by higher feed costs and lower beef prices.
Demand for most forest products continues strong, but strikes at several Northwest
mills are restricting supply. Construction and real estate activity continues mixed, with
the coastal states reporting particularly strong demand for single-family homes.
Respondents are about evenly divided between those who anticipate steady wage gains
during the next year and those who expect wage increases to accelerate.

Banks and

thrifts report generally healthy activity.
Business Sentiment
Respondents to the Twelfth District Business Sentiment survey continue to expect
GNP growth during the next year to be a little lower than 3 percent, with none
anticipating a recession during that period.

Compared with the previous survey,

respondents are slightly less optimistic about economic growth, and somewhat more
optimistic about inflation.
Consumer Spending
Auto sales continue at a satisfactory pace in most parts of the Twelfth District.
Inventories of most domestic models are at or below desired levels, but some
respondents report that slow sales have increased inventories of imported cars to
unsustainably high levels.

XII-2

Growth of retail sales remains sluggish.

One retail executive asserts that the

sector is improving very slowly from its poor Spring.

Another notes continued slow

growth, but points out that retailers have been managing expenses and inventories very
conservatively, and earnings therefore have held up reasonably well. Most respondents
indicate that retail inventories are close to desired levels.
Manufacturing
Overall, manufacturing activity in the West is strong.

Commercial aircraft and

heavy equipment manufacturers note especially robust activity. Most information about
the electronics industry suggests that it is benefiting from a surge in orders and sales,
although one manufacturer of electronic components notes some weakening in recent
weeks, and at least two sizable plants are slated to close.
Respondents indicate that overall inventory levels are either close to or somewhat
below their desired levels.

Lean inventories are reported for sectors that are

experiencing strong demand, including some electronic components and exported
products, as well as minerals, valves, and castings that are in short supply.

A few

respondents note high inventory levels, but these respondents also point out that some of
the inventory accumulation is an attempt to ensure the availability of products for
which demand is expected to be strong.
Agriculture and Resource Related Industries
The drought is not expected to cause problems for most western farmers, since
most acreage in the West is irrigated and reservoirs hold sufficient supplies for this
summer.

Cattle ranchers, however, have range land that is providing insufficient

nourishment, and feed costs have escalated substantially due to the drought.

As a

result, many are selling earlier than they otherwise would, to avoid paying the high feed
costs. In the glutted marketplace, they are getting lower prices, and most anticipate
significantly higher prices in several months as the glut is worked off.

XII-3

The forest products industries continue to experience strong demand, from both
overseas and domestic markets.

Pulp and paper activity is particularly strong, and

production is running at capacity. Nevertheless, inventories reportedly are low at both
the user and manufacturer levels, so several firms plan to expand their production
capacity. However, lumber production has been curtailed because of recent strikes at
several mills.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity continue mixed in the Twelfth District. In
the coastal states, the pace of residential building is healthy, particularly for singlefamily homes. In the Los Angeles and San Francisco regions, some areas with limited
available space are seeing such frenzied home buying activity that home values have
increased by as much as 25 percent during the past year. Activity in Idaho has improved
modestly during the past few months.
In contrast, construction activity in Utah was so weak during the first five months
of 1988 that it will take a remarkable rebound even to reach 1987's poor showing.
Arizona is in somewhat better shape than Utah, but activity continues to languish there
as well.
Wages and Salaries
Most respondents anticipate wage increases in the 4 to 5 percent range during the
next year. Respondents are divided about evenly between those who expect wage and
salary increases during the next twelve months to be unchanged from those of the past

year, and those who anticipate some acceleration of wage hikes.
Most of those who anticipate steady wage gains argue that increases will be low
due to pressures for keeping costs under control, expectations of weakening activity (as
for defense contractors), or a trend toward tying individual compensation more closely
to performance.

Those who anticipate higher wages cite the pressures for wage

increases that have resulted from recent high profits (as in timber), general

XII-4
improvements in economic activity (as in Boise), and difficulty attracting and retaining
qualified workers.
While California is not experiencing labor shortages associated with immigration
reform, some farmers in Idaho reportedly are paying day laborers substantially more
than they did last year.

Few respondents note wage increases associated with

California's new $4.25 minimum wage, which went into effect on July 1.

These

increases occurred in such low-wage sectors as agriculture, restaurants, and hotels.
Financial Sector
Most western banks and thrifts report healthy conditions, reflecting the healthy
regional economies in which they operate.

Several bankers note particular strength in

consumer lending, while a few site commercial lending as the leading sector. Bankers in
Oregon, Washington, and California report stiff competition for quality mortgage
applications.

