SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

NOVEMBER 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY....... .........................................

.........

First District

- Boston ....................................

Second District

- New York .....................................

Third District

- Philadelphia.............................

Fourth District

- Cleveland ....................................

Fifth District

- Richmond ....................................

Sixth District

- Atlanta .....................

.

................

Seventh District - Chicago....................................

II-I
III-1
IV-1
V-1
VI-I
VII-I

Eighth District

- St. Louis .....................................

VIII-1

Ninth District

- Minneapolis . ............ ......................

IX-1

Tenth District

- Kansas City..................................

Eleventh District- Dallas .....................................
Twelfth District - San Francisco...............................

X-1
XI-1
XII-1

SUMMMARY

Most Districts report continued economic growth, but at an apparently
slower pace than in previous months.

Only Dallas, St. Louis, and Kansas City

report generally sluggish business conditions and cite persistent weakness in
many sectors.

Much of the activity in the faster-growing Districts appears to

be generated from strong exports and a steady demand for capital goods.
brisk production pace continues to be supported by growing new orders.
increases are moderate, although labor markets continue to be tight.

The
Wage

Capacity

pressures, and consequently price pressures, have reportedly eased slightly in
several industries, including paper, chemical, steel, and textiles.
Improvement is noted in the drought-stricken Districts, except Dallas, as
damage estimates are revised downward and more favorable weather improves soil
conditions.

Residential construction is sluggish throughout most of the

Districts, but nonresidential construction remains brisk in several Districts.
Retail sales are slow, but some optimism is expressed about prospects for the
holiday shopping season.

The moderate increase in loan demand has been driven

primarily by strong commercial loans.
RETAIL TRADE
Retailers report flat to moderate sales as they enter the holiday shopping
season.

Several Districts in the eastern half of the nation, including

Boston, New York, Philadelphia and Cleveland, express optimism about the
apparent turnaround in women's apparel, which has been particularly weak for

Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland using
information gathered prior to November 18, 1988.

several months.

However, department store managers in Cleveland and

Philadelphia expect price increases to dampen to some extent the recent
rebound in apparel sales.
Inventories generally remain light, as retailers anticipated the recent
sluggishness in sales and continue to be cautious in stocking shelves for the
winter months.

Merchants in Kansas City, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia report

that inventories are at acceptable levels.

Only Richmond reports that

inventories, especially in large departments, were higher than desired.
Despite the slim inventories, many retailers are pursuing widespread
discounting.

However, Philadelphia managers report that the price discounting

is in line with their planned pricing strategies.

Several Districts,

including Kansas City and Cleveland, report some pressure on wholesale prices,
which may squeeze even further the profit margins of these businesses.
Retailers express guarded optimism about sales prospects for the holiday
season.

New York, Minneapolis, and Kansas City merchants anticipate good

holiday sales, especially compared with the post-October consumer sentiment of
last year.

St. Louis and Philadelphia managers were less optimistic and

expect only slight increases from a year ago.
Automobile sales are sluggish in most Districts, except for reports of
strong sales in Chicago and Minneapolis.

Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas

City report expanding inventories, which could prompt more dealer incentive
and rebate programs.
MANUFACTURING
All Districts report expanding production, but many report a slower rate
of growth than in previous months.

Traditional durable-goods industries show

considerable strength, even more so than many "high-technology" industries.
Cleveland reports that strong capital-goods demand and rising exports have
fueled rapid advances in nonelectrical machinery and primary metals.
and Atlanta also note strength in durables and steel production.

Chicago

Boston,

Dallas, and San Francisco, on the other hand, report sluggishness in defense
and computer-related industries, especially electronic equipment manufacturing
and semiconductors.
The expansion in manufacturing continues to be supported in most
Districts by rising new orders.

However, some of the pressure on capacity has

been eased, as evidenced by a reduction in the backlog of orders and shorter
delivery times.
Many industries, including paper, chemical, and aerospace, are still
operating at or near capacity.

San Francisco reports that capacity

constraints are clearly evident in the commercial aircraft industry.

Atlanta

reports that the chemical industry is running close to capacity, bidding up
wages for skilled labor and creating tight supplies of ethylene and propylene.
However, these same Districts also report some retreat from the high levels of
capacity seen earlier in the paper, textile, and apparel industries.
Despite general tightness in many District labor markets and reports of
shortages of skilled workers, only moderate wage increases have been observed.
Cleveland reports that area compensation managers are budgeting about the same
level of wage and salary hikes for the coming year (4.6 percent) as granted in
1988.
Prices continue to increase in many sectors, but do not appear to be as
large or as widespread as recorded in previous months.

Chicago reports that

upward pressures on steel prices have eased after sharp increases earlier.
For the first time in several months, less than half the purchasing managers
surveyed in Cleveland report general commodity price increases.

Manufacturers

in the Atlanta District say they have not increased their prices because
domestic competition is strong.
Only a few Districts mention plans to increase capital spending.

Boston

mentions plans for several new plants in their District, but notes that
overall capital spending plans are mixed.

Chemical, textile, and

nonelectrical machinery manufacturers in the Philadelphia District have
announced planned increases for both modernization and capacity expansion.
AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY
Drought-ridden areas generally report improving conditions as fall rains
begin to replenish soil moisture.

Some Districts are revising downward

earlier estimates of crop damage.

Chicago reports that crop yields are

slightly higher than earlier estimates.

More current estimates show corn

production to be 41 percent lower and soybeans 29 percent lower than last year
in the District.

St. Louis reports that conditions continue to improve as

recent rains have benefited the winter wheat crop and have improved pastures.
Kansas City also reports that the severity of the drought has been revised
downward.

Lenders in that District expect strong farm incomes from higher

prices and anticipate little change in loan repayment rates.
Dallas is the only District reporting worsening drought conditions.

Many

pastures and ranges are bare, and without significant rainfall this winter,
the cost of supplemental feeding may threaten the profitability of cattle
operations in some parts of the District.

San Francisco reports that the demand for lumber and plywood has fallen in
recent weeks, causing prices to erode slowly.
remain firm due to continued exports.

However, log and timber prices

Atlanta notes that foreign demand for

hardwoods by Japan and the United Kingdom has helped support prices of
hardwood logs.
CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE
Housing construction remains slow in most Districts, except for a few
isolated pockets of strength.

Richmond reports fairly strong demand for

single-family homes, and San Francisco notes relatively brisk activity in
California, Oregon, and Washington.

New York attributes the weak demand for

new homes and a slow resale market in much of their District to persistently
high prices.
Several Districts find relatively brisk activity in nonresidential
construction.

St. Louis notes that the expansion of nonresidential

construction exceeds the national rate.

Atlanta attributes the increase in

warehouse and industrial construction in their District to strong exports.
Chicago reports vigorous commercial building activity in downtown Chicago.
FINANCIAL
Loan activity among Districts ranges from flat to moderate.

Philadelphia

reports good loan growth, particularly for commercial lending, but notes some
easing in recent months.
on the other hand.

St. Louis and Kansas City record weak loan demand,

San Francisco reports continued competition for quality

loans and cites some reports that credit requirements are being relaxed in
order to attract additional business.

However, despite the relatively low

loan volume in the San Francisco District, many financial institutions show
improved net income.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic sentiment in the First District has a more positive tone than in
recent months, although actual results are mixed.

Manufacturing sales are

good and orders are up at a majority of firms contacted.

Retail sales are

ahead of last year and generally on plan, but plans have been scaled back.
Price pressures have moderated except for steel and copper.

Manufacturers

have now joined retailers in expressing concern about the tight regional labor
market.

The outlook is "steady as you go," with most contacts expecting a

continuation of current activity levels.
Retail
First District retailers report business in October and early November to
be generally satisfactory and within their conservative expectations.

Sales

are moderately ahead of last year's level, and also better than soft third
quarter results.

Respondents even expressed optimism that a turn-around in

the sluggish women's apparel trade is imminent.

Inventories are nevertheless

light, reflecting a desire to enter this Christmas season in a lean position.
Prices remain relatively stable at both the wholesale and retail level.
Profits are consistent with plans, for the most part, as increases in margins
and improvements in sales mix offset greater promotional activity and rising
labor cost.

Wages for retail clerks, in particular, are up 13 to 15 percent

from year-ago levels.

But despite the prolonged tightness in regional labor

I-2
markets, some respondents have been pleasantly surprised by the availability
of part-time workers for the Christmas season.
Regional retailers generally expect a good Christmas.

But over the longer

term, most respondents foresee a sharper competitive environment.

One sees a

permanent increase in promotional activity while another spoke of an
over-built regional retailing sector.

Most contacts express a continued

interest in building new stores should the right site appear, but they are
focussing their capital programs on remodelling, warehouse, and office
construction.

One retailer found contractors unexpectedly eager to undertake

a warehouse expansion; the bids were 15 percent below expectations.
Manufacturing
Most First District manufacturers characterized current business
conditions as good, with sales 3 to 20 percent above year-ago levels.
order situation is mixed, however.

The

Almost half of the respondents report that

orders are flat or down slightly - with two citing seasonal factors.

The

other contacts indicate that orders are 10 to 15 percent above last year's
levels and for one the order backlog is its highest in several years.

Demand

for machinery, paper, and aircraft-related products was described as
particularly strong.

Demand for consumer, defense and computer-related

products is less robust.

Several contacts mentioned good export growth or

reduced import competition.
Inventories are generally reported as "comfortable" although a few
manufacturers have increased inventories because some materials such as paper
require longer order times.

Most First District contacts indicate that

materials prices have continued to rise.

While manufacturers generally see

paper prices stabilizing now or in early 1989, they expect no relief from
steel and copper price increases.

Although most respondents have recently

raised prices on some of their own products, several report that materials

I-3
price increases continue to hurt their margins on some lines.

Prices on

consumer products are set far in advance, for instance, and raising the prices
of auto, defense or computer-related products remains difficult.
Employment levels at First District manufacturing firms are flat or up
slightly.

Almost half of the respondents described labor markets as tight or

indicated a need to train recruits.

Views on wage pressures were mixed.

While some contacts described recent wage increases (of 2 to 4 percent) as
"moderate," others are giving more than in recent years.

One firm is shifting

some functions to the Southwest to avoid offering premium wages.
Capital spending plans are also mixed.

While some firms' capital

expenditures are substantially above last year's level, others report that
capital spending is down slightly.

Several respondents that undertook big

capital spending programs over the last couple of years expect expenditures
for 1989 to be down somewhat.

Other contacts foresee an uptick in capital

spending; two mentioned plans for new plants.
A majority of contacts foresee sales growth continuing at a "strong" 10 to
15 percent annual rate during the first half of 1989.
slowing.

Others expect a gradual

One respondent, who expects reduced sales, pointed out that his firm

can achieve better profits even on the basis of reduced volume because of cost
cutting programs already in place.
first half of 1989.

No contact forecast a recession in the

One characterized 1989 as likely to be "boring," but

suggested that the country needs a boring year to reduce current imbalances.
Outlook
The New England Economic Project (NEEP), a non-profit organization
comprised of businesses, government agencies, and educational institutions,
held its semi-annual outlook conference in mid-November.

The NEEP forecasts

for the six New England states, taken together, call for nonfarm jobs to grow
2.5 percent in 1988 and 1.9 percent in 1989, compared to 2.6 percent in 1987.

I-4
Because of continued improvement in the nation's trade deficit and
associated increases in business fixed investment, manufacturing jobs in the
region are expected to grow modestly in 1989.

The region's factory job gains

will be concentrated in durable goods industries, especially nonelectrical and
electrical machinery.

Despite the improvement in manufacturing,

nonmanufacturing industries will still account for most of the additional
jobs.

Nonmanufacturing employment growth will be more modest than in recent

years - averaging about 2.2 percent in 1989.

The region's unemployment rate

will continue to be 2 percentage points below the national average.

Personal

income growth is also expected to remain stronger in New England than in other

regions of the country.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The rate of expansion in the Second District's economy may have slowed
somewhat since the last report.

The latest purchasing managers' surveys continue

to show most firms reporting improved to stable conditions, but a smaller share
than in recent reports, and some department stores have recently experienced an
over-the-year decline in sales.

The pace of homebuilding remains slow for the most

part, but a pickup occurred in commercial real estate activity.

Commercial and

industrial loan demand at small and medium-sized banks in the District has been
slow to moderate, though a few loan officers reported some strength.
Consumer Spending
The pattern of sales at District retail stores was quite varied in recent
weeks.

Two retail chains reported that October sales declined from a year earlier

although some improvement occurred as the month progressed.

On the other hand, one

chain had a large over-the-year gain which was attributed primarily to increased
promotionals this year.
Reflecting the differing sales results, reactions were also mixed
concerning the level of inventories and the ability to meet sales targets.

Those

retailers with sales below plan and excessive inventories intend somewhat more
aggressive promotionals in the weeks ahead, while others anticipate no change in
strategy.
Most of our contacts reported some pickup in sales of women's apparel
from the slow pace earlier this year, and some noted that unusually cool weather
spurred outerwear sales as well.

With regard to the outlook, retailers are

moderately optimistic about the upcoming holiday season but generally do not
anticipate large over-the-year gains.

II-2

Business Activity
Recent purchasing managers' reports suggest some slowing of the District's
economic expansion occurred in recent weeks.

In both Buffalo and Rochester the

percentage of purchasing managers reporting improved business conditions declined,
and the percentage reporting a worsening increased.

Nonetheless, by far the

majority of firms--90 percent in Rochester and 85 percent in Buffalo-continue to
report stable to improved conditions, and those in the Rochester survey anticipated
little change over the next three months.
Unemployment rates in the District remain below the national average with
October readings of 4.2 percent in New York and 3.9 percent in New Jersey.

As was

true nationally, rates in the District have fluctuated within a fairly narrow range
in the past several months.

The October-to-October rate decline in New York was

virtually the same as the national average, but in New Jersey where last October's
rate was already very low, the year-to-year decrease was slight.
Few new major projects were announced in the District since the last
report.

However, western New York was buoyed by some recent developments.

Two

"upscale" New York City department stores announced plans to make their Buffalo
area debut in a new shopping mall now under construction there-further indication
of Buffalo's comeback from its earlier loss of several manufacturing firms.

In

addition, a major supermarket chain plans to open three large "superstores" in
Buffalo and Niagara Falls.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
The pace of homebuilding in the Second District remains slow for the most
part though some upstate New York communities continue to report strength.

In the

Fort Drum area, for example, builders are busy on both military and nonmilitary
housing and activity around Buffalo exceeds the year-earlier level.

In most of the

District, however, activity has been subdued, with home prices remaining high and

II-3

the resale market slow as a result.

Several plans for affordable and retirement

housing have recently been unveiled, though, and these could help reactivate the
housing market to some extent next spring.
A pickup occurred in District commercial real estate activity recently.
During October the midtown Manhattan market experienced its highest level of
leasing activity since July 1986, and downtown Manhattan also registered more
strength than had been seen since the stock market crash. The pace of leasing
activity has also been moderate to good in other parts of the District.

However,

vacancy rates have shown little change because of a sizable supply of office space
coming on line in many areas.
Financial Developments
Commercial and industrial loan demand at small and medium-sized banks in
the Second District is currently reported as slow to moderate, though a few loan
officers report some strength.

Those who have witnessed a slackening attribute it

to seasonal factors and to concern about the economy, particularly the budget and
trade deficits.

One officer stated that in an environment of uncertainty,

borrowers are reluctant to take on additional debt. Most respondents said that the
increased level of interest rates in recent months has had little effect on
business loan demand. The bankers anticipate that conditions at their banks will
hold constant into early next year.

Business loan portfolios at these banks

currently consist almost solely of short- to intermediate-term loans, the
definition of which varies among respondents, but is generally less than five
years.
former.

Recent changes in the mix of short- versus long-term loans favored the
All of the respondents stated that their banks had not purchased any of

the merger and acquisition loans which are now on the secondary market. One
officer commented that the pricing of these loans was not attractive enough to
entice smaller banks to learn about the unfamiliar new packages.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

A mid-November survey of business conditions in the Third District
indicates continuing growth in most sectors.

Manufacturing was posting its

tenth month of expansion, with growth running at about the same pace as it has
since spring.

Retail sales were rising modestly, and a slight pickup in

year-to-year gains first noted in October was continuing.

Automobile sales in

October and early November were up from the same period last year for domestic
makes but down for imports.

Business and personal lending continue to rise,

although the pace of growth appeared to be easing in recent weeks.
The outlook in the Third District business community is for more growth,
but with some reservations about the extent of further gains over the winter.
Manufacturers see the current expansion continuing, but optimistic forecasts are
not as prevalent as current reports of improvement.

Nevertheless, capital

spending plans are fairly strong, on balance, and firms scheduling additions to
plant and equipment are looking to boost capacity by 5 to 20 percent over the
next six months.

Retailers forecast fiscal fourth quarter sales of about

3 percent above last year, in real terms, but express more than the usual amount
of uncertainty about the outlook.

Bankers see signs that growth in loan demand

is slowing, but they say money market conditions could push lending rates up
nevertheless.
MANUFACTURING
The region's manufacturing sector is still on an upward track, according to
the November Business Outlook Survey.

Among firms polled for the survey,

34 percent said business was picking up from October while only 6 percent said
business was off.

Manufacturers of nondurable goods reported somewhat better

III-2

conditions than did durable goods makers, but both sectors showed improvement
month-to-month.
Nearly all indicators of industrial activity were signaling growth in
November.

New orders and shipments were rising, order backlogs were edging up,

and delivery times were being stretched somewhat as local manufacturers posted
the tenth consecutive month of growth.

Employment continued to gain as well.

Twenty-four percent of the firms participating in the November survey were
adding to payrolls while only 11 percent were cutting back.
Upward price pressure is still being reported.

Among November survey

respondents, 61 percent noted rising input costs and 32 percent indicated they
were raising the prices of their own products.

Looking ahead, 66 percent expect

to pay higher prices for the goods they will buy over the next six months and
60 percent intend to charge more for the goods they make.
Area manufacturers see good business conditions lasting at least through
the winter.

Thirty-eight percent of the firms contacted in November expect more

growth over the next six months while 17 percent see signs of a slowdown ahead.
Overall, survey participants forecast increases in employment, new orders and
shipments, although they anticipate an easing in order backlogs.
Local manufacturers' capital spending plans call for increases, on balance,
for the next six months.

Thirty-six percent of the November survey respondents

intend to step up investment while only 13 percent will cut back.

Planned

increases, for both modernization and capacity expansion, are prevalent in the
chemical, textile, and nonelectrical machinery industries.

Some area firms in

these industries have scheduled investment projects that will boost capacity in
a range of 5-20 percent at certain plants over the next six months, although
most describe the amount of the increase in their capital expenditures as
modest.

III-3

RETAIL
Third District retailers report that sales were better than expected in
October and a good pace was being maintained in the first half of November.
Sales of women's apparel appear to be on the rebound after a long period of
weakness, but merchants say price increases are coming that could dampen
shoppers' enthusiasm.

Store officials indicate that inventories are in line

with current and projected sales, and they say that discounting, while
widespread, is in accordance with planned pricing strategies.
Area merchants are reluctant to predict the outcome of the Christmas
shopping season because the competitive situation in the region is in flux, with
major chains still working out their consolidation moves.

Nevertheless, most

retailers anticipate a satisfactory season, although expectations are that the
year-to-year improvement in 1988 will be less than in the past few seasons.

The

consensus forecast is that fiscal fourth quarter (November-January) sales will
be around 3 percent higher, in real terms, than the year-ago period.
Automobile dealers in the region report mixed results for October and early
November.

Domestic makes are selling above last year's pace but imported cars

are selling below the rate of a year ago.

Dealers expect sales to be good

through the end of the year, after accounting for the usual winter slowness.
However, dealer inventories have inched up lately and there could be a step-up
in manufacturers' rebates and dealer discounts to boost sales in December.
FINANCE
Third District bankers contacted in mid-November described loan growth as
good, but easing in recent weeks.

Total loan volume at major Third District

banks grew at an annual rate of 12 percent in October, but bankers say most
categories of lending have been growing somewhat more slowly since.

Commercial

and industrial lending in October was up 18 percent from the year-ago period at

III-4

major banks but growth appeared to be declining in November.

Lending officers

say requests for commercial credit are continuing at a high rate, but the
average credit quality of business loan applicants has fallen below standards,
and growth in loans booked is slackening as a result.

Real estate lending,

while still expanding strongly, continues on its year-long trend of slowing
growth.

The rate of increase in consumer loan volume eased somewhat in October,

but bankers said recent promotional efforts were reviving the pace of growth.
While deposits at major banks have been growing at a fairly steady
6 percent annual rate since mid-year, bankers interviewed in mid-November said
their costs of funds have been rising.

According to some, current money market

conditions make increases in bank lending rates likely.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
The Fourth District economy continues to expand.

Manufacturing output

is growing at close to the national rate, with particular strength in
nonelectrical machinery and primary metals.

Purchasing managers report fewer

price increases, as the backlog of orders has fallen and new orders have risen
only slightly.

Service jobs lead recent employment gains, and unemployment

rates are only slightly above the national rates.

Retail sales and loan

demand continue to grow at moderate rates.

Retail Sales
Retailers report moderate gains in sales from a year ago.

Home

electronics products and apparel are reported to be selling well, while other
general merchandise is lagging.

Although retailers are posting price

increases cautiously, they are relying much less on discounting to move
inventory than they did a year ago after the stock market downturn.

Some

retailers expect price increases in hardware, kitchenware, and apparel because
suppliers of these products are operating at capacity.
Domestic auto dealers report that sales are about the same as a year ago.
The current pace of auto sales has been sustained without resorting to special
incentive programs, which were used extensively a year ago.

Few 1988 models

remain in dealers' inventories, and dealers indicate that inventories of 1989

IV-2

models are in line with expected sales.

Popular imported cars are selling

well, although not as briskly as a year ago.

Labor Markets
Employment in Ohio continues to grow at a moderate pace.

Total employment

increased 2.1 percent over the last year, which marked a slightly slower rate
than in previous months.

Increases in service jobs, particularly business

services, accounted for most of the employment gains.
employment showed only slight increases.

Manufacturing

Despite the slightly slower overall

employment growth rate, unemployment rates throughout the District remained at
or slightly above the national rate of 5.3 percent.

Shortages of skilled

workers are reported in several metropolitan labor markets.
Average hourly earnings of manufacturing workers have been very stable,
despite the recent upturn in average weekly hours from 42.3 hours to 42.5
hours.

According to two separate surveys, area compensation managers are

budgeting about the same level of wage and salary hikes for the coming year
(4.6 percent) as they granted in 1988.

Average pay increases range from a low

of 3.4 percent for unionized production workers to almost 5 percent for
executives and managers.

Manufacturers reported lower expected increases than

did nonmanufacturing companies.

Manufacturing
Backed by strong capital-goods demand and rising exports, manufacturing
production in Ohio continues to advance at a rapid pace.

The gains have come

IV-3

despite some softness in demand for consumer durables, and particularly in
auto and truck production.

According to the Federal Reserve Bank of

Cleveland's Ohio Manufacturing Index, Ohio production rose 5.2 percent from a
year ago, roughtly the same magnitude as output gain at the national level
(5.9 percent).

Producers of nonelectrical machinery led the advance, up 11.6

percent over the past year.

Also posting large gains over the year were

electrical machinery and primary metals, up 6.7 percent and 8.8 percent,
respectively.

Production of transportation equipment, which accounts for

roughly 20 percent of Ohio's manufacturing output, has fallen to its lowest
level of the past three years--down 1.9 percent over the year.
Purchasing managers report that, while production continues to increase,
the backlog of orders has fallen and new orders are up only slightly.

In

addition, vendor delivery performance continues to improve, indicating that
vendors have more time to service their accounts.
Commodity, service, and equipment prices are still increasing, but less
quickly, according to purchasing managers.

For the first time in several

months, less than half the respondents reported general commodity price
increases.

Banking
District loan demand continues to be moderate.

Total loans outstanding at

large banks grew at an annual rate of 7 percent from mid-September to the
beginning of November.

Although this growth is considerably less than the

IV-4

double-digit pace registered over the same period a year ago, it represents a
slight pickup from the loan growth experienced during the summer months.

Real

estate loans, which increased at a 13 percent annual clip, accounted for a
large share of the loan growth.

Business and consumer loans grew at annual

rates of 3 percent and 4 percent, respectively.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND
Overview
District economic activity varied by sector during the first half of
November.

Retailers reported lower sales, and homebuilders said their

construction was down more than seasonally.
loan activity was flat.

Bankers reported that deposit and

Manufacturers, however, reported moderate growth in

activity, and representatives at District ports expect exports to grow more
than imports in November.

Office vacancy rates held steady or declined in

some District cities, and in the District's agricultural sector, tobacco
farmers enjoyed a good year.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales in the District during the first half of November apparently
were down from the last half of October.

Slightly over half of the

respondents to our regular mail survey reported declines in sales, while the
other respondents were about evenly divided between those who experienced
increases and those who experienced no change in sales.
reported declines in the sales of big ticket items.
department stores and new car dealerships.

Department stores

Inventories rose at both

Most department store managers

felt their inventories were too high, while most car dealers said their
inventories were about right.

The majority of retailers expect sales to

increase in the next six months over the comparable period a year ago.
Manufacturing
According to our regular mail survey, manufacturing activity expanded
moderately in late October and early November, at about the same pace as in
September.

Responses indicating increased activity outnumbered those

indicating declines; about half of those surveyed reported no change.
Inventories of finished goods and materials were generally unchanged.

Half of

V-2

the respondents said their inventories were at proper levels, while 38 percent
said they were too high.

Prices of manufacturers' materials apparently

continued to rise at about the same pace as in September.
District manufacturers have become more optimistic about the growth of
general business activity in the nation.

In our previous two surveys,

manufacturers who expected decreases in national activity exceeded the number
who expected an upturn, but in our latest survey, the respondents who expect
some change in national activity were evenly split between those expecting
increases and those expecting decreases over the next six months.

With regard

to the outlook for their own businesses, most respondents believe their
shipments will hold steady or rise in the next six months.
Port Activity
Based on port activity through the first half of November,
representatives from the three major District ports--Baltimore, Norfolk, and
Charleston--said they expect increased activity through November compared with
October.

Increases in exports were cited as responsible for the current and

expected increases in activity.

Imports in November are expected to rise only

slightly from October at Norfolk and remain unchanged at the other two ports.
Our District port contacts indicated that the ratio of exports to imports was
higher now than a year ago.
Construction
A telephone survey of District homebuilders indicated that new
construction slowed more in November than is usually expected for this time of
year.

Well over half of the respondents reported a drop-off in speculative

building.

Builders said, however, that demand was still fairly strong,

and most anticipate stable markets for single-family homes for the next
several months.

Another of our telephone surveys indicated that office vacancy rates in
several large District cities either remained steady or edged down in the
third quarter from second quarter levels.

The office vacancy rates in the

cities surveyed ranged from 13 percent in Baltimore to 21 percent in Norfolk.
Vacancies in the Raleigh-Durham area have recently dropped below 20 percent,
but more space is slated to open there soon.
Financial
The responses of bankers we telephoned indicated that deposit and loan
activity was essentially flat in the past three weeks.

For the most part,

industrial loans on the books in mid-November were reported as unchanged from
mid-October as well as from a year ago.

The few institutions with increases

in industrial loans attributed the rise to stronger demand rather than more
liberal lending policies, while the institutions that experienced declines
cited more conservative policies.

Most bankers expect increased demand for

industrial loans in 1989.
Agriculture
The District's markets for flue-cured tobacco closed for the season last
week, and final figures indicate that it was a good year.

District

production, which is close to 90 percent of the national total, was up 15
percent over last year, and prices averaged about 2 percent higher.
Production of burley tobacco was about even with a year ago.

The cash value

of all 1988 tobacco production in the District is estimated to be about $150
million above a year ago.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The strength of the current economic expansion is reflected in the southeastern
economy, although pressure on prices is being partially countered by capacity expansion
and weaker domestic demand for some products. Several makers of producer goods like
ball bearings, air-powered

tools, custom-made

machinery, paper board, and metal

buildings report that they have been running virtually at 100 percent of capacity. They
are currently trying to expand capacity by either adding new space, replacing old
equipment with modern machinery, or adding extra shifts of workers. In general, capital
investment in the District appears strong and the demand for capital goods produced in
the region also seems robust.
Although they are operating near capacity, these manufacturers seem to be
satisfied with their ability to keep up with deliveries to their customers.

Some report

that their suppliers are delaying shipments, while others are having no trouble with input
delays.

Input prices show no consistent movements, ranging from no increase to an

increase of about 5 percent over the year for most products. The prices of metals have
increased considerably more.
taken place,
manufacturers.

Some substitution of domestic for imported inputs has

although imports

are not used to a great extent by southeastern

Most point out that wages have increased between 4 and 6 percent over

the year; expected increases for 1989 are about the same. Manufacturers in Tennessee
and Alabama have had little trouble hiring skilled workers; those reporting difficulty in
finding skilled workers are located in rural areas of Mississippi or southern Georgia and
Alabama, areas that historically have had fewer skilled workers.

Many report pressures

on the cost of employee benefits, especially health related ones.
The localized tightness in some labor markets, supplier delays, and input cost
increases have yet to result in any consistent increases in final product prices.

The

manufacturers we contacted say they have not increased their prices because domestic
competition is strong.

Inventories of materials are lower than usual for these

VI-2
manufacturers, although they seem to prefer to purchase these inputs as new orders
arrive rather than maintain larger inventories.
The chemical industry centered in Louisiana is also running at high capacity
levels. Some contacts report that there are "bidding wars" for skilled labor. Supplies of
ethylene and propylene are tight, and chemicals used in the textile industry, especially
those used in rayon, are becoming more expensive.

Strong export demand is keeping

chemical prices up.
The textile and apparel industries are concentrated in the Southeast, and there
has been some retreat from the high levels of capacity utilization seen earlier this year.
The weakness seems to be centered in those plants heavily involved in the production of
apparel fabrics.

Competition from imported apparel is still strong, while domestic

demand is showing some weakness, and this has caused some domestic producers to shift
out of apparel fabrics and into products like commercial carpets, towels and bedding, and
infant clothing (perhaps a result of the baby-boom echo).

Except for carpets, weaker

demand is preventing increased production costs from being passed on to consumers. The
shift in production has been accompanied by the closure of older plants and the expansion
or construction of new plants.

Labor saving spinning and weaving machines are being

installed. Skilled workers, however, are reportedly in short supply, and wages have been
rising.
Strong export demand has been offsetting weak domestic demand for several
southeastern industries. Steel producers note that foreign demand for steel pipe has been
strong. The weakness in domestic purchases stems from a decline in orders from the oil
and gas industry, particularly for replacement pipe for older gas pipelines. A producer in
Alabama has suggested that steel supplies are plentiful compared to the tight markets
earlier this year, with the price of scrap steel now showing some decline. Modernization
and construction of new steel and aluminum plants in Alabama are underway. They are
technologically state-of-the-art, and while they will expand capacity substantially, they
will not result in great employment gains.

Appliance manufacturers have reported

VI-3
increases in the prices of steel and aluminum.

Because of weak demand owing to the

slowdown in the housing market, they have not been able to raise their prices and cover
their higher costs.

In trucking, however, these increases seem likely to show through.

The industry is expanding, and the demand for carriers is brisk.
Foreign demand for hardwoods is supporting the price of raw timber and logs.
Japan is a large buyer of hardwoods,

and the United Kingdom has been importing

hardwoods for flooring. Demand from domestic furniture makers has weakened, resulting
in some price declines for certain grades of finished hardwood.

The earlier retreat in

housing starts has weakened the market for construction grade softwoods.

Inventories

are increasing as producers hold on to output in hopes of receiving a better price later.
Lumber producers

do not expect exports to help much in 1989, partly because of

competition with Canadian exports and higher interest rates in the United Kingdom that
have slowed the housing market there.
Although residential, office, and retail construction is slow in the District,
industrial and warehouse construction has been expanding.

The strength in exports has

resulted in new warehouse construction in Miami and Savannah.

Speculative industrial

building has been going on in Birmingham, Mobile, and Nashville, where low vacancy
rates have encouraged new development.

One respondent felt, however, that in Atlanta

overbuilding now extended into the industrial and warehouse sector as well as the
commercial market.

The prospect of more foreign companies moving to the Nashville

area has spurred construction there as well.

VII-1
SEVENTH

Summary.

DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Business activity in the Seventh District continues to expand,

though several indicators suggest at a less rapid rate than earlier.

Chicago

purchasing managers report somewhat slower, but still brisk, expansion in
October.

Indianapolis purchasers indicate stronger growth.

Motor vehicle

makers are working overtime at several plants to meet demand, but cutting
back elsewhere because of slow sales of some models.
equipment and steel remain relatively strong.
next year in capital goods.

Markets for heavy

Further growth is expected

Construction activity is holding up well, but

some slippage is expected in 1989.

This year's harvest of major crops is

virtually complete in most of the District, and drought losses appear
slightly less severe than expected earlier.
Labor Markets.

Increases in payroll employment in the District states

during the third quarter were slower than in the first half.

Unemployment in

the District, higher than the nation throughout the 1980s, has fallen nearly
to the national rate.
District.

Labor markets have tightened in various regions in the

Iowa, which experienced sizable outmigration earlier in the

decade, now reportedly faces shortages of skilled blue collar and clerical
workers.
Purchasing Managers.

A survey of Chicago-area purchasing managers showed

continued fairly strong expansion in business activity through October.
However, several measures were less robust than in earlier months.
Production and backlogs continued to rise but less sharply.
delays in obtaining deliveries were also less common.

Lengthening

Those paying higher

prices continued to outnumber, by a wide margin, those paying less (59

VII-2

percent to 2 percent) but price increases were more widespread in prior
months since July 1987.

In contrast, an October survey of Indianapolis

purchasing managers, conducted quarterly, suggests stronger expansion in the
latest period.
Motor Vehicles.

Car and truck sales continue at high levels.

However,

the somewhat slower pace of car sales in October than in earlier months and
ambitious production plans have raised concerns that excessive inventories
may accumulate.

Manufacturers' sales incentives, now offered continuously,

may be enhanced if this occurs.

A Michigan plant assembling a slower-selling

car model will reduce output and lay off 1,000 employees in January.
However, other plants, particularly truck plants, are running flat out and
resorting to overtime to meet demand.
Machinery and Equipment.

Markets for machinery continue strong, overall,

though demand is softening for some types of equipment.

Further increases in

spending for capital equipment, particularly heavy capital goods, are
considered likely in 1989, with growth expected to be less rapid than this
year.

Investment is particularly strong in chemical process industries,

including petrochemicals and paper, mainly in "debottlenecking" or
"incremental" additions to existing capacity.

Sizable investments are also

reported in steel mills; in printing plants producing newspapers and wrapping
paper; and in food processing plants, including bakeries and breweries.

Some

softening is reported in communications equipment and electronic components.
Steel.

Demand for steel remains strong.

likely to outpace last year by 9 percent.

Industry shipments in 1988 are

Early indications for 1989 suggest

a continued high level of steel purchases by motor vehicle, appliance, and
machinery makers.

Shipments from steel service centers have set records.

VII-3

Upward pressures on steel prices have eased, after sharp increases earlier,
but could resume next spring when the industry may again be unable to meet
peak seasonal demands.
Construction.

Construction activity in the region appears to be holding

up relatively well, stronger than expected earlier, but is likely to decline
from recent levels.

Contracts for nonresidential buildings in the five

District states, for 9 months, were 1 percent below a year earlier (measured
in square feet of floor space).

Residential contracts were 9 percent below

last year, indicating that future building activity is

likely to fall.

However, shipments of some building materials, an indicator of current
construction activity, have risen this year.

Shipments of gypsum board to

the District states were 3 percent higher during the first 9 months than a
year earlier.

Year-to-date cement shipments to the East North Central states

were also 3 percent higher.

Building activity is vigorous in the Chicago

area, particularly Loop office construction, industrial building, and homes.
Agriculture.

Corn and soybean harvests are nearly finished in most

District states.

The Michigan harvest, slowed by recent rains, is about

three-fourths complete.

Although badly hurt by the drought, yields are

slightly higher than earlier estimates.

Corn production in District states

is expected by the USDA to be 41 percent below last year's crop, and soybean
production is estimated 29 percent lower--both sharper declines than
nationwide.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Weakness in many sectors of the District economy has continued in
recent months.

Payroll employment rose slightly, largely the result of

gains in manufacturing.
homebuilding declines.
activity to fall.

Construction activity continues to weaken as
A drop in consumer lending has caused overall loan

Agricultural conditions, on the other hand, are

improving because of warm, wet fall weather.
Employment
Unemployment rates in most District states increased slightly in the
third quarter.

Payroll employment continues to grow slower in the District

than in the nation:

in the third quarter, it rose at a 0.2 percent

seasonally adjusted annual rate in the District compared with a 3.3 percent
rate for the nation.

In contrast to other states in the region, Kentucky's

recent employment growth has been moderate:

payroll employment in the

state rose at a 2.7 percent rate in the third quarter.
Employment in all nonmanufacturing sectors grew slower in the
District than in the nation in the third quarter.

Employment in the

region's services and wholesale/retail trade sectors declined slightly in
both the second and third quarters after rising in every previous quarter
of the recovery.
District manufacturing employment grew at a 2.7 percent rate in the
third quarter, after declining at a 2.8 percent rate in the second quarter.
In comparison, national manufacturing employment increased at a 1.4 percent
rate during the third quarter, after growing at 2.3 percent rate during the

VIII-2

previous three months.

The District's recent growth was concentrated in

factories producing electrical equipment, nonelectrical machinery,
chemicals and transportation equipment.

Approximately 2,100 workers--many

of whom had been laid off since November 1987--were recalled to a St. Louis
area auto assembly plant in September.

Increasing orders for motor vehicle

parts led to 1,100 additional jobs over the last 12 months in Arkansas.
Consumer Spending
District retail sales have been similar to those of a year earlier,
after adjusting for inflation.

St. Louis retailers report slightly slower

sales volumes than a year earlier with particularly sluggish sales in
general merchandise stores.

Sales in Memphis recently have softened after

moderate gains during the summer months.

In contrast, retail jobs in

Louisville, as well as elsewhere in Kentucky, have grown substantially in
response to moderate sales growth.
Department stores throughout the District generally expect real sales
during the upcoming holiday season to be only a few percent above last
year's level and have accordingly kept inventories slim.

Numerous

pre-holiday sales already have appeared, and widespread price discounting
is expected throughout December.
Construction
The real value of District building contracts declined 1.5 percent in
the third quarter and was 7 percent less than in the third quarter of 1987.
Contracts for District nonresidential construction projects rose 3.8
percent in the third quarter while residential contracts fell 6.1 percent
after adjusting for inflation.
year-earlier levels.

Contracts for both sectors were below

During the third quarter and throughout the current

recovery, regional residential construction growth has been weaker than the
national rate.

The expansion of District nonresidential construction,

however, has exceeded the national average.

VIII-3

Banking
Total loans at large weekly reporting District banks declined at a
1.3 percent annual rate in the three months through October, down from a
2.5 percent rate of increase in the same period last year.

The overall

decline was due primarily to a 17.4 percent drop in consumer loan volume.
For the same three-month period in 1987, consumer loans expanded at a 6.3
percent rate.
period.

Commercial loans also declined during the recent three-month

Real estate lending grew more slowly than a year earlier.

Agriculture
Agricultural conditions continue to improve.

Late-planted soybeans

in southern portions of the District have benefited from warm, wet fall
weather and are producing above-average yields.
states accordingly is being revised upward.
the recently planted winter wheat crop.

Crop production in these

The rain also is benefiting

The District's cotton crop,

however, is being damaged by the rain, and below-average yields are now
anticipated.
The rain also has helped to recharge dry soils and has improved
pastures, a development that will allow livestock producers to carry larger
herds through the winter.

This should alleviate some of the pressure on

red meat prices that had been feared for next year had livestock producers
been forced to reduce herds further.

Because of the availability of

storage space and the long harvest period, no grain transportation
difficulties have been encountered.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District Economic Conditions are good.
have not changed much.

Unemployment

rates

Consumer spending has stayed at satisfactory levels

and consumer price increases continued to be moderate, but some raw material
prices

have

increased

sharply.

Conditions

in

resource-related

industries

continued to improve and those in agriculture remain largely unchanged.

Labor Markets
The employment

situation

has been

good

throughout

the district.

Between August and September, Minnesota's unemployment rate dropped two-tenths
of a percentage point to 3.4 percent; this is lower than the 4.2 percent rate
A director notes increased turnover of the work force in

of a year earlier.
the Twin

Area, particularly

Cities Metropolitan

$6/hour, suggesting that labor markets are tight.

in

jobs

paying

less

than

South Dakota's September

unemployment rate at 3.5 percent edged up modestly from the year ago rate of
3.4 percent.

North Dakota's unemployment rate rose to 3.9 percent in Septem-

ber from 3.3 percent a year
September was 4.7
year.

earlier.

In Montana the unemployment rate in

percent, down a full percentage point

from the previous

However, the labor force was 3 percent smaller than a year earlier.

the Upper

Peninsula of Michigan, the

unemployment rate was 6.3 percent

In
in

September, compared to 7.3 percent a year ago.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general merchandise continues to increase and
retailers

generally

acceptable levels.

anticipate

good

Christmas

sales.

Inventories

are at

The Upper Peninsula, particularly, reports strong sales.

Consumer loans from banks in that region are up 31 percent in the first ten
months of this year from a year ago.

IX-2

Motor vehicles are generally selling well, though there is reported
to be some shift from new to used car sales, particularly in the Dakotas.

One

domestic line reports that car sales were up 36 percent in October from the
depressed levels of a year ago.

Truck and van sales are particularly good and

manufacturers report difficulty in meeting demand.

Recreational vehicles are

selling exceptionally well and the bigger and better 1989 models are in heavy
demand.
Housing activity is generally lower than a year ago.

The number of

new housing permits issued in Minnesota in September was down 35 percent from
a year ago.

Reflecting recent strength total housing sales in the Twin Cities

area in October were up 33.4 percent from a year ago.
13.2 percent

for

period last year.

the

However they were down

first ten months of the year compared with the same

Housing activity is good in some parts of the district.

The Upper Peninsula reports that new mortgages issued by banks are at record
levels.

Mobile home sales are reported to be higher in South Dakota than last

year.
Tourist spending continues to be strong, particularly in the Upper
Peninsula which reports the number of tourists was 10 percent higher thus far
this year than last year.

Ski resorts anticipate an excellent year due to the

early and heavy snowfall in many areas.

An initiative to allow limited gam-

bling in the city of Deadwood, South Dakota has passed and is expected to be
approved by the Legislature.

Proponents hope this move will attract more

tourists to that historic city.

Prices
Consumer price increases continued to be moderate in the district.
However, many agricultural prices
year.

are reported

to be up sharply over last

Corn prices are up to $82 per ton from about $55 per ton at this time

IX-3

last year.

Some raw material prices are also up sharply.

For

example,

aluminum prices are up to $1.10 per lb. from $0.80 per lb. a year ago.

Copper

prices are up to $1.40 per lb. from $1.10 per lb. a year ago.

Resource-Related Industries
Conditions are generally reported to be excellent in the district's
resource-related
standing year.

industries.

The

lumber

industry

in Montana

had

an out-

Productivity improvements in this industry over the last five

years have reduced the work force by about 25 percent even though output is
higher.

Mining

continues

to

be a

bright spot

platinum mine expected to open in 1989.
now operating

in the

reported to be good.
Peninsula as

area.

in

Montana

with a

second

However, there are only 4 oil rigs

Gold mining activity in South Dakota is also

One observer described the forest industry in the Upper

"going gangbusters."

Furniture

orders ranging from 6 weeks to 3 months.

plants

in the area have back

New copper smelters are being con-

sidered for construction in the area.

Agriculture
Agricultural
recede.

are

conditions

However, many

areas still

fair

as

the

effects

report low topsoil

of

the

moisture.

drought
Montana

reports that topsoil moisture is 60 percent below normal and subsoil moisture
is 65 to 70 percent below normal.
is reported

to have

Only 20 percent of the topsoil in Minnesota

adequate moisture.

essential for a good winter wheat harvest.
is about 85 percent completed.

Early

winter precipitation

seems

Winter wheat planting in Montana

However, lack of snow cover raises the pos-

sibility of significant crop loss.

An estimated 99 percent of Minnesota's

corn crop has been harvested compared to a normal average by this time of 92
percent.

The sugar beet crop is good in most of the district.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The pace of economic activity in the Tenth District remains

relatively slow.

Many manufacturers report high capacity use rates and some

have had problems finding skilled labor.

Retailers report some improvement in

sales recently, but automobile sales are steady to lower.

Housing activity

remains slow, with weak sales and high inventories of homes.

Lower crude

prices are leading oil companies to reevaluate their drilling programs, but
the number of active drilling rigs was little changed from August to October.
Loan demand at district commercial banks has changed little, while deposits
have increased slightly.

Solid farm incomes in spite of the drought are being

reflected in an active market for new and used farm machinery and in strong
farmland prices.
Retail Sales.

Most respondents note a general improvement in retail

sales over the last three months.

Prices are generally steady to slightly

higher, with most retailers reporting price adjustments primarily in response
to wholesale price increases.

Inventory levels are typically satisfactory,

although some respondents report continuing efforts to reduce their stocks.
Retailers are cautiously optimistic about future sales.

With no "Black

Monday" effect, expectations for holiday season sales are more optimistic than
last year at this time.

Moderate gains from last year's sales levels are

expected.
Automobile Sales.

Most respondents report steady to lower automobile

sales over the past month, and inventories are reported to be expanding.
Adequate dealer and customer financing are generally available.

Little change

in sales is expected in the upcoming year.
Manufacturing.

Most respondents report that materials inputs prices have

risen moderately compared with a year ago.

Materials are generally available,

X-2

but some lead times have lengthened.

Many respondents have been trimming

their inventories but now are satisfied with current levels.
rates vary widely across industries.

Capacity use

However, many firms are operating near

full capacity, and some firms report problems in finding skilled labor.
Energy.

Weaker oil prices are causing oil companies to reevaluate their

drilling programs.

October drilling activity was down almost a fourth from a

year ago, but the average number of active drilling rigs in the district rose
slightly from 261 in August to 265 in October.

One respondent noted that

exploration and drilling in Oklahoma has held up surprisingly well recently,
partly due to significant gas discoveries in the eastern part of the state.
Housing Activity and Finance.
sluggish.

Activity in the housing sector remains

Homebuilders in the Tenth District generally report that housing

starts are down compared with last year and stable to slightly higher compared
with last month.
component.

Multifamily construction continues to be the weakest

Most respondents report lower sales of new homes, and home

inventories are considered to be fairly high.
Most respondents at Tenth District saving and loan institutions report
that savings inflows are little changed either from a year ago or from a month
ago.

Virtually all respondents expect little change in savings inflows in the

near future.
factors.

Mortgage demand has slowed recently, partly due to seasonal

Mortgage interest rates have remained steady or increased slightly

recently, and are expected to increase further in the next several months.
Banking.

District commercial banks report little change in loan demand

over the past month.

Demand for commercial and industrial loans and consumer

loans was up slightly at a few institutions, while demand for most other types
of loans was either constant or down slightly.

None of the respondents

changed their prime rates in the past month, and virtually none of them expect

X-3

any change soon.

Consumer loan rates were also unchanged at most of the banks

surveyed, and no change is anticipated in the near term.
deposits was more variable.

The behavior of

On average, deposits increased somewhat at

district banks, with greatest strength in large CDs and small time deposits.
Agriculture.

The district's fall harvest indicates that the 1988 drought

was generally not as severe in the Tenth District as elsewhere.
effect on crop yields also varied widely across the district.

The drought's
Although a

return to normal weather patterns is likely for the 1989 growing season, the
drought's lingering effects on next year's crops remain of concern.

If

depleted soil moisture is not replenished, 1989 crops will be especially
dependent on timely rains during the growing season.

Soil moisture and autumn

rainfall generally have been adequate for the early development of the
recently planted winter wheat crop.

But low soil moisture reserves are still

of concern for corn and soybeans in northern Missouri and eastern Nebraska.
Most ranchers are expected to maintain their herds through the winter
months, in spite of high prices for drought-diminished forage supplies.
Grazing of the winter wheat crop's early growth has eased demand for tight
supplies of other forages.

But high feed prices are still likely to limit any

significant expansion in cattle herds despite currently high cattle prices.
The drought apparently has had little effect on agricultural credit
conditions in the district.

Most district lenders expect strong farm incomes

and little change in loan repayment rates.

Solid farm incomes are already

being reflected in an active market for new and used farm machinery and in
strong farmland prices.

On balance, the 1988 drought appears to have had

little adverse impact on district farmers or their lenders.

And drought-

diminished crop inventories could brighten the farm outlook for the year
ahead.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy continues to perform sluggishly.
demand for manufactured goods is modest.
Auto sales are down.

Growth in

Retail sales expansion is slight.

In construction, contract values remain above levels for

the first half of 1988, but employment continues to fall.
have reduced District oil and gas drilling.

Weakened oil prices

Drought is becoming a more acute

problem for agriculture.
Although reports vary greatly across industries, respondents in the
District manufacturing sector generally note modest growth in sales.

Among

producers that sell both nationally and internationally, foreign sales are
generally cited as growing faster than domestic sales.

This distinction was

made by firms across a broad spectrum of products including paper,
nonelectrical machinery, and electronics.

Electronic equipment manufacturers

note some sluggishness in sales overall, and particularly in semiconductors,
but they say that their export sales are still growing.

Among computer-related

manufacturers, consumer product sales are soft, while demand for business
equipment remains fairly strong.

Energy-related machinery producers say their

drilling-related sales are falling but that they anticipate rising marketings
to petrochemical producers over the next year.

A number of chemical producers

continue to note that their sales are high and that they are operating at peak
capacity.

Demand for manufactured products linked to the construction

industry, including lumber and wood and stone, clay, and glass, is generally
soft, but a number of producers say their sales are no longer falling.

After

XI-2

strong growth in the demand for paper products during

October, a lull in sales

is apparent in November.
Patterns of retail sales growth vary widely across the District, but
are reported as more stable than earlier this year.

Respondents say that sales

are strong and growing in Houston, San Antonio, and in the border communities.
Along the border, a declining real value of the dollar has made U.S. goods more
attractive to buyers from Mexico.

By contrast, demand for retail merchandise

is sluggish in the Dallas/Ft. Worth area and in Austin.
Reports are fairly consistent across the District that auto sales
have been soft lately.

In Houston, where reports had been positive in recent

months, renewed weakness in sales is attributed to customer concerns over oil
price instability.

In Dallas/Ft. Worth, respondents link poor sales to the

overall sluggishness of the area economy.

Despite recent softness, sales in

Houston are significantly higher than a year earlier.

In Dallas/Ft. Worth,

sales are unchanged from last year.
District construction activity remains somewhat above levels for the
first half of 1988.

Nonresidential contract values have shown little movement

over the year, while residential values have expanded modestly since March.
Nevertheless, after increasing four consecutive months, a three-month moving
average of the value of construction contracts decreased in September.

In

September, both residential and nonresidential contract values declined in all
three District states.

District construction employment continues to decline,

although at a somewhat slower pace than at the beginning of this year.
Residential building permits have been flat recently.

XI-3

Oil and gas drilling continues to slide in the face of oil prices
that have remained below $15 per barrel for several months.

The District rig

count has fallen 17 percent since May and employment in some energy-related
industries has recently begun to fall.

After inching up in every month from

February through August, Texas employment in oil and gas extraction declined
markedly in September.

Respondents say that declines in well permits and a

weak outlook for oil prices suggest that drilling will remain weak in the next
few months.

Reports of cutbacks in drilling plans are widespread.

Drought is becoming a more acute problem for District agriculture.
At the end of October, the geographic distribution of drought conditions was
about the same as in early August, but drought intensity had increased.

In

some areas, as much as one-third of an average year's additional rain is needed
to return soil moisture to normal levels.
many ranges and pastures are bare.

County extension agents report that

Without significant rainfall this winter,

the cost of supplemental feeding may threaten the profitability of cow/calf
operations in high-drought areas.
Nevertheless, some farmers are benefitting from the dry weather.

For

Texas High Plains cotton producers the warm, dry weather of late October and
early November has increased yields by as much as 10 percent.

The national

effects of the drought have resulted in year-over-year increases in prices paid
Texas crop growers of 9 percent.
up 11 percent.

Prices paid to Texas livestock producers are

These price increases signify losses to feedlot operators,

however, because the cost of purchasing and feeding a cow now exceeds the price
of fattened cattle.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The Twelfth District economy continues to post healthy economic growth.
Although respondents to this Bank's Business Sentiment Survey indicate that their
expectations about the national economy continue to deteriorate, most paint upbeat
pictures of conditions in their industries and regions. Increases in wages and prices are
noted for a wide range of products and industries, while recent price decreases have
occurred only in a few sectors.

Although consumer spending has been lackluster in

recent months, manufacturing activity continues strong.

In the forest products

industries, demand for lumber and plywood has fallen slightly, while capacity constraints
are easing in paper production. Gold mining activity continues strong in Nevada.

The

pace of construction and real estate activity varies widely within the District, with
strength noted in California, Washington, Oregon, and Nevada; markets in Arizona,
Alaska, and Utah remain weak.

Financial institutions continue to report stiff

competition for quality borrowers, but industry profits appear to be holding up well.
Business Sentiment
Respondents reported further weakening in their expectations regarding GNP
growth during the next year. In the November survey, 53 percent anticipate that next
year's growth will be weaker than 3 percent, compared with 43 percent in October and
only 34 percent in September.

Less dramatic weakening in expectations was noted in

business investment, consumer spending, and the trade deficit.

Respondents indicated

that their expectations about housing starts during the next year have improved
somewhat.

XII-2

Wages and Prices
Reports suggest varying degrees of upward pressure on wages and prices.
Structure adjustments for wages and salaries are expected to be close to 5 percent in
most cases, which represents a slight up-tick from the 4 to 5 percent range earlier this
year.

Some note dramatic price increases.

For example, one respondent notes price

increases of 10 to 14 percent during the past quarter for such "big-ticket" items as large
generators and steam boilers.
increases.

Others report more modest, but also more widespread,

For example, a vintner reports increases in the costs of many materials,

including grapes, glass, corks, and labels, which have led to slight increases in his
company's wine prices. Newsprint prices seem to be stabilizing after dramatic increases
earlier in the year.

Reports indicate recent price decreases for natural gas, plywood,

and used cars.
Consumer Spending
Sales of soft goods have been relatively flat since late summer, although one
respondent notes some improvement during October and early November.

Weakening

consumer spending also has been reflected in reduced spending on advertising in both
print and broadcast media.
October was a sluggish month in the retail automobile business, with weak demand
for new cars.

Moreover, a general absence of buyers at wholesale used car auctions

suggests that the used car market, which until recently had been very strong, may be
weakening as well.
Manufacturing
Respondents generally indicate that manufacturing activity is strong, particularly
in the Northwest. Increased aluminum production in the Pacific Northwest has cut the
region's previous electricity surplus in half. Capacity constraints are clearly evident in
the aerospace industry, as Boeing has a three and a half year backlog of unfilled orders

XII-3

for commercial aircraft.

A shortage exists for titanium dioxide, a key whitening and

opacity agent used in paints and coatings. No additional production is anticipated until
1992, but demand continues to grow, particularly offshore.

As a result, the price of

titanium dioxide continues to escalate.
At the same time, the volume of orders continues to decline in the semiconductor
industry. The book-to-bill ratio (orders received divided by orders shipped) has fallen in
each of the past six months, and now stands at a two-year low of 0.96. Moreover, many
producers are experiencing declining profits, and some layoffs and plant shutdowns have
been reported.
Agriculture and Resource Related Industries
Demand for lumber and plywood has fallen in recent weeks, and prices are eroding
slowly. In contrast, log and timber prices remain firm due to continued strong export
demand.
Bottlenecks and capacity constraints are easing in the paper business.

The

operating rate for linerboard, which is used to make boxes, declined about 2 percent
during 1988. Demand growth slowed to a 2 percent pace, while the capacity growth rate
surged to 3.5 percent.

This rate of capacity growth was much higher than estimates

made in 1987 suggested it would be. Newsprint operating rates also are declining, with
significant capacity growth.
There continues to be a great deal of activity in gold mining in Nevada, both in
production and exploration. The decline in the price of gold has not been large enough
to have a significant adverse effect on the industry.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity continues strong in Washington, Oregon,
California, and Nevada.

One respondent from central Oregon notes that some title

companies in his area are working their employees overtime to process the large volume

XII-4

of transactions.

Increases in California residential property values have slowed

substantially from the 15 to 20 percent rates seen earlier this year.
In Utah, Arizona, and Alaska, however, construction activity remains at low
levels. An Arizona developer reports that for the first time in twelve to fifteen years,
property values are starting to decline.

The average resale price for a single-family

home in Arizona has fallen by more than 3 percent during the past year.
Financial Sector
Banks and thrifts report continued competition for quality loans.

Some report

that, as a result, credit requirements are being relaxed in order to attract additional
business.

Despite the relatively small volume of loans being made, many financial

institutions are experiencing improvements in net income over last year.

