SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

MARCH 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

First District - Boston .

. .

S. . . . . . . . . .

i

I-

.

Second District - New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Third District - Philadelphia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IIIII-

Fourth District - Cleveland.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond..

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

V-

Sixth District - Altanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VI-1

.

VII-1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IX-1

Seventh District - Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Eighth District - St. Louis.

Tenth District - Kansas City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Eleventh District - Dallas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Twelfth District - San Francisco . . . . .. .

. .

. . . . . .

X-1
XI-1
XII-1

SUMMARY*
Without exception, reports confirm a moderate expansion of the
nation's economy.

Strength in the manufacturing sector and continued

moderate growth in employment are sustaining the current expansion.
Consumer spending, which had provided much of the earlier stimulus to the
economy, has continued to expand sluggishly.

Auto sales, however,

improved and have risen strongly in some districts.

Construction

activity remains mixed, while bank loan demand is generally flat.
Consumer lending has declined sharply in keeping with the slower growth
of consumer spending.

The farm sector outlook remains positive.

Manufacturing
Most districts report a general expansion of manufacturing
activity.

The declining foreign exchange value of the dollar is credited

with spurring manufacturing growth in many districts.

Orders for steel

or fabricated metals produced in the Boston, Chicago, St. Louis and
Dallas districts are increasing rapidly.

Many producers are using all

available capacity causing higher prices in some areas.

Paper production

is growing rapidly according to Boston, Atlanta and San Francisco.
Several districts also mention growth in electronic equipment orders.
Atlanta, Dallas and St. Louis report strong gains in textile and apparel
orders, with labor shortages reported by Atlanta.
are also mentioned by Boston and St. Louis.

Tight labor markets

Despite manufacturing's

general strength, Chicago and St. Louis note auto production declines.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis based on information
gathered prior to March 8, 1988.

Dallas and San Francisco also report weakness in defense and
construction-related manufacturing.
Boston and Dallas find manufacturers' inventories generally at
satisfactory levels, but Kansas City reports higher-than-desired
inventories of material inputs.

Of the six districts that mention

manufacturers' input prices, most report price increases.

Boston,

Philadelphia and Richmond report generally stable prices for
manufacturers' products.

Prices of some products, such as paper and

steel, however, are up sharply.
Employment
Most Districts indicate generally favorable employment growth.
Declining unemployment rates are mentioned by New York, Cleveland and
Minneapolis.

Areas of weakness include layoffs in New York's financial

sector and in the auto industry of the Chicago and St. Louis districts.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales for January and February are flat or weak in all
districts.

Despite the weakness, retail inventories are near or slightly

below desired levels in all districts except Minneapolis.

New York and

San Francisco point out that many retailers are reserving their judgment
on the outlook for the year pending the results of Easter sales.

Boston

and San Francisco report that prices of imported consumer goods have
risen.

Kansas City found only modest general price increases.
Strong auto sales are reported by Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis

and Minneapolis.

Other districts indicate that auto sales are on target

or slightly ahead of last year.

A number of districts find that domestic

autos are selling better than imports because of import price increases
and domestic manufacturers' incentive programs.

Construction
The performance of the construction sector is mixed.

Boston,

Chicago, Kansas City and Philadelphia report an improved construction
environment, whereas St. Louis, Dallas and San Francisco report a
weakening in overall construction activity.

Residential construction,

while expanding in the Atlanta, Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis
districts, is declining in most other districts.
report strong new home sales.
mixed results.

Boston and Philadelphia

Commercial construction continues to show

Construction activity in the Chicago district is likely

to remain at a high level in 1988.

The Minneapolis district reports that

January nonresidential building contracts were three times higher than in
January 1987.

In Dallas, construction continues to decline and remains

the weakest sector of the economy.
Banking
Loan demand at the nation's largest commercial banks remained
generally flat.

Most districts report that reductions in lending rates

during February have not triggered a significant increase in loan
applications.

Richmond was the only district reporting an increase in

loan demand across all major loan categories.

Two-thirds of the bankers

surveyed by Richmond anticipate increased demand over the next six months
for both consumer and real estate loans.

Cleveland, Kansas City,

Philadelphia and St. Louis report a slowing in consumer lending.
Cleveland, Richmond, Philadelphia and Atlanta report strength in real
estate and commercial lending.

Atlanta cites rising exports as the

primary reason for the increased commercial loan volume.

New York

reports that demand for commercial mortgages for office construction is
particularly weak, and some bankers believe the suburban office space

surrounding New York City is overbuilt.

Dallas reports further declines

in deposit and loan growth due to widespread concern about the stability
of District financial institutions.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Of the districts mentioning agriculture, all describe strength
in the farm sector.

Richmond and San Francisco report stronger farmland

values, while Chicago and Kansas City report increased farm equipment
sales.

St. Louis and San Francisco find that farm loan demand has

fallen, while Kansas City indicates flat loan demand.
Three districts indicate increased oil drilling activity.

The

lumber and forest product industry and the West's mining industry are
strong.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic reports were quite mixed in the First District in
February.

Retail results were mostly disappointing while manufacturers

generally reported improvement.

Manufacturers' shipments ran 2 to 10

percent ahead of last year and new orders ranged from flat to 20 percent
higher than a year earlier.

Most of the retailers and manufacturers

contacted have satisfactory inventory levels, but a few are overstocked.
The outlook is generally upbeat, as evidenced by plans to increase capital
spending or continue opening new stores.

A recent pickup in the region's

residential real estate market makes realtors optimistic as well.

Retail
Sales at most of the First District retailers sampled were slack in
February, although one contact, a mass-market discount chain, reported
brisk activity.

The weakness was most noticeable in soft goods; sales of

hard goods reportedly dropped off only in the last two weeks of February.
Despite lackluster activity, only one respondent expressed discomfort with
"over-stocked" inventory levels.
In the area of pricing, respondents reported no change in their own
markup or promotional policies.

At the wholesale level, however, prices

are reported to be rising on imported hard goods while remaining flat or
falling in the weaker market for soft goods.

In response to exchange rate

shifts, upscale merchants have been unable to find acceptable substitutes
for Japanese electronics or European housewares; low-end discounters, on

I-2

the other hand, are turning to alternate foreign sources or domestic
manufacturers.
The retail outlook is mixed, but hardly pessimistic.

Most of the

retailers surveyed had non-economic explanations for the current softness,
citing bad weather, management failures, and the lack of an accepted
fashion trend.

Thus a majority expect sales to rise - some moderately and

some rather smartly.
Respondents are proceeding cautiously with their investment
programs.

Some of this investment is aimed at increasing efficiency rather

than expanding capacity.

But most chains are adding new outlets, albeit at

a slower pace than in recent years.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturers' reports on new orders range from flat
to "startlingly" strong compared with their year-ago levels.

The best

reports come from respondents in paper products, fabricated metals and
transportation where new orders are up 8 to 20 percent from early 1987.
Demand emanating from the electronics and auto industries is described as
improving, but reports on government orders vary.

Only a few respondents

said exports or the weak dollar contributed to their gains.

Current

shipments are running 2 to 10 percent above year-ago levels.
Materials prices are rising modestly (2 to 3 percent) except for
paper and metals.

With availability a concern, paper prices are up 10

percent and are expected to go on rising.
recently.

Nickel prices have doubled

High copper and aluminum prices, in contrast, are now thought to

be headed down.

Manufacturers' own prices are generally stable, but there

I-3

are exceptions.

For example, a tool maker recently raised prices 10 to 15

percent and manufacturers of paper products have passed most cost increases
on to their customers.
Inventories are generally termed satisfactory, but a third of the
respondents find them higher than they would like.

Employment levels are

stable, although a minority would hire a few production workers if they
were not facing tight labor markets and "incredible" turnover rates in New
Hampshire and the Greater Boston area.

One firm, however, expects a layoff

later this year.
As for capital spending, most respondents plan increases of 10 to
25 percent from 1987 levels while a minority expect little change or
declines.

Contacts in paper, fabricated metals and transportation are

expanding capacity slightly, but most spending programs are aimed at
modernization and efficiency improvements.
In general, First District manufacturers are "cautiously
optimistic" about 1988 and expect a "decent" year with slow growth.

One

third of those contacted recently revised their post-October forecasts
upward, and no one expects a recession in 1988.
Residential Real Estate
Residential real estate sales in the First District picked up in
February compared to recent months and now exceed year-earlier levels.

The

improvement is especially pronounced in the Boston area, where realtors
report very brisk activity.

Less expensive houses and condominiums are

more in demand than expensive homes.
spring.

Realtors look forward to a very busy

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

Economic

activity

sales were relatively
February.

in the

Second

District

strong in January, but

continued mixed.

has

a decided

Retail

slowing occurred during

While overall business conditions were generally satisfactory, demand

for new homes and office space varied among areas.

Business borrowing at small and

medium-sized banks was somewhat spotty.
Consumer Spending
The pattern of retail sales in the District has been mixed since the last
report..

Respondents

stated

that

consumer

spending

January, due in part to continued heavy promotionals.

was

relatively

During

strong

in

the first half of

February, however, sales activity showed a decided slowing, which they viewed with
some concern.

Nonetheless, District retailers were hopeful that, given the early

occurrence of Easter this year, activity would soon improve.
Over-the-year gains during January ranged from 9 percent to 15 percent and
were reported to be on or above plan.

Demand was strong for a number of categories

including adult and children's apparel, accessories and home furnishings.

Buying

by foreign consumers continued somewhat heavier than usual according to New York
City

retailers.

As

a

result

generally pared in January.

of

the

strong

Respondents

ranging from on plan to 3 percent above.

sales

described

activity,

inventories

their inventory

were

situation as

Some unwanted accumulation occurred over

the first half of February, however, when consumer demand weakened.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Conditions

in the District's market for new homes are varied.

In some

areas of speculative building and high prices, developers are offering a variety of

II-2

incentives in order to try to sell new houses and condominiums.

In many other

areas, however, overall demand remains strong, and the need for affordable housing
is unabated.

Several large-scale residential projects have recently begun or will
In downtown White Plains the foundation was poured for a

soon be undertaken.

316-unit apartment building-the largest in Westchester County--which will provide
medium-priced housing for some of the workers in the many new office buildings
there.

Elsewhere, a residential community is developing in what has been an

industrial area of Queens, a desirable site located on the water and facing the
Manhattan skyline.

One apartment building has already been constructed, another is

underway, and a third will probably be started there this spring.
The pace of commercial leasing activity has also varied during recent
weeks.

Demand for office space is strong on much of Long Island, due in part to

last year's moratoriums on construction in some areas.
that their

vacancy rates remain well

Moreover, despite the fact

above 20 percent, Fairfield County and

northern New Jersey have seen some improvement in leasing activity.

In Westchester

County, however, net absorption of office space has been minimal due to lackluster
demand and corporate relocations and downsizing.

Leasing has also slowed in New

York City where a substantial amount of office space was recently added as the
result of a merger of two financial services firms.

Midtown and downtown Manhattan

vacancy rates have risen and are expected to move higher in the months ahead.
years

ago

the

City

offered

development of Midtown west.

zoning

incentives

to

stimulate

the

Six

commercial

Since developers wanted to meet the May 1988 deadline

for laying foundations, an additional 12 million square feet of office space is now
under construction in midtown.
Business Activity
Economic

conditions

in

the

Second

District

have

generally

been

satisfactory with the major exception being the widespread layoffs which are taking

II-3

place in the financial services sector.

Despite these layoffs

however, February

unemployment rates in New York and New Jersey fell further to 3.9 percent and 3.4
percent, respectively--the lowest in 18 years.

The New York City rate also remains

some two and a half percentage points below its year-earlier level.

While further

cutbacks by the City's financial services firms are in the offing, several other
areas report that their economy continues to expand.

In Rochester, for example,

where 84 percent of surveyed purchasing managers found current business conditions
to be the same or improved in January, 60 percent anticipated further gains over
the next three months.
Financial Developments
Demand for commercial loans in the Second District has been somewhat
spotty in recent months based on a survey
medium-sized banks.
about average,

of senior officers

of small and

Though most stated that the level of borrowing activity was

some

reported strong

demand

while others

noted

sluggishness.

Reductions in lending rates at these banks during early February have not triggered
a significant

increase in loan applications.

Several bankers

commented that

businesses tend to be less sensitive to interest rate changes than individuals.
Among

the

different

sectors,

demand

construction is particularly weak.

for

commercial

mortgages

for

office

Some of the bankers believe that suburban

office space surrounding New York City is overbuilt, a troublesome situation given
the weakness of the securities industry.
demand

for

import

loans,

particularly

One bank reported a dramatic drop in
those

for

Taiwanese

products.

Most

respondents anticipate that 1988 will eventually prove to be a year of healthy
growth for their banks.

Though they were generally less optimistic about the U.S.

economy at large, most were confident that a recession would be avoided and the
second half of 1988 would show stronger growth.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy in early March was making only modest progress.
Manufacturing activity was advancing marginally and retail sales were level
with, or slightly above, the pace of the year-ago period.

Auto sales are

considerably higher than they were in early 1987, although the increase is less
than dealers had expected.

Banks report very little growth in consumer loans,

but note an improvement in commercial lending; real estate lending remains
strong.

Commercial real estate markets are softening in some suburban areas but

are otherwise healthy.

Residential real estate activity is picking up slightly

and builders report a good sales rate at new projects.
Expectations in the Third District business community are mixed, but the
overall outlook is for a continuation of current trends.

Retailers expect the

pace of sales to accelerate modestly from spring through fall, achieving an
annual increase between 3 and 10 percent.

Auto dealers believe cars will sell

at about the current rate for the rest of the year.

Bankers expect continued

strength in real estate lending and look for a modest increase in business loan
demand, but they expect consumer lending to remain flat.

Real estate agents say

home sales will run at a good pace this year if mortgage rates do not rise above
current levels, and builders expect new home sales this year to match last
year's rate, although they are not optimistic that housing demand will carry
strongly into 1989.

Manufacturers have the most negative forecast: in February,

surveyed manufacturers turned pessimistic, on balance, for the first time in
nearly eight years, and they have held to this view in March.

Local industrial

firms expect slower business in the next six months, and they may reduce
employment accordingly.

III-2

MANUFACTURING
Industrial activity in the region is moving up marginally, according to
preliminary results of the March Business Outlook Survey.

Twenty percent of the

manufacturers covered by the survey are stepping up operations, 70 percent are
running at a steady pace, and 10 percent are cutting back.

Nondurables

manufacturers report relatively more improvement than durable goods producers.
Specific measures of industrial activity are mixed.

In March, new orders

increased marginally, but shipments increased at a faster pace; consequently,
order backlogs fell slightly.

However, the pickup in shipments allowed

manufacturers to work down inventories somewhat this month.

Manufacturing

employment continues to grow: more firms reported adding workers than cutting
back in March, marking eleven consecutive months of rising payrolls.
With regard to prices, half of the March survey respondents report rising
input costs and half say they are steady; for their own goods, 25 percent are
charging more while 70 percent are maintaining steady prices.
The outlook among Third District manufacturers turned pessimistic in
February and remained so in March.

For the first time in nearly eight years

anticipation of slower business is more widespread among surveyed companies than
expectations of improvement.

Survey respondents also forecast a level rate of

new orders and shipments, a further decline in order backlogs, and a weaker
employment situation in the next six months.
RETAIL
Third District retail sales in early March were running level with or
slightly above last year's pace, roughly according to merchants' plans.
officials said their inventories were in line with sales.

Store

Some reported taking

delivery of spring merchandise earlier than usual to get discounts offered by
suppliers; none reported undesired buildup of stocks.

III-3

Merchants are cautiously optimistic for the year ahead; they expect the
pace of sales to be mild in the spring and move up through fall, with sales for
the year as a whole 3-10 percent above 1987.

Plans to add or remodel stores are

being considered by many area retailers.
Auto dealers said sales in January and February ran above sales in the same
months in 1987.

Dealers said the year-to-year improvement is more than just a

rebound from the particularly low sales of the prior year period and reflects
healthy demand for new cars.

Although they have scaled back the 1988 sales

estimates they made last year, thay are optimistic that the current rate of
sales can be maintained for the balance of the year, even without manufacturers'
incentives.
FINANCE
Total loan growth at major Third District banks picked up in February after
a pause in January.

Lending officers say business loan demand has rebounded

recently and they are receiving more inquiries from business borrowers.
Consumer lending is growing weakly.

Bankers say credit card lending is flat

while other types of personal installment lending are advancing fractionally.
Several banks have been promoting personal auto leasing recently, and these
efforts have boosted this form of consumer finance.

Real estate lending

continues to grow at a strong pace.
Bankers expect current lending trends to continue.

They foresee some

further growth in commercial and industrial lending, but expect consumer lending
to remain flat.

Real estate lenders expect real estate loan volume to be strong

for the rest of the year.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Real estate agents described most markets as healthy in early March, with
commercial leasing generally steady and residential sales picking up.

III-4

Commercial real estate markets in the Third District are active although some
pockets of softness are beginning to appear.

Commercial real estate agents say

office supply and demand in the central business district of Philadelphia are
roughly in balance; in suburban locations the picture is mixed.

Vacancy rates

are rising in areas where construction has been extensive and falling in areas
where the pace of building has been slower.

Lease concessions are now common in

relatively overbuilt areas, and developers in these areas have postponed
starting dates for new projects.
Demand for industrial buildings is strong through most of the Third
District.

As major highway projects in the region near completion, companies

from outside the district are locating new warehousing and distribution centers
to take advantage of improved transportation links.
Residential real estate markets in the Third District are generally
healthy.

Sales activity slackened in January, but real estate agents contacted

at the end of February said home sales were increasing by what appeared to be
more than a seasonal amount.

Some agents said houses in the higher price ranges

were not selling as quickly as lower priced houses; and their forecast calls for
average selling prices to rise, but not by as much as they did last year.
Nevertheless, real estate agents believe the residential market will remain
healthy, barring any upward thrust in mortgage rates.
Residential builders contacted in early March generally report new house
sales running at a good pace, and some are unable to complete houses as quickly
as buyers would like.

Overall, developers in the Third District expect sales in

1988 to be around last year's level; however, they are not as optimistic for
1989, and some large companies are trimming their long-range development plans.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
Economic conditions in the Fourth District remained optimistic,
exhibiting little change from the previous report.

Manufacturing output

and new orders continued to grow, fueled in part by continued improvement
in exports.

Employment growth in both goods-producing and

service-producing sectors held unemployment rates steady.

Strong auto

sales contributed to a slight increase in retail sales, offsetting weak
apparel sales.

Retail Sales
Auto dealers reported surprisingly strong sales during February,
while retailers posted generally weak sales.

Auto dealers felt that

buyer incentive programs were responsible for much of the surge in
sales.

The sluggishness in retail sales was attributed to weak apparel

sales, especially women's clothes, and to slow sales in consumer
durables.

Retailers continued to express concern that their lackluster

sales figures were still reflecting consumer caution in the aftermath of
the stock market.

Housing
Recent housing activity throughout the District was mixed.

Akron

area home sales fell 10.5 percent in January from a year ago, but sales
in the Canton-Massillon market edged up 2.4 percent, according to monthly
reports by boards of realtors in the two areas.

One realtor attributed

Akron's deline in home sales to a combination of local economic

IV-2
conditions, poor weather in January, and the possibility that home-equity
lines of credit may have reduced the number of homeowners seeking to move
up to more expensive housing.
Cincinnati realtors also reported a decline in the number of home
sales in recent months compared with a year ago.

However, new home

construction in the Cincinnati area from October through January rose 10
percent compared with the same period the previous year.
The Columbus area housing market continues to show the most
consistent growth.

Home sales and new housing construction are reported

to be above the levels set a year ago.
reflected in housing prices.

The strong housing market is

According to a recent survey, house values

in Columbus have appreciated 110 percent over the last 10 years,
exceeding price increases in the other major cities in the District.

Manufacturing
The export boom continues to have favorable effects on the Fourth
District's manufacturing sector.

Local producers reported that they are

capturing some of the markets lost to imports in recent years not only
because of a lower dollar but also because of more technologically
advanced products.

One machine tool manufacturer attributed his

increased foreign sales to several years of intense engineering and
marketing efforts.
Reports from purchasing managers indicated broad-based strength in
manufacturing.

Nearly 50 percent of the Cleveland area producers

surveyed reported increased production, and only 7 percent reported
declines.

Representatives from some companies commented that they are

producing all they can, and a few said they are even looking for

IV-3
subcontractors.

In the Cincinnati area, production was reported higher

by over 40 percent of the purchasing managers surveyed.

Only 16 percent

said it was lower.
Increases in new orders and a sizable backlog of existing orders
point to continued expansion of production in both areas.

However,

purchasers expressed some concern that steady price increases, key
material shortages, and some inventory buildup may dampen this outlook.

Labor Markets
Ohio's employment level in February surpassed 5 million workers,
marking the first time monthly statistics have reached this level.

The

increase of 25,000 jobs during February contributed to a slight reduction
in Ohio's unemployment rate from 6.5 percent in January to its present
level of 6.4 percent.

Unemployment rates within various regions of the

District also remained roughly the same.

The Cincinnati and Columbus

area reported unemployment rates of less than 5 percent, while the
Cleveland and Pittsburgh area recorded unemployment rates around 6
percent.
Ohio's employment growth in January was divided evenly among
goods-producing and service-producing sectors, adjusted for seasonal
factors.

Two-thirds of the new jobs in the goods-producing sectors came

from construction, with manufacturing contributing the rest.

Employment

growth in the service sector was dominated by employment gains in
wholesale and retail trade.
The average workweek of manufacturing workers in January dropped by
half an hour to 42.8 hours.

IV-4
Banking
On balance, district loan demand has been relatively flat over the
last month and a half.

Total loans outstanding at large banks fell at an

annual rate of 2 percent from the beginning of January to mid-February.
The marginal loan contraction was attributed to a large decline in
consumer installment loan volume.

Seasonal factors and the warriness of

consumers to assume additional debt may have accounted for the recent
weakness in the demand for consumer installment loans.
In contrast, the demand for business and real estate loans has picked
up.

Real estate mortgages outstanding grew at an annual pace of 23

percent as homebuyers took advantage of falling mortgage rates.
loans outstanding increased at an annual clip of 12 percent.

Business

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity expanded in February, although homebuilding
and housing sales were unchanged, and retail sales declined.

Manufacturers

reported strong growth, and they are optimistic about growth prospects in the
next six months.

District retailers, too, are optimistic about growth in the

coming months, despite sluggish sales in recent weeks.

Financial institutions

report higher loan demand in all major categories, and bankers share the
optimism of retailers and producers.

Agriculture is reported to be in

generally better condition than a year ago.
Consumer Spending
Thirty-eight percent of the District retailers responding to our regular
mail survey reported declines in sales in February, while 30 percent reported
increases.

Many respondents indicated that they had increased discounting and

promotions since the beginning of the year.

Although the majority of

respondents indicated no change in inventories, 32 percent reported increases.
Two-thirds of the retailers expect increases in sales in the next six months,
compared to 14 percent who expect declines.
Reports from department stores generally indicated weaker activity than
in the retail sector as a whole.

Half of the department store respondents

said sales declined during February, while 25 percent said sales had
increased.
items.

Nearly 70 percent experienced declines in sales of big ticket

Department stores also reported slight declines in employment and

little change in inventories.

Manufacturing and Mining
District manufacturing activity increased in February compared to its
pace in January.

Forty-six percent of the respondents to our survey reported

higher shipments in February, up from 34 percent who reported increases in
January.

Reports of reduced shipments remained at only about 15 percent.

Increases also were reported in new orders, backlogs of orders, employment,
and the length of the workweek.

About half of our respondents reported that

inventories of finished goods and raw materials were unchanged from a month
earlier, while about one-third reported increases.
The prices of raw materials and finished products rose further, according
to District manufacturers.

One-third said they had raised their product

prices, and 64 percent said the prices they paid for raw materials had risen.
Almost none reported price reductions.

In addition, two-thirds of our survey

respondents who use imported materials noted price increases in these inputs
since the beginning of the year.
Manufacturers expect their activity to continue to rise in the next six
months.

About 48 percent of the respondents believe their shipments and new

orders will rise--a proportion almost equal to the high recorded in the early
fall of 1987--while about 14 percent expect orders to decline.
expect the lower dollar to boost their sales this year.

One-third

Thirty-nine percent

plan to increase their capital expenditures in the next six months--the
highest percentage reporting such expansion plans since last August.
Coal production in the District during the first three weeks of February
was slightly above production during the same period last year.

Although the

United Mine Workers' contract expired on January 31, there were no reported
work stoppages.

Most union-affiliated coal companies in the District are

operating under new contracts, although a few are still negotiating.

V-3

Housing
Half of the District realtors and builders surveyed by telephone reported
that home sales in February were unchanged from a year ago.

The remaining

half was about evenly split between those reporting increases and those
reporting declines.
above $150,000.

Most of the activity in the market was in homes priced

In the Washington, D.C., area, however, condominiums priced

near $100,000 were selling well.

In Baltimore, sales of new homes in the

$80,000 to $100,000 range have been depressed in recent months, although lower
and higher priced houses have been selling well.
Agriculture
Our contacts in the agriculture sector report that farmland prices appear
to be strengthening throughout the District, and that farmers are generally
optimistic about their income prospects.
continue strong.

Tobacco exports are expected to

Peach growers expect a good crop as the winter weather has

been cold enough to keep buds from swelling and opening prematurely.

However,

poultry processors and pork producers are in the down phase of their cycle,
with lower prices expected to persist.

Subsoil moisture conditions are

reported to be good in Maryland and Virginia, but conditions have been dry in
parts of the Carolinas, prompting alerts of forest fire dangers.
Financial
Our telephone survey of District financial institutions indicated
slightly higher demand for commercial, consumer, and home mortgage loans in
February.

Two-thirds of the respondents said they anticipate increased demand

for both consumer loans and loans secured by real estate over the next six
months.

Bankers also reported that prospects are good for commercial and

industrial loans in the months ahead.

Respondents attribute their optimism to

lower interest rates and to their belief that rates will not rise.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Recent economic activity in most sectors of the southeast has maintained the
moderate pace of the previous reporting period.
expand especially for textiles and paper.
are reviving.

Regional manufacturing continues to

The petroleum and coal extraction industries

Although retailers' sales are not increasing much when compared to last

year, inventories are not excessive and auto sales are improving.

Loan demand has

turned up at commercial banks and tourism has posted healthy gains. The outlook for
agriculture is positive thanks in part to government programs.

Although commercial

construction continues at a low ebb, residential building is improving in some areas.
Employment and Industry. Increasing exports of nondurables continue to bolster
the southeast economy. Textile mills and apparel manufacturers are optimistic that they
will continue to do well in 1988.

Several apparel manufacturers who were shut down a

year ago now speak of labor shortages.

The paper industry has been unusually strong,

reflecting rapidly increasing demand from both foreign and domestic sources.

Industry

contacts report rising prices and exceptionally low levels of inventories for pulp and
linerboard.
A number of plants in the region's petrochemical industry have announced
expansion plans for 1988 and are increasing employment.
have been greatly helped by the decline of the dollar.

Foreign sales in that sector
Oil service manufacturers are

expecting a profitable year due to the continuing increase in oil rig activity both on and
offshore.
Consumer Spending.

Retailers around the District reported moderate or no

increases in February sales over those of last year. Inventories are reported to be in line
with desired levels heading into the spring selling season, although retailers indicate that
they are concerned about the potential for an unwanted inventory buildup. Retailers are
targeting this season's inventories to match last year's levels, an indication that they

VI-2
expect no increases in sales over last year. All retailers surveyed indicated that prices
are drifting upward both for foreign and domestic merchandise.
Fueled by a new wave of buying incentives, district car sales improved markedly
in February from the weak sales volume in February 1987.

Dealers are optimistic that

the recent extension of incentive programs will continue to boost car sales at least
through the end of April.
Construction. The region's stronger states (Florida, Georgia, and Tennessee) are
optimistic that housing starts will increase following a pick-up in sales due to a lowering
of mortgage interest rates.

Meanwhile

weaker states (Alabama,

Mississippi,

and

Louisiana) report that the decline in interest rates has had little impact on both sales and
construction of homes.
There has been considerable overbuilding of residential structures throughout
Florida, despite high housing demand aided by the continuing influx of new residents. At
the same time, Georgia is experiencing a decline in the housing industry's growth rate.
January's single family building permits dropped 22 percent below the year-ago level.
The overall outlook for Tennessee is bright. The major exception is the overbuilt
market in Nashville.

Alabama's housing industry outlook remains optimistic due to the

influx of high tech industries which are attracting residents from outside the state.
Housing markets in both Louisiana and Mississippi remain weak primarily because of
depressed incomes of residents; however, home prices in New Orleans have recently
begun to stabilize because of improving conditions in the oil sector.
Southeast

commercial

construction,

although

emerging

from

its

seasonal

slowdown, is still being restrained by lenders who are requiring stringent preleasing
before financing is provided.
Financial Services.

Business loan demand is strong among small to mid-size

companies, and appears to be related to the surge in exports resulting from the decline in
the dollar.

Part of the demand is for working capital and part for purchase of new

VI-3
equipment.

However, concern about the economic outlook has caused some banks to be

more cautious about granting loans.
Tourism.

Florida experienced a 25 to 30 percent increase in the number of

foreign visitors from 1986 to 1987 and while expectations for 1988 are for some slowing,
the overall outlook remains bright.

There was a 12.5 percent increase in visitors from

Canada in 1987 and gains in 1988 are projected at 7 percent. Elsewhere in the District,
New Orleans posted a successful Mardi Gras Festival which attracted approximately
500,000 people over the 11 day period, reportedly the best attendance in years. The New
Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival next month is expected to bring at least 300,000
people to the city.
Mining, Agriculture and Forestry.

Oil and gas exploration in the District is

increasing. Drilling rig activity is 50 percent higher than a year ago. In early 1988 coal
production has continued increasing at a rapid pace. Relative to a year ago, production
is up 19 percent.
Prospects for the region's agriculture continue to improve as the government's
farm program pumps large amounts of revenue into the District. The export market for
grains remains active as indicated by shipments from District ports.

Both cattle and

pork producers are enjoying relatively high prices for their products. Florida's vegetable
and citrus growers are also benefiting from good crops and strong prices.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

Expansion continues in District economic activity.

Employment

rose in District states in January, seasonally adjusted, except in Michigan
where layoffs at auto and parts plants cut manufacturing

payrolls.

For

February, Chicago purchasing managers again report robust increases in orders,
output, and backlogs; higher inventories; rising employment; longer delays in
obtaining deliveries; and widespread price increases.

Reports from industrial

concerns show vigorously rising demand for equipment,
industrial materials.

steel,

and other

Recently improved car sales and large first quarter

production cuts, including many at District plants, are bringing auto stocks
into better balance.

Construction activity in the District is viewed as likely

to remain at a high level in 1988, but some segments are expected to be below
1987, notably starts on commercial projects.
early 1988 were mixed.

Reports on consumer spending in

Conditions and prospects are improving in agriculture

and related industries, with land values rising and farm equipment sales
higher.
Manufacturing.

The industrial sector in the District continues the robust

expansion evident late last year.

A maker of large construction machinery

reports some types of equipment on allocation, and the order backlog highest in
several years.

Equipment orders from paper and steel mills, for expansion and

modernization, are described as "extremely strong."

Rising capital spending is

also reported by makers of chemicals and plastics.

In response to the lower

dollar, production of equipment and components is increasingly being shifted
back to the U.S. from abroad, but this shift has been gradual
contractual relationships.
from low levels.

because of

Demand is up for mining equipment and railcars,

Machine tool orders and backlogs are up but remain far below

strong levels of the late 1970s and early 1980s.

Manufacturers continue to

VII-2

evaluate expansion projects cautiously, particularly

in

heavy

equipment

industries which were hard-hit by the severe downturn of the early 1980s.
Closings of older, inefficient plants in the District continue to be reported,
as part of producers'
Motor Vehicles.

efforts to pare costs.

In response to somewhat better than expected car sales,

second quarter auto production schedules have been adjusted upward almost to
levels of a year ago.

The improved second quarter outlook follows sizable

first quarter reductions in assemblies at numerous plants in the District.
Permanent closing

of another assembly plant, in

recently.

sales and

Steel.

Truck

production

have remained

Production at steel plants in the

Orders for cold-rolled

Wisconsin,

was announced
very strong.

District continues strong.

and coated sheet are at good levels into the second

quarter, even with the cutbacks in auto output schedules.

Hot-rolled sheet and

plate orders have increased reflecting investment projects in the paper and
petrochemicals industries.

Buying of steel for construction projects has been

very strong, with no seasonal downturn in bidding after the turn of the year.
Increases are reported in industrial construction
steel.

projects, which are mainly

Supplies are tight--customers would take more steel if

it--resulting in upward pressures on prices.
through steel warehouses
Construction.

The volume of steel shipped

continues to set records

The picture for construction

they could get

month

after month.

in the District is mixed,

activity generally at a high level, but declining in some sectors.

with

Building

activity in the District in January was lower than last year, attributed to
more normal weather this winter after exceptionally mild conditions in early
1987, and lower residential

mortgage interest rates a year ago.

last year, contracts for construction

of nonresidential

For all of

buildings in District

states, in square feet, were 11 percent above a year earlier, and residential
contracts were 5 percent higher--both stronger performances than the nation.

VII-3

Fewer starts on commercial projects in the Chicago area are expected this year,
but most of the large amount of office space being built downtown

is

not

scheduled for completion until 1989 or later, implying a high level of activity
on projects already underway.

Construction

of Chicago-area industrial

buildings is increasing, mainly light warehouse structures, after being very
low.

Strong leasing of Chicago-area industrial space is

Industrial construction is
some new plants.
strong

expected to continue.

also rising elsewhere in the District, including

Public works construction--highway,

sewer, and water--will

be

in 1988.

Consumer Spending.
District were mixed.

February

sales reports from large retailers in the

A survey of Illinois retailers for January showed a small

decline in total sales, attributed to weather, after a "healthy" gain in 1987.
A contact with a major retailer believes the consumer sector is in better shape
than many people think.

Consumer confidence is

up; wages have accelerated

(though not much); and relatively large tax refunds are expected to boost
spendable incomes this year.
reasonable

General merchandise inventories are viewed as in

balance.

Farm Equipment.

Unit retail sales of farm equipment continued well above

year-earlier levels in January, extending a trend that began in the latter part
of 1987.

During the past seven months, farm tractor sales were up 35 percent
in

from the year ago pace and the highest for the period

three years.

Similarly, combine sales in the five months ending with January were up 46
percent from a year earlier and also at a 3-year high.

Because of the surge in

sales, unsold inventories of new tractors and combines,

relative to annual

sales, are now at the lowest levels since the late 1970s and early 1980s.
comparatively low inventories, coupled with expectations
modest gains in sales, raise hopes
production

in the District may

of at least further

that long-depressed

begin to recover

in

The

farm equipment

the months

ahead.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary

The District economy continued to expand moderately, but
indicators of future economic activity are mixed.

Strong employment

growth, for example, was spurred by gains in services and manufacturing.
The construction sector, however, weakened.

Consumer spending reportedly

strengthened in February after a weak January, but bank lending slowed
due to a sharp decline in consumer borrowing.

The farm sector is in good

condition for the coming crop year.

Outlook
A recent survey of 240 small District businesses revealed
increasing pessimism about general business conditions over the next six
months.

The proportion of respondents who felt conditions would worsen

was up slightly from October and was almost double the response of a year
ago.

In contrast, more respondents planned to make capital expenditures

for plant or equipment and expand their workforces than a year ago.
Furthermore, two-thirds planned no reduction in their inventories.

In

the recent survey, 13 percent of respondents reported an inability to
fill positions for skilled workers, double the year-earlier response.

Employment
Preliminary data indicate that nonagricultural employment
expanded rapidly, at a 5.0 percent rate in the three months through
January compared with a 2.8 percent rate in the previous period.
major sources of job growth were services (particularly health and

The

VIII-2

business services), construction (mainly commercial projects) and
manufacturing.
continued.

Intermittent layoffs of auto assembly workers have

Most other manufacturing industries, aided by growing

exports, report continued growth.

Producers of fabricated metal, for

example, have rapidly expanded their workforces as orders increase.
Rising import prices have allowed regional producers of nonelectrical
machinery and apparel to increase sales and expand their operations.

Consumer Spending
District retail sales rose 5.3 percent in the fourth quarter
from a year earlier.

Rapid sales growth in Arkansas was responsible for

much of the increase.

Contacts report sluggish January spending, with

sales of durables particularly weak.

Sales improved in February,

however, spurred by stronger car sales.

Construction and Real Estate
The value of District construction contracts fell 2.0 percent in
the three months through January.

Growth in Kentucky and Missouri was

largely responsible for a 3.5 percent advance in District residential
contracts.

Gains in the residential sector, however, were offset by a

8.7 percent drop in contracts for nonresidential buildings.
Home building and buying has picked up slightly from January,
but is still well below year-ago levels.

Refinancing of existing

mortgages reportedly has increased as rates for fixed-rate mortgages
dropped into single digits.

Banking
Total loans outstanding at weekly reporting District banks rose
at an 8.0 percent annual rate over the December - February period.

This

VIII-3

figure is down sharply from the 19.6 percent rate for the same period a
Both commercial and real estate lending growth changed little

year ago.

over the period, but consumer loans declined at an annual rate of 18.2
percent after increasing at a 25.4 percent rate over the same period last
year.

Agriculture
The District agricultural sector is in good condition after a
The winter wheat crop is rated in good-to-excellent

mild winter.
condition.

Livestock operations report only average rates of

weather-related losses.

Croplands, dried by the lack of rain last summer

and fall, have been recharged by winter moisture and should be ready for
the upcoming planting season.
by government programs.

Crop prices will continue to be supported

Cattle prices are expected to remain strong,

while poultry and pork prices should decline.
Preliminary banking data for 1987 indicate that farm loan
performance at agricultural banks continued to improve.

The rate of

delinquent farm loans at agricultural banks fell from 7.0 percent in 1986
to 5.3 percent in 1987.

The loan loss rate at agricultural banks

improved, falling from 1.8 percent of all loans in 1986 to 1.2 percent in
1987.

This improvement occurred in every District state except

Mississippi.

Commercial bank farm loans declined by 14 percent in the

District in 1987; declines were noted in all District states.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Despite
District's economy
conditions

slower

consumer

spending

than

a

year

ago,

held firm in the opening months of 1988.

remained

strong.

Although

residential

nonresidential building projects were under way.

the

Ninth

Labor market

construction

slowed,

The district's wood products

industry has been thriving, and the news for agricultural producers has been
encouraging.

Labor Markets
As

1988 began, district labor markets held firm, with only normal

seasonal employment declines, mainly in the construction and retail sectors.
These declines

brought down

unadjusted employment figures

Even so, Minnesota's unemployment rate

in the district.

in January was still a bit less than

the nation's, and the Minneapolis-St.Paul metro area's unemployment rate was
fully 1.6 percentage points below the nation's.

Another sign of continuing

labor demand in Minnesota was evident from the decline of initial unemployment
claims, down 3.8 percent in January from its January 1987 level.

Also, the

most recent seasonally adjusted data show Ninth District employment rising in
December 1987, accompanied by a drop in the district's unemployment rate.
Scattered

labor-management disputes

were

reported

recently.

The

largest is between flight attendants and management of the district's major
airline.

Consumer Spending
Retail spending on general merchandise does not appear to have been
strong in recent months.

One large retail chain reports that stores it has

owned for at least a year had slightly lower sales results this February than
last, although year-ago sales were particularly high.

Still, the sales dearth

IX-2

has left

the stores with above-average inventories.

corroborates these

findings.

A second retail chain

However, another chain reports that favorable

weather helped it attain double-digit sales increases in February.
Sales of motor vehicles appear to be surprisingly strong, especially
when last year's good performance is considered.

In particular, one domestic

manufacturer's truck sales were 19 percent higher through February than they
were in 1987.

That manufacturer's car sales were up a more modest 7 percent

through February 1988.
Housing activity slowed considerably early in the year, but it may
have picked up a bit in February.
were 35 percent lower
March 1987.
December

In Minneapolis and St. Paul, home sales

this January than last, well off the record pace of

In the Twin Cities metro area, housing permits were way down in

1987,

dropping

over

42

percent

below

year-earlier

levels.

And

residential construction contracts in Minnesota were down 19 percent over the
same period.

One Bank director says that this slowing can be partly accounted

for by the October 19 plunge in stock prices, which he believes has led to
But a leading Twin Cities realtor notes

decreased sales of high-priced homes.

that the pace of sales accelerated somewhat in February.
Reports on tourist spending have been mixed.
weather has hurt some ski resorts.

Adopting a novel approach to controlling

state government costs, Montana plans

out-of-state tourist inquiries.

In Montana warm, dry

to use state prison inmates to field

In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, all indi-

cations point to a record year.

Nonresidential Construction
In contrast to residential construction, nonresidential construction
for infrastructure has not fallen off in some parts of the district.

While

down somewhat in Minnesota during December, nonresidential building contracts

IX-3

Most of the growth

in January were three times higher than in January 1987.

was in public infrastructure projects for highways, bridges, and sewer and
A newspaper editor notes much interest in civic projects in

water systems.

the Fargo-Moorhead area on the border of North Dakota and Minnesota--projects
including an expansion of its civic center, a new performing arts center, and
a small indoor stadium.

A director of this Bank's branch in Helena, Montana,

mentions $25 million in defense construction for this year at the air force
base in Great Falls.

Wood Products
The

wood products

industry,

one of the district's

largest

manu-

facturing industries, is currently thriving, with products ranging from lumber
to chopsticks.
committed

In Minnesota alone, over $1 billion in new capacity has been

since

1979;

the

latest

project,

announced

expansion of capacity to make a plywood substitute.
paper

mill

highs.
most

reports

that

business

is

very

good,

in

February,

is

an

In Montana, a pulp and
with

prices

at

all-time

A major lumber producer notes the healthy state of the industry, with

producers

operating

in

the black.

Among producers,

the pine beetle

remains a continuing cause for concern.

Agriculture
More good news cropped up in the agriculture sector recently.

The

Minnesota farm price index rose in February, with increases reported both for
livestock and for major crops.

In addition, the federal government's Farmers

Home Administration (FmHA) announced a plan to forgive as much as $7 billion
in bad farm debt.

This was welcome news to over 2,000 Minnesota farmers with

seriously delinquent loans at the FmHA.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The economy of the Tenth District shows a mixed performance,
Retailers report flat to slightly increasing

but slight improvement overall.

sales compared with a year earlier, and auto sales show some recent
improvement.

Farm incomes are up considerably.

Home mortgage demand and

housing activity are relatively weak, however, and improvement in the
district's energy industry has been slowed by weaker oil prices.

Loan demand

and deposits at commercial banks are off slightly.
Tenth District retailers generally report flat to

Retail Sales.

slightly improving sales when compared with a year ago, but slightly worsening
sales over the past three months.
reported.

Only modest general price increases are

While most respondents are satisfied with present inventory levels,

nearly all report continuing tight inventory management.

Sales are estimated

to be flat to moderately increasing in the months ahead.
Automobile Sales.
improvement in sales.

Automobile dealers generally report some recent
Although most dealers report steady inventories, some

dealers are concerned that stocks are too large relative to sales.

Overall,

dealers are not very optimistic about 1988 sales.
Manufacturing.

Manufacturers' input prices are reported to have risen

moderately in the past year, with the exception of substantial increases for
steel, plastic, and aluminum.

Future increases are expected to be slight,

except for a moderate further increase in aluminum prices.

Respondents report

that current inventories of materials inputs are too high, and they plan
further trimming.

Capacity utilization varies by respondent, ranging from 70

percent for a paint manufacturer to virtually full capacity for a manufacturer
of small electric home appliances.

Only a few respondents report any problems

with availability or lead times for inputs.
further improvement in 1988.

Firms selling abroad expect

X-2

Energy.

Weakening crude oil prices have begun to erode some of the

stability established in the district's energy industry last year.

The

average weekly number of operating drilling rigs in the Tenth District
decreased from 363 in December to 307 in January.

In February, the rig count

fell further to 271, still about 21 percent above the February 1987 average.
Soft prices and continuing uncertainty about OPEC's resolve to rein in
production could postpone further improvement in the district's energy sector.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Activity in the housing sector shows

slight improvement across the district.

Homebuilders report that housing

starts are up compared with last month but down substantially from a year
earlier.

Single-family construction has improved while multi-family

construction continues to be weak.

Most respondents express optimism for

single-family construction in the spring.

Delivery times and availability of

construction materials remain about normal.
Most responding savings institutions report that savings deposit inflows
are up compared with a year ago, with some tapering off since the beginning of
this year.
future.

Overall, little or no change in inflows is expected in the near

Mortgage demand has been weak in most areas, but most respondents

expect a pick-up in the spring.

Mortgage rates are stable to declining, but

several respondents expect some increase in the second half of the year.
Banking.

District commercial bankers report slightly lower total loan

demand last month.

Demand for commercial and industrial loans, consumer

loans, and commercial real estate loans was down slightly.

Demand for

agricultural loans was unchanged and demand for residential real estate loans
was up slightly.

The prime rate fell 25 basis points on average, and consumer

lending rates also fell slightly.

No further change is expected in the next

month in either the prime rate or consumer loan rates.

Total deposits fell

X-3

slightly because of decreases in demand deposits, conventional NOWs and large
CDs.

These decreases were partially offset by slight increases in MMDAs,

IRAs, and small time deposits.

Super NOWs and passbook savings accounts were

unchanged on average.
Agriculture.

Tenth District farm incomes were higher in 1987 as

earnings were up substantially for livestock producers, and crop farmers
generally had an exceptional year as well.

While gross farm incomes were up

considerably, improvement in after tax incomes may be less dramatic.
Government farm programs will be popular again in 1988.

Higher crop

prices are not discouraging program sign up, and a majority of farmers in the
district are opting for the basic 20 percent required set aside.

There is

less enthusiasm for the additional 10 percent voluntary set aside, and very
little interest in the 0/92 program--a program which pays 92 percent of
eligible deficiency payments in exchange for idling all acres.

The

Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), however, has been quite attractive.
Bankers report that in many areas most of the eligible acreage has already
entered the program, and sign up is tapering off.

In other areas, the

relatively complicated requirements for program compliance have made the CRP
less popular.
Agricultural loan demand appears flat for 1988, with both lenders and
borrowers maintaining a conservative approach to agricultural credit
decisions.

A few bankers anticipate a limited increase in loan demand for

livestock expansion.

Some renewed activity in the farm implements market may

also provide a limited source of increased loan demand.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy continues to grow at a mild pace.

Expansion

in manufacturing is widespread, although construction-related manufacturing
is declining.

Drilling activity has recently turned up and it remains well

above a year earlier.

District retailers say their sales are sluggish,

while auto dealers note slight increases in demand.

Construction continues

to decline and remains the weakest sector of the economy.

Total deposits

at District financial institutions remain below a year earlier.

Although

District agricultural prices are up from a year earlier, agriculturalists
generally expect a slight decline in overall farm income in 1988.
Most district manufacturers report continued growth in orders.
Demand for the products of construction-related firms, however, is falling.
Manufacturers linked to oil and gas drilling note a continuation of the
mild expansion in sales that emerged in the fourth quarter and they also
cite significant year-over-year sales growth.

Although some chemical and

refined petroleum manufacturers report recent slight declines in orders,
they perceive these to be temporary and they expect a strong upward trend
to reappear.

A number of petrochemical firms are expanding capacity.

Steel producers report high levels of demand and they expect growth to
persist throughout 1988.
moderately.

Production of electronic equipment is expanding

Although some defense-related manufacturers report falloffs in

contract values due to defense cuts, respondents expect to be impacted less
than in other regions because of the high-technology focus of much District
production.

Most manufacturers in apparel and in food and kindred products

report expanding orders.

No manufacturing respondents reported significant

increases in unplanned inventories.

XI-2
The District drilling rig count increased slightly in February
after declining in each of the previous four months.

The February rig

count was 22.2 percent higher than in February 1987 but was 9.6 percent
lower than its previous peak of September 1987.

A recent increase in

District well permit applications, a leading indicator of drilling
activity, suggests continued slight gains in the rig count.
The value of District construction contracts continues its
protracted decline in both residential and nonresidential building.
Overbuilding remains a problem in the office and retail markets in a number
of District cities including, most notably, Austin.

Even nonbuilding

activity, which had been a strong point in District construction, has shown
some recent weakness.

Issuance of residential permits is at about

one-fifth its 1984 rate.

Both single and multi-family residential building

permits are down.
District retailers say that sales are sluggish, following a better
than expected showing at the end of the year.

At department stores,

January sales were below a year earlier, after a year-over-year increase in
December.

Department store sales have been particularly weak in the

Dallas-Ft. Worth area.

Retail employment continues to fall in the District

both as a result of weak sales and because recent mergers and
consolidations have led to layoffs of redundant managerial staffs.
District auto dealers report slight upturns in sales in February,
following a decline in January.

Inventories for domestic models are said

to be at desired levels, while inventories of imports are high and above
planned levels.
half of 1988.

Dealers expect little expansion in sales until the second

XI-3
Total deposits at District financial institutions remain below a
year earlier, despite year-over-year expansions at thrifts and member
banks.

Concerns about the stability of District financial institutions, as

a result of problem real estate loans, are widespread.

One large District

financial institution lost eight percent of its total deposits in one week.
These concerns are said to explain the shifts out of large time deposits
and into small time deposits that continue to be evident, particularly at
thrift institutions.

At large District banks, business and real estate

loans remain below a year earlier, with particularly strong declines
appearing in the business loans category.
District farmers and ranchers generally expect their incomes to
fall slightly below 1987 levels, but they anticipate relatively high
incomes compared with other recent years.

Although District crop and

livestock prices remain above a year earlier, the ratio of prices paid by
farmers to prices received by them has also grown.

The 1987 sale of a

cooperative denim mill in West Texas has pumped about $100 million into the
farm economy of the region.

The effects of that one-time income shock are

increased land values and a firmed market for cotton equipment.
grapefruit production has finally rebounded from the 1983 freeze:

Texas
3.3

million boxes are expected this season, a 71 percent increase over a year
ago.

Texas cattle raisers are increasing their herds while herd sizes are

declining nationally.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Respondents in most areas of the District continue to report moderate growth,
although concerns about slowing near-term growth are rising.

Conditions in resource-

related industries are improved generally: agricultural conditions continue to improve
for most crop and livestock producers; lumber prices remain high with low inventories;
and energy-related
earlier levels.

industries--although not expanding--report

activity above year-

Residential and nonresidential construction has been weakening in many

parts of the District. Manufacturing activity is mixed, with gains reported in resourceprocessing and export-related industries, but slowdowns reported in construction and
defense-related manufacturing. Lending activity remains mixed, as lower interest rates
have prevented the erosion of business, but have not stimulated increases.
Business Sentiment
Nearly all respondents anticipate slowing national growth this year, but none
expects a recession.

Respondents generally expect below average housing starts, slight

increases in the growth of business investment, slight decreases in consumer spending
growth, and significant shrinkage in the trade deficit.

On average, respondents expect

slight increases in both inflation and unemployment rates this year.
Agriculture and Resource Related Industries
Survey responses indicate strengthening in the agriculture sector.

Higher prices,

caused by increased exports and government-induced production cuts, together with
lower interest rates, have helped increase land prices in most areas of the District.
Crop farmers have reduced their debt burdens significantly as their incomes have risen.
Grain processors report record revenues, although they expect reduced storage income
this year because of reduced inventories.
gains from reduced import competition.

The domestic wine industry reports strong
A cattle rancher reports the best conditions

XII-2
since 1975 and expects conditions to strengthen further over the next 2 to 3 years.
Farmers and ranchers in California, however, express concern about possible income
losses arising from the imposition of Proposition 65, the state's initiative to limit the
use of toxic substances.
The forest products industry reports strong prices and low inventories of logs.
Respondents expect a decline in demand, however, based on reduced housing starts
nationally.

Pulp and paper production remains at almost 100 percent of capacity,

causing sharp increases in newspaper and publishing costs.
In the mining sector, conditions are improved from year-earlier.

The drilling rig

count is above year-earlier, although normal seasonal declines are occurring and few in
the industry expect further gains this year.

Recent declines in oil prices have not yet

had a significant effect on exploration and development plans, which included increased
investment in Alaska.

Metal mining activity continues to rebound in Arizona and Utah

as a result of higher prices for copper and gold, reduced wage

rates, and improved

extraction technology.
Retail Sales
Retail sales in February were up only 2.2 percent from year-earlier, but retailers
are waiting for the Easter season to get a good reading on consumer spending plans.
Retailers report rising prices for some imported goods, although not all of the dollar's
decline has been passed along. Inventories are reported to be at or slightly below desired
levels for most retailers. Used auto prices are rising, but dealers report that consumers
are waiting for new incentive programs before buying new autos.

Auto inventories are

up, but dealers expect reduced output by major auto makers to begin to reduce those
inventories.
Manufacturing
The outlook for manufacturing is mixed.
competitiveness

The falling dollar has improved the

of domestic producers, but defense and construction-related

XII-3
manufacturers face slowing or negative growth.

Current orders should sustain

aerospace employment for the next several years, but the completion of several large
defense contracts may begin to reduce employment this year in many defense-related
industries.

Construction-related industries expect reduced sales following the drop in

housing starts. Respondents report declines in heavy equipment sales for housing and
commercial construction, but report some gains in sales for nonbuilding construction.
Increased prices of steel and other imported raw materials are appearing in equipment
costs. Computer-related firms report rising sales, with the semiconductor book-to-bill
ratio indicating a growing backlog of orders.

Electronic component sales to industrial

consumers also are reported to be strong with inventories declining.
Construction
Construction has weakened overall, although urban areas of Oregon and
Washington report strong housing permits. Construction was particularly weak in Alaska
(a 7 year low), Utah (down 46 percent in 1987), and Idaho.

Residential and commercial

construction also has slowed in California, but activity remains relatively high.

Some

growth is reported in nonbuilding construction in many areas of the West.
Finance
Lower interest rates have improved the outlook of respondents in the finance
sector, although loan demand has not increased significantly.

The decline in rates is

generally credited with preventing a drop in loan demand by increasing consumer
optimism, but does not appear to have caused an increase in demand by making loans
sufficiently more affordable.

Several respondents expect a refinancing boom if fixed-

rate mortgages drop an additional 50 to 75 basis points. Several respondents also cite
problems obtaining high-quality loan applications.

