SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

SEPTEMBER

1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY .........................................

.........

i

First District - Boston............. ......................

I-1

Second District - New York.................................

I-1

Third District - Philadelphia..............................

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland...............................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ............... ................. .

V-I

Sixth District - Atlanta..................................

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ................................

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis................................

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis............................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City..............................
Eleventh District - Dallas...............................

X-1

..

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco...........................

XII-1

SUMMARY*

The pace of business activity reflected in most District reports
ranges from healthy expansion to stable or mixed, with weakening noted
only by St. Louis.

However, contacts in several Districts were less

optimistic than earlier about the outlook.

A number of manufacturing

industries are operating near capacity, and further upward pressures on
prices were noted.

Retail spending is generally lackluster though some

segments are doing better.

Several Districts report weakness in

residential construction, but home sales are strong on the West Coast and
in the Richmond District.

Nonresidential construction has slowed in

various areas of the country, though industrial building has strengthened
in the Midwest.

Rainfall in the second half of the summer relieved

drought stress to agriculture in several Districts, though parts of the
St. Louis District suffered further crop damage from hot, dry weather.

Manufacturing
Activity is expanding in numerous manufacturing industries and in most
Districts.

Rising exports and transfer of production from overseas as

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago based on information
gathered prior to August 30.

ii
well as strength of domestic demand have contributed to manufacturing's
rise.

Some industries are at or near capacity including paper, chemicals,

steel, and aluminum.

Other sectors doing well include electronics;

nondefense aerospace; and electrical equipment and instruments,
particularly for installation in new plants and factory expansion
projects.

Demand for various types of nonelectrical

strengthened, in some cases from low levels.

machinery has

Motor vehicle output plans

have been revised upward in line with better-than-expected

sales.

San

Francisco says that output of forest products is strong, though industry
sources are concerned about weakening in housing.
Boston report sluggishness in construction supplies.

In contrast, Dallas and
Other manufacturing

sectors showing softness include personal care products and government
purchases, including defense.

Atlanta, however, notes an increase in

shipbuilding to fulfill new Navy contracts.
foreign competition still strong.

Apparel is

mixed, with

Several Districts indicate that the

overall manufacturing expansion is expected to continue, though Richmond
noted somewhat less optimism among its contacts than earlier.

Construction and Real Estate
Housing market conditions vary widely around the country, from healthy
to weak.

Recent interest rate increases are thought to have prompted some

potential buyers to act before rates rose further (New York) but
discouraged other would-be buyers (Richmond).

San Francisco reports

strength in West Coast housing markets and rapid increases in home
prices.

Richmond indicates that new home sales stayed strong in August.

Dallas reports that residential construction contracts and permits are

iii
rising but from low levels.

Slowing in homebuilding is noted by New York,

Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City, though some
parts of the New York District have shown recent improvement or less
slowing than expected.

Weak multifamily building was reported by Chicago

and Atlanta, though the latter has seen an upturn in two District cities.

Construction of factories has strengthened in the Chicago District,
and industrial park construction has increased in south Florida with the
boom in exports.

The pace of office building construction varies

considerably among major cities.

Hotel building is booming in Orlando.

Chicago contacts expressed concern about overbuilding of retail stores in
some areas.

Boston described capital spending by profitable stores as

cautious; weak retailers are selling stores.

Strong or increased highway

construction was noted by Chicago and San Francisco.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending was reported sluggish in most Districts.

Cleveland

and Minneapolis, however, noted an upturn in apparel sales in recent
weeks.

Other Districts were hopeful that an end to hot, humid weather

would bring stronger sales of fall apparel and back-to-school items.
Lines described as selling well include conservative clothing (Boston) and
accessories, handbags, and women's at-home clothing (New York).

Cleveland

sees some strength in home furnishings, appliances, and electronics, but
sales of furniture were reported lagging by Boston, New York, and
Richmond.

Sales of home improvement items were reported strong by Kansas

City, but Boston said hot weather deterred sales of building materials.

iv
Retail sales have picked up in rural areas following recent rains,
according to St. Louis.

Motor vehicle sales have been mixed.

Ordering by retailers is described as conservative and cautious.
Inventories were viewed as generally satisfactory in the New York,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City Districts, but Dallas noted stocks above
desired levels, and Boston District stores with weak profits are cutting
inventories.

Extensive markdowns were reported by New York and Chicago.

Dallas noted reports of continued high square footage per customer,
holding down profits.

Resource Industries
Crop conditions vary widely.

Timely rains in August helped crop

conditions according to Richmond, Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas.
However, hot dry weather in mid-August caused further crop deterioration
in the St. Louis District.

Minneapolis reports conditions largely

unchanged there over the past month.

This summer's drought caused a

sharper loss of corn and soybean production in the Chicago District than
for the nation as a whole.

Higher feed costs have squeezed livestock

producers' margins, as have higher water costs in the San Francisco
District, but Kansas City indicates that drought-induced cattle
liquidation has been limited.

Richmond notes that higher livestock prices

are expected to help offset the adverse effects on margins of the rise in
feed costs.

The past year's climb in agricultural land values in the

Chicago District slowed in the second quarter.

v

This has been a "roller coaster" year for forestry, according to
Atlanta.

Increased timber supply due partly to the drought, and reduced

demand reflecting concerns about lagging housing starts, have cut lumber
prices.

Oil exploration and development is expected by Dallas contacts to
remain sluggish.

The number of active drilling rigs has fallen since May

in the Dallas District but risen, contrary to expectations, in the Kansas
City District.

Atlanta reports new oil discoveries in Alabama and

Mississippi, and moderately lower oil production in the District.

Other Drought Effects
Low Mississippi River levels this summer because of the drought caused
diversion of freight from barges to higher-cost rail and Great Lakes
shipping.

However, recent rains in the upper Midwest have helped raise

barge traffic above a year ago at Memphis, where delays had been lengthy.
The drought cut into demand for farm equipment, which was recovering in
the spring from low levels, but added to demand in some other industries
including pump manufacturing and well drilling.

Inflation
Rising raw materials costs continue widespread, and higher prices for
components are increasingly being noted.
expected.

Further price increases are

Some firms, however, are experiencing little or no cost

pressure, because of long-term contracts or because they have worked
closely with suppliers on cost reduction, according to Boston.

Richmond

vi
reports that materials and finished goods price increases in August were
less widespread than in July.

Various materials and components are in

short supply, and lead times have lengthened further, prompting producers
to try to raise their inventories of these items.

Cleveland comments that

concerns about rising costs and capacity limits are allayed by sizable
profit and productivity gains, but Chicago notes that margins at some
firms are being squeezed by increasing materials costs.

Reports on wage gains are mixed.

Cleveland sees signs of somewhat

higher labor costs, partly reflecting increased overtime.

Boston's

contacts are evenly divided between those who see accelerating labor
costs, especially for fringe benefits, and those who do not.

San

Francisco reports shortages of entry and low-skill workers, partly tied to
the immigration law.

Shortages of qualified retail salespeople are

exerting upward pressures on wages.

In contrast, St. Louis sees no

substantial upward wage pressures even in industries running at capacity.

Finance
Trends in lending have been mixed.

Business lending has been strong

except in the Dallas District where business and real estate loans are
leading the decline in total loans.

Consumer lending ranges from soft to

strong, with increases generally led by financing of car purchases.

Real

estate lending is weak in some areas and showing moderate gains in
others.
costs.

Business and consumer loan rates have risen as have funding
Boston area bankers expect further interest rate increases over

the rest of 1988.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Retail activity in the First District continued to be generally
lackluster through the summer, with high-fashion/high-price apparel and
housing-related goods especially weak.

Manufacturing activity is mixed,

with some firms reporting more than double-digit gains in sales and orders
compared to a year earlier but others only holding steady.

Price increases

appear to be picking up for a range of manufacturing inputs, perhaps
including labor.

Cautious optimism characterizes the manufacturing

outlook, but some retailers are now scaling back 1988 plans.
Retail
First District retailers report that recent sales activity is
generally sluggish.
best:

Vendors of core consumer items appear to be doing

unit sales of moderate and higher quality conservative clothing and

of pharmacy prescriptions are holding to last year's robust levels;
purchases of high-fashion/high-price clothing, health and beauty aids,

furniture, and building supplies are reportedly lagging.

The hot summer

has spurred sales of seasonal items while dampening customer interest in
materials for do-it-yourself home improvements.
Retail profitability is declining, as gross margins move in tandem
with sales and the labor market remains tight.

Firms with good sales

results are increasing wages and improving working conditions; weaker firms
are trying to reduce their expenses, and some are laying off costly
employees.

While earnings are flat among the healthiest firms, most

respondents report profit declines, and some are operating at a loss.

Compared to earlier reports, capital spending plans of retailers
have turned conservative.

Most of the more profitable respondents are

expanding their operations, but slowly and cautiously.

The weak firms are

disinvesting - selling stores and reducing inventories - and spending funds
on only the most necessary and immediately rewarding projects.
retailers are strapped for cash.

Some

One regional distributor, noting weakness

in its customer base, is tightening credit.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturers give mixed reports on recent sales
activity.

While a majority indicate that sales are strong, with gains of

18 to 25 percent above year-ago levels, over one-third say that sales are
flat or disappointing.

Order rates vary too:

some firms have backlogs 15

to 19 percent above 1987 levels but others sense some softening.

Demand

for electrical machinery and instruments, particularly by the auto and
chemical industries, was especially strong.

Half of the First District

manufacturers contacted have benefitted from strong exports, and two firms
mentioned transferring production to the United States from overseas.

In

contrast, demand for building products and personal care products was
sluggish, in part because retailers are reportedly keeping inventories
under tight control.

Government purchases are also down.

Earnings are generally described as very good.
inventories are also said to be in good shape.

For the most part,

A third of the firms

contacted report that their capital spending is 10 to 20 percent above last
year's level.
with 1987.

For the majority, however, capital spending is below or even

I-3

Many firms continue to face price increases for materials like
paper, plastics and metals.

Increasingly, however, they also mention

rising prices for other inputs such as motors, electronic components and
castings.

By contrast, one-third of respondents have experienced little or

no cost pressure, either because of long-term contracts, or because they
have worked closely with suppliers to achieve cost reductions.

Most First

District manufacturers are raising their own prices whenever competitive
conditions permit.
While a few manufacturers are hiring or recalling workers, most
report that employment is flat or declining.

Two major regional employers

have announced lay-offs affecting their operations worldwide.

Respondents

discussing wage pressures are evenly divided between those who believe
labor costs - particularly fringe benefits - are accelerating, and others
who see no such development.
Most First District manufacturers foresee reasonably clear sailing
through year end but express considerable caution as well.
"walking on eggs."

One spoke of

Another firm wants to be able "to jump either way" but

is "erring on the side of caution."

While most respondents appear

unconcerned about rising interest rates, two mentioned that continued
dollar appreciation might weaken their exports.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

In general, the Second District economy registered a modest uptrend
since the last report.

Business activity picked up somewhat and several areas

reported either an improvement in residential construction or less softening
than was anticipated.

Office leasing continued at a moderate pace while the

pattern

store sales was

of department

mixed.

Demand

for

commercial

loans

remained strong at small- and mid-sized banks in the District.

Consumer Spending
The pattern of District department store sales was mixed during July as
respondents reported results ranging from somewhat below to well above plan.

A

prolonged period of hot and humid weather was cited by several retailers as a
factor in slower-than-anticipated apparel sales since consumers were reluctant
to try on new fall clothes.

Furniture and housewares were also somewhat weak.

Among items mentioned as selling well were accessories, handbags, and women's
at-home clothing.
Over-the-year

sales

changes

in

July

ranged

+10 percent with most stores registering a net gain.

from

-1

percent

to

Inventories were generally

reported in good shape, due in part to heavy markdowns of summer merchandise.
However, one respondent noted that stocks are somewhat higher at his store than
planned.

After about a year of sluggish sales of women's apparel, all are

hopeful that the new fall fashions will be able to turn things around.
Business Activity
Economic conditions
recently.

The

percentage

in the Second District
of

Buffalo

purchasing

have picked up somewhat
managers

reporting

an

improvement in general business activity increased in July while the percentage

II-2

with a worsening declined. A semiannual survey of manufacturers in the Syracuse
area found that four-fifths of the responding firms were operating at a capacity
of 80 percent or higher, up from only 50 percent at that operating level in
January.

Purchasing managers in the Rochester survey generally reported stable

conditions and most anticipate little change over the next quarter.
Unemployment rates in the District remain lower than the national
average with July readings of 4.1 percent in New York and 3.6 percent in New
Jersey. A midyear review of labor market conditions in the New YorkNortheastern New Jersey area noted that the first half of 1988 saw continued but
slower

job

growth

compared

with

unemployment than a year earlier.

the

last

half

of

1987

and

much

lower

For the first five months of 1988 the area's

unemployment rate averaged 3.8 percent, down from 4.7 percent a year earlier.
Thus, despite cutbacks in New York City's finance and manufacturing sectors, the
predicted large increase in regional unemployment has so far not materialized.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
While the overall pace of homebuilding activity remains somewhat slower
than in the past few years, several areas reported either an improvement in
recent weeks or less softening than had been anticipated.

The moderate rise in

mortgage interest rates reportedly has motivated some potential buyers to act
now before rates move higher.

In addition, some upstate New York communities

continue to experience stronger homebuying and higher levels of residential
construction than a year earlier.

The outcome of several cases now under

litigation will have a decided impact on future residential construction in the
District.

Hundreds of units of affordable housing have been mandated in a

number of communities, but several plans for implementing the mandates are being
challenged in the courts.
Office leasing activity has continued at a moderate pace since the last
report.

The expansion of foreign firms was a major factor in both midtown and

II-3

downtown Manhattan leasing, and negotiations with several other international
companies are reportedly underway.

In addition, some financial services firms

which had earlier contemplated moving have decided to remain in lower Manhattan,
where excess space has made rental rates and other terms more flexible.

With

little or no new office construction planned, vacancy rates in Westchester and
Fairfield counties have either declined or stabilized in recent months, albeit
at high levels.

A modest slowing has also occurred in office construction in

northern New Jersey where the overall vacancy rate remains about 20 percent.
Financial Developments
Officers of small- and mid-sized banks in the Second District report
that demand for commercial

loans continues to be strong.

The majority of

bankers said that demand is the same or greater than a year ago.

The few who

noted a decline in activity attributed the slowdown to a weak commercial real
estate market, particularly in Stamford and northern New Jersey.

Except for the

real estate sector, nearly all respondents believed that their local economy is
quite

strong.

Most

officers expect

that

interest rates will

continue to

increase for the remainder of 1988, though some anticipate that rates will
stabilize in early 1989.

Higher interest rates have not as yet dampened

commercial loan demand at the surveyed banks.

Opinion was split as to whether

further increases in rates would cause an appreciable reduction in loan activity
in the next several months.

Several bankers expect demand to continue brisk so

long as the economy remains strong.

Others noted

that some

expressed apprehension concerning any further rise in rates.

clients have

In terms of loan

distribution, most of the officers said that the bulk of their loans go to
established firms that are expanding or modernizing.

However, some mentioned

that they issue many small business loans and help finance new companies.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy was still on an expansionary trend in late
August although the retail sector remained slack.
continues to increase moderately.

Manufacturing activity

Retail sales are flat compared to last year

and merchants say the recent trend has been weak.
particularly in business and construction loans.

Bank lending is moving up,
Bankers say personal

installment and car loans are expanding but credit card lending is soft.
Conditions in Third District recreation areas vary; business at seashore resorts
is mostly off from last year while tourism at mountain resorts is up.
The outlook in the Third District business community is mostly positive,
except in the retail sector.

Manufacturers expect moderate growth to continue

and they are planning increases in capital spending and hiring over the next six

months.

Bankers anticipate sustained loan demand, particularly from businesses,

as economic growth continues.

Retailers look for slow growth in the final

quarter of the year but they do not expect real sales for the period to show any
improvement over last year.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the region continues to expand, according to the
latest Business Outlook Survey.

Among firms polled in August, 32 percent

reported increasing business while 16 percent indicated they were operating at a
slower pace compared to July.

Improvement is more widespread among producers of

nondurable goods than in the durable goods sector.
Specific measures of industrial activity reflect modest gains.

New orders

were increasing in August, and a pickup in shipments is enabling area firms to
reduce inventories marginally.

However, order backlogs are unchanged and

III-2

payrolls at local plants are virtually steady, marking the first pause in
employment growth--as measured by the survey--in 16 months.
Price pressures continue in the manufacturing sector.

Nearly two-thirds of

the companies contacted for the August survey reported increases in input costs
from July, and almost one-third said they were raising the prices of the
products they make.

The outlook is for further price increases.

Three-fourths

of the survey respondents expect to pay more for the goods they purchase over
the next six months and more than half plan to charge more for their own
products.
Looking ahead, area manufacturers expect moderate growth to continue;
34 percent of the August survey participants predict improving business in the
next six months while only 9 percent anticipate a slowdown.

Overall,

respondents expect increases in new orders and shipments and further reductions
in inventories.

Area firms intend to add workers in the next six months, on

balance, and they plan to step up capital spending as well.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in late August generally indicated that
sales in late July and early August were about level with the same period last
year, in real terms.

Merchants say apparel sales remain weak, but there is some

strength in home furnishings, appliances, and electronic goods.

Unusually hot

weather was aggravating the seasonal slowness, according to store officials,
deterring customers from beginning back-to-school shopping.
Area merchants expect sales to improve only slowly through the fall, and
they are anticipating a final quarter that will probably just match last year's
when measured in constant dollars.

In line with a flat projection for sales,

retailers are cutting back plans for new store openings.

III-3

FINANCE
Loan volume at major Third District banks was growing at about a 13 percent
annual rate in July and early August and bankers contacted late in the month
said this pace appeared to be continuing.

Several banks reported strong demand

for commercial and industrial loans, prompted by increases in capital spending
by local businesses as well as by inventory financing needs.

Lending to

contractors for office and flex-space construction has picked up although the
growth of real estate lending overall continues to ease.

Bankers say consumer

lending has been strong recently, with car loans and installment loans moving
up, although credit card lending is flat.
Several banks in the Third District have mounted promotional campaigns to
raise deposits with 1-2 year maturities, and these banks generally have met
their goals.

While most bankers contacted in August said funding costs have

remained under control, several expressed concern that they will not be able to
maintain their current rate of asset growth unless they can boost deposit growth
further, and that this will require paying higher rates of interest.
TOURISM
Tourism business is mixed in the Third District.

New Jersey beach resorts

have suffered from sporadic pollution incidents and a period of abnormally cold
ocean water temperatures.

Lodging and other tourist-related business at these

resorts is off around 15 percent from last year, according to municipal
officials and local merchants.

Overall tourist business at Delaware beach

resorts is up around 5 percent from last year, but local merchants say retail
business has not matched the increase in visitors and rental activity.
Pennsylvania mountain resorts in the Third District are experiencing better than
expected business; tourist officials say gross revenue in vacation-related
business is running about 9 percent above the year-ago level.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
The Fourth District economy continues to enjoy a healthy expansion.
Manufacturing production and new orders are at reportedly high levels with
only moderate labor cost increases.

Unemployment rates around the District

have fallen to equal the national rate, but factory workers' average weekly
earnings remain flat.

Retail and auto sales are sluggish, and banks report

strong business lending but slow consumer lending.

Retail Sales

Major retailers in the District report a noticeable upturn in sales in
recent weeks compared with meager sales volumes during July.

Sales of men's

and boys' wear are brisk, and sales of women's fall fashions are picking up as
the weather cools.
fall orders.

Nonetheless, retailers have been conservative in placing

Firms report that they have encountered no capacity constraints

when purchasing merchandise from domestic suppliers.
Local auto dealers report that sales in the last two or three weeks have
been slow to moderate.

One dealer attributed the slow sales to higher

interest rates, and another noted that buyers don't want variable-interestrate loans because they expect rates to rise further.

Another dealer

suggested that frequent changes in incentive programs over the last several
months have confused potential buyers, making them more reluctant to make a
purchase decision.

However, dealers report that those who do buy show no sign

IV-2

of becoming more cautious in their spending and continue to purchase many
options for their cars.

Dealers are generally satisfied with inventory

levels, but are prepared to offer discounts or rebates if necessary to make
room for the 1989 models.

Labor Markets
Unemployment rates in Ohio and Pennsylvania have converged to the national
rate for the first time in a year.

The current reduction in Ohio's

unemployment rate marks the sixth straight month of steadily falling rates.
The latest improvement results both from the addition of 62,000 workers to the
ranks of the employed and from a reduction of 49,000 (or 15 percent) in the
number of unemployed workers.
The new jobs appear to be slightly less concentrated in the services than
they were earlier in the year.
5,200 jobs in Ohio.

For instance, durable-goods employers added

According to industry sources, most of these jobs are in

the smaller companies that supply the major manufacturers, rather than in the
large manufacturers themselves.
Ohio's lower unemployment rate has not yet affected factory workers'
hourly earnings, which have remained flat over the last few months.

However,

the liberal use of worker overtime by District manufacturers to meet
production schedules has increased the average workweek by 0.2 hours to 43.3
hours, pushing average weekly earnings up $4.47.

IV-3

Manufacturing
The District's manufacturing sector continues to enjoy a healthy

expansion.

According to the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Ohio

Manufacturing Index, production rose 5.8 percent during the last three months
over the same period a year ago.

Optimism about further expansion is buoyed

by the high rate of incoming orders, as reported by purchasing managers.
However, recent surveys indicate mounting concern about rising material costs,
capacity constraints, and recent signs of somewhat higher labor costs.
However, these concerns are tempered by reports of sizable profit and
productivity gains.
A wide variety of commodities, particularly bearings, electric motors, and
a number of chemical, steel, and aluminum products, remain in short supply,
leading in some cases to price increases.
their inventories of raw materials.

Producers are coping by increasing

The high volume of new orders and the

steady backlogs of existing orders are expected to absorb this slight
inventory buildup.
The metals sector continues to boom.

Raw steel production in Youngstown,

Pittsburgh, and Lake Erie regions rose 12.4 percent during the last three
months over the same period a year ago.

Although production has expanded

significantly, upward price pressure is reported on many steel products.

IV-4

Banking

District loan demand has been mixed, with strength in business lending,
moderation in real estate lending, and softness in consumer installment
lending.

Total loans outstanding at large banks fell at an annual rate of 4

percent over the first half of the third quarter.

After increasing at a rapid

pace during the second quarter, consumer installment lending has subsided,
which led to a slight overall contraction in loan volume.

Also, real estate

loans have been increasing at a slower rate than during the spring when
mortgage rates were lower.

In contrast, business lending has picked up

considerably, with commercial and industrial loans outstanding growing at an
annual clip of more than 20 percent.

V-1

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND
Overview
Economic conditions in the District appear somewhat less robust in August
than in July.

Manufacturing activity increased at a slower pace, and

manufacturers were somewhat less optimistic about the outlook.

Department

store sales were unchanged while furniture and car sales were down.
market for new homes remained strong.

The

Exports rose and imports fell at

Bankers reported moderate increases in consumer and real

District ports.

Agricultural conditions improved somewhat with the recent

estate loans.
rainfall.

Only one-fifth of manufacturers, but over half of our retail respondents,
said they had raised wages during the month.

Meanwhile, some slowing in

producer price increases was evident.
Consumer Spending
District retailers responding to our regular mail survey reported
decreased activity in the ten days ending August 17 compared with the previous
ten days.

Thirty-seven percent of the respondents reported declines in sales

and 21 percent reported increases, as compared with 33 and 48 percent,
respectively, who responded to our previous survey in mid-July.

Sales of big

ticket items were down according to about one-fourth of the respondents while
65 percent reported no change.

Within the retail sector, department store

respondents generally reported no change in sales while the majority of
furniture store respondents and car dealers reported declines.

Inventories

were also down.
Employment in August was roughly even with that of July among our
respondents.

About half of the retail respondents said they had raised wages

during the first half of August.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity apparently expanded only slightly in August,
according to our regular mail survey.

Thirty-two percent of the respondents

reported increased shipments, down from 38 percent in the previous survey.
Reports of unchanged shipments increased to 46 percent from 38 percent in the
previous survey.

New orders, backlogs of new orders, employment, and the

length of the workweek also increased, but only marginally.

Slightly over

half of our respondents reported no change in inventories of finished goods
and materials and about one-fourth reported increases.
Prices of manufacturers' materials and finished goods continued to rise,
but at a slower pace than was reported in July.

The prices of finished

products increased according to 21 percent of our respondents, and 61 percent
reported higher prices for raw materials.

The corresponding percentages in

July were 35 and 69.
One-fifth of our respondents said they raised wages in August or expect
to raise them before month-end.

Most of these manufacturers said the wage

increases were previously scheduled.
In our latest survey, District manufacturers were somewhat less
optimistic about the outlook for the economy.

For the first time in several

months, respondents expecting a decline in national business activity in the
next six months about equaled those expecting an increase.

With regard to the

outlook for their own businesses, 36 percent of the respondents believe their
shipments will rise in the next six months and 26 percent anticipate declines.
Producers who expect declines in their unfilled orders and workweeks exceeded
the number who expect increases.

Housing
The pace of new home sales remained strong in August according to our
telephone survey of District realtors and builders.

Most of them reported

that both sales and new listings remained at healthy levels.

Only a few

noticed a slowdown in activity, which they attributed to the recent rise in
interest rates.
Finance
Executives of District financial institutions reported continued growth
in their sector.

About half of the respondents said that deposit growth was

more rapid than a year ago, while only one reported a decline in deposits.
Growth in consumer loans, home equity lines, and home mortgages continued at
the moderate levels reported a month ago.

Most of our banking contacts have

not observed any change in loan or deposit trends.
Agriculture
District agricultural conditions improved somewhat in August as timely
rains helped reduce the heat stress on crops in many farm areas.

According to

our contacts, the condition of the peanut and soybean crops improved, and
tobacco is in generally good shape.
Corn yields will vary widely in the District this year.

On the coastal

plains of North Carolina, where most of that state's corn crop is grown,
yields are expected to be excellent.

In many other parts of the District,

however, the rains came too late to help most of the severely damaged crop.
Two successive summers of drought have Maryland farmers talking about planting
more winter wheat and barley and less corn in the future.
Rising poultry prices are expected to help District producers maintain
profits in spite of increased feed costs due to the drought.

Cattle and hog

producers also look for increased prices for livestock in coming months.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The Sixth District economy continued its spotty expansion in mid-summer with
key manufacturing industries very strong, but services moderating and construction
weak.

Strength elsewhere in the U.S. economy appears to be dampening migration,

especially in Georgia and to some extent in Florida.

Retail sales have shown renewed

sluggishness, though recent dealer incentives have sustained auto sales.

Homebuilding

remains soft and nonresidential construction has been declining in major regional
markets, where inventories of space are high. Recent rainfall has improved prospects for
crops and livestock in many areas earlier affected by the drought. Selected industries
are producing at capacity and raising prices but wage increases are modest.
Employment and Industry

Industrial activity appears to be generally healthy,

with several export-related industries operating at capacity levels.

In textiles, demand

for carpet is strong; demand for apparel fabric is down, but producers expect that
dampened imports will lead to stronger demand for domestic products.

The wood

products industry continues to do well, with both domestic and foreign demand expected
to continue growing into next year. Paper and packaging materials producers, operating
essentially at full capacity, report that they can easily pass on price increases. Increased
foreign demand is expected to offset slower domestic growth for commodity chemicals;
producers have been expanding facilities, and a new chemical plant was recently
announced for Louisiana.

Producers of specialty chemicals used by the paper and

electronic industries also are doing well and are raising prices. Manufacturers generally
are not experiencing tight labor markets or significant upward wage pressure.
The electrical equipment industry continues to benefit from the manufacturing
revival as firms add production lines and build new factories. The electronics industry is
being boosted by demand for personal computers and defense-related electronics.
Ship building has benefited from major new U.S. Navy contracts, which have also
boosted demand for regionally-produced steel plate and increased employment rolls in

VI-2

Alabama and Mississippi.

Steel mini-mills are prospering from new business stimulated

by the weaker dollar, and increased demand for can sheet has led to the expansion of a
Tennessee aluminum plant.
Consumer Spending

Retail sales in the Southeast slowed in August following a

mild rebound in July; revenue was off from last year for several retailers.

Although

back-to-school sales in the region have not met retailers' expectations, the hope persists
that fall sales will accelerate when the weather cools.

In fact, retailers are fairly

optimistic about the fall season, especially compared to their poor experience last year.
Few expect a big jump in sales and they continue to order conservatively.
Car sales were brisk in August, helped by moderate model clearance incentives.
The August volume was lower than a year earlier, when bigger incentives strongly
boosted sales.

Truck sales continue to post healthy year-over-year gains.

Though

Georgia and Florida account for about half the region's volume gain, Louisiana and
Mississippi are posting the largest percentage gains.
Construction

Overall, nonresidential construction was declining in mid-summer

and was at its lowest level since last winter. Even the Georgia market, which has been
posting the highest year-over-year percentage increases, has softened.

South Florida's

office market is notably weak, but industrial park construction has picked up as export
trade booms.

Elsewhere, Tampa's huge wave of new construction and absorption has

begun to subside.

However, hotel construction in Orlando is booming and the office

market has been a bright spot in Nashville.
Residential construction dropped one-fifth in July from June's level, mostly from
a slowdown in single family construction.
on housing demand.
including Jacksonville,

Reduced migration continues to exert a drag

Multifamily housing remains overbuilt in several major cities,
Miami, Nashville, and New Orleans.

In Atlanta, multifamily

building permits and construction are up sharply from last summer's low levels; there also
is evidence of an apartment price war. Tampa's condo market is expanding.

VI-3
Financial Services Business loans continue to exhibit strength, while real estate
lending is flat because of the slowdown in home sales and the end of the refinancing
boom. Consumer lending in Louisiana and Mississippi is showing strong growth as a result
of vigorous car sales.

Beginning July 1, legislation permitted commercial banks in

Mississippi to acquire or be acquired by banking companies in Alabama, Louisiana, or
Tennessee; the first inter-state deal was a proposed acquisition of a Mississippi bank by a
Memphis bank.
Tourism Tourism has been one of the best industry performers this summer even
though there has been little growth over last year.

Despite reports that travelers are

cutting back both on length of stay and discretionary spending, Florida anticipates
record-breaking fall and winter seasons.

In Central Florida, the Space Shuttle Discovery

is providing a strong boost to attendance at the Kennedy Space Center.

Traffic at

Orlando International Airport continues to grow rapidly, but the Tampa and Miami
airports have reported significant declines this summer, primarily the result of flight
cutbacks by Eastern Airlines.

Also, New Orleans expects a drop in visitors and reduced

hotel occupancy this fall following the spurt accompanying the Republican National
Convention.
Agriculture, Forestry, and Mining

Most of the Southeast received badly needed

rains in recent weeks; the moisture came in time to help a majority of crops.

The

forestry industry continues to experience a roller coaster year as prices of many common
lumber products have fallen about one-fifth in recent weeks after earlier advances. The
summer drought improved logging conditions and allowed lumber supplies to outrace
demand.

Fewer home starts are limiting demand and enhanced competition from

Canadian producers, caused by reduced rail rates on Canada's nationalized railroads, may
also have contributed to price weakness.
Coal production remains stable while oil production is down moderately from last
year's level.
Mississippi.

Oil exploration in the region has yielded new discoveries in Alabama and

VII-1
SEVENTH

Summary.

DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Reports on business activity in the District generally indicate

solid expansion into the second half of 1988, though the rate of rise in
activity appears to be less rapid than in the first half.
prices continue.

Upward pressures on

Manufacturers in this region have been helped greatly by the

strengthening in demand for capital equipment.

Better-than-expected consumer

spending for motor vehicles continues to support upward-revised production
plans at plants in the District.
last year's record pace.
be slowing.

Sales of major appliances have stayed near

Construction activity, in the aggregate, appears to

The drought has adversely affected the farm sector and some

nonagricultural industries but boosted activity in a few other industries.
Labor Markets.

Employment growth in the District states through this

year's first half was somewhat slower than the nation in part reflecting first
quarter layoffs at auto assembly and parts plants.

Unemployment has been below

5 percent of the labor force in Indiana and near 4 percent in Iowa and
Wisconsin.

Illinois and Michigan rates have been above other District states

and the nation.

Labor markets have tightened in parts of the District but wage

gains generally remain restrained, with some firms seeking concessions.
Motor Vehicles.

Sales of domestic cars have remained strong, and domestic

truck sales have set a record pace.

The industry has been boosting production

schedules to meet demand, following cuts earlier this year.

Car assemblies in

calendar year 1988 are projected about even with 1987, and truck production is
expected to be highest ever.

A large domestic producer assembling trucks on

overtime is reported to be looking into expanding capacity, possibly using
recently shuttered plants of another producer.
Steel.

Production of steel slowed seasonally during the summer but is

expected to come back strong.

Some scheduled maintenance has been deferred in

VII-2
order to keep output at a high level.
projected highest since 1981.

Mill shipments for the year are

Among steel's major markets, domestic motor

vehicle production has been revised upward this year; demand for steel from
machinery makers has increased considerably; plant investment is rising in
chemical process industries--paper, chemicals, petrochemicals, and refineries;
and construction steel has stayed strong.

Steel mill inventories are thought

to have risen in July but are not excessive.

Steelmakers in the District are

investing in projects to boost quality and productivity.
Other Manufacturing Industries.

Demand for a wide range of machinery types

continues to rise, in many cases from low levels.
materials are squeezing profit margins, however.
double the year-ago pace.
tripled.

Increased costs for
Machine tool orders are

Railcar orders have doubled and backlogs have

Demand for truck trailers is expected to stay strong, about at last

year's pace.

Construction machinery sales have improved sharply, encouraging

investments in upgrading manufacturing plants.

Major home appliance shipments

are expected to be second-highest ever this year, 4 percent below 1987.
Recreational vehicle sales are projected 8 percent above last year.
Construction.

Construction activity is at a fairly high level in the

District, but segments of the industry are slowing and further slowing appears
in prospect.

Contracts for construction of nonresidential buildings, in square

feet of floor space, were 5 percent lower in the first half than a year earlier
in District states.

Residential construction contracts were 11 percent lower.

In contrast, first half shipments of gypsum board in District states were 1
percent higher than a year earlier, reflecting finishing work on projects begun
earlier.
slip.
rates.

Apartment construction is weak, and home building has also started to

Further slowing is expected in response to higher mortgage interest
Industrial building is strong in the District.

Office construction

remains strong in downtown Chicago, though below the record pace of recent

VII-3

years, and also has been strong in other District cities including Des Moines,
Indianapolis, and Milwaukee.

Office construction is slowing in suburban

Chicago, and is expected to slow in downtown Indianapolis.
nonresidential construction probably peaked last year.

Total Detroit area

Some types of public

works construction are very active including streets and highways.
Consumer Spending.

Apparel sales, particularly fall merchandise, were hurt

by hot weather in July after a stronger performance in June.
described as widespread, depressing dollar volumes.
concerns about overbuilding of retail space in
Drought Effects.

Markdowns were

Contacts expressed
some areas.

The drought, relieved somewhat by increased rainfall and

cooler weather in recent weeks, has cut crop yields sharply and pared farm
equipment sales.

Barge traffic was cut by low water levels, helping rail and

Great Lakes transport alternatives to barges.

Other industries which gained as

a result of the drought include pump manufacturers and well drilling.

The

absence of rain earlier in the summer allowed construction projects to proceed
ahead of schedule.
landscaping

Demand for farm equipment, grain storage facilities, and

supplies and services may come back strong next year.

Agriculture.

Crop losses due to the drought were sharper in the District

than in the nation.

The USDA estimates year-to-year declines of 42 percent in

District states' corn production and 27 percent in soybeans.
have squeezed livestock producers'

margins.

However,

Higher feed costs
recent disaster

assistance legislation will cushion adverse drought effects on crop and
livestock farmers.

District farmland values rose during the second quarter but

more slowly than in the previous four quarters.

Although the District as a

whole was up 1 percent from three months earlier, gains were not reported in
all five states.

Contacts were less optimistic than earlier about the

near-term trend in farmland values.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy continues to weaken.
construction activity have declined recently.

Employment and

Real consumer spending has

exhibited little growth with car sales weakening.

Manufacturers in

several industries, however, are running at maximum capacity.

In

banking, weakness in consumer and real estate lending continues, however,
commercial loan growth remains strong.
harmed crops further.

Dry weather in mid-August has

River transportation has improved.

Employment
Following a strong first quarter, District nonagricultural
employment declined at a 1.1 percent annual rate in the second quarter.
While all nongovernment sectors reported job losses, declines were
particularly severe in the mining and construction sectors.

District

manufacturing employment fell at a 2.7 percent rate last quarter with
sharp drops in the food processing and textile and apparel industries.
Many chemicals producers, saw mills and paper manufacturers, on the other
hand, are running at maximum capacity due to a rapid increase in exports
and strong domestic sales.
maintain their supply.

Some paper mills have imported pulp to

Nevertheless, no substantial wage hikes have been

reported in these industries.

A St. Louis auto assembly plant plans to

call 2,500 auto assembly workers back to work in September.

VIII-2

Outlook
A July survey of District small businesses revealed a more
pessimistic outlook than a survey conducted one year earlier showed.

A

substantially larger proportion of respondents in the recent survey
anticipate a decline in real sales volume and a weakening in business
conditions in the following six months.

There was no change in the

proportion of the total sample that planned to raise prices in the near
future, though a considerably larger share of respondents from the
manufacturing sector planned price increases.

The survey also revealed a

shortage of skilled construction and transportation workers.
Consumer Spending
District consumer spending in recent months has been only
slightly higher than a year earlier, after adjusting for inflation.

Car

sales leveled off in August but spending for services was moderately
strong.

Grocery stores sales in St. Louis are picking up slightly,

despite higher prices.

Sales are increasing in some agricultural areas

of Arkansas, reflecting farmers' improved outlook following recent rains.
Construction
Construction continues to weaken.

In both the District and the

nation, the value of total building contracts awarded in the three months
through July was down approximately 4 percent from the previous three
months.

The May-July value of District contracts was down 8.7 percent

from a year earlier as both residential and nonresidential building
sectors weakened.
strong.

In St. Louis, however, nonresidential building remains

In the second quarter, both office and industrial vacancy rates

VIII-3

in St. Louis were lower than they were a year earlier and were also below
the national average.
Banking
For the three months ending July, total loans at weekly
reporting District banks grew at an 8.5 percent annual rate, somewhat
slower than the 10.7 percent rate reported for the same period last
year.

Real estate loans grew at a 12.9 percent rate, less than half the

pace of the May-July period in 1987.

Consumer loans declined during the

three months, falling at a 1.2 percent rate.

Commercial loans, on other

other hand, grew at an 11.9 percent rate, more than double the rate of

the same period last year.
Agriculture
Extremely hot and dry weather caused District crop conditions to
deteriorate in mid-August.

An August 1 survey estimated corn yield

losses in District states at 23 to 42 percent.
further reduce these already weak yields.

Recent hot weather will

The northern half of Missouri

is the area most affected by the drought with corn yields more than 50
percent below last year.

In Arkansas, Kentucky and Tennessee, soybean

yields were estimated at 4 to 8 percent higher than last year because of
timely rains.

The recent heat wave, however, will reduce yields.

The

District's cotton and rice crops, however, remain in very good
condition.

In addition, river transportation has improved because of

above-average rains in the upper Midwest.

Barge traffic at Memphis, a

site of major delays earlier this summer, has been higher than a year
earlier.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
Ninth District economic conditions have remained stable.
prospects have

stayed

good.

Consumer spending appears

Employment

to have held up.

Merchants contacted have not observed sharp price increases.

Resource-related

and agricultural industry conditions have remained largely unchanged.
Labor Markets
Recent tightness in the labor market has eased.
prospects remain

good.

Minnesota's unemployment rate

seasonally in July, to 3.5 percent.

Still, employment
increased more than

This was primarily due to stronger-than-

expected labor force growth, though, as employment remained higher than seasonally expected.

In addition, initial unemployment claims in Minnesota fell

in July, to a level 5.6 percent below that of a year earlier.

The most recent

data indicate that the unemployment rate in Montana has leveled off at 6.4
percent.

And despite strong employment growth, North Dakota's unemployment

rate rose a bit in June, but was still 0.8 percentage point below its level in
June 1987.

Seasonal construction and tourism-related employment in Michigan's

Upper Peninsula brought that area's unemployment down to around 7 percent,
well below that of a year ago.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general merchandise may have picked up a bit in
August.
July.
by

One retailer notes an increase during August, following a lackluster
Another district retailer experienced good sales growth recently, led

strong

sales of

fall apparel.

Retailers'

outlooks

vary,

with

some

Inventories are at acceptable levels.
predicting

continuing strength while

others (in the Fargo, North Dakota, area) worry that recent strength may be
coming at the expense of lower activity later this year.

IX-2

Motor vehicles have continued to sell well.

One domestic line re-

ports that its newer compact cars are selling particularly quickly. A domestic
manufacturer notes that compact trucks are also a hot item, racking up doubleWith production going full bore,

digit sales increases for the month of July.
consumers

will

wait longer

to

take delivery on

special orders this

fall.

Analysts contacted report good sales in such diverse locations as Billings,
Montana, and Escanaba, Michigan.
The most recent
slowing a bit.
tan area fell
1987.

statistics

indicate that housing activity may be

Housing permits issued in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropoliin June, dropping 14 percent below the number issued in June

But 1987 was a banner year for Twin Cities homebuilding, with permit

issuance comparable to Phoenix, Arizona.

And Twin Cities sales of existing

homes still rose above year-earlier levels during both June and July.
Tourist spending has continued to increase.

A tourism industry association

attract tourists to cooler lakeshore areas.
reports a

30 percent

increase

in revenue

Superior's North Shore, in Minnesota.

Hot weather has helped

for

its members

located

on Lake

According to local observers, tourist

spending has been very good in the area around Pierre, South Dakota, and in
the central part of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
visits

Still,

to parts of Montana, though.

Forest fires are hurting

total tourist activity for the

year in Montana has been high, and a newspaper editor comments that firefighting has brought employment to some unemployed workers and strikers.

Consumer Prices
Retailers of general
creases.

merchandise

report

some wholesale

price

in-

One chain says prices rose at most 5 percent this year, with some

goods actually declining in price.
for products made from grains.

Food manufacturers have increased prices
But

two supermarket chains believe

competition will moderate the increase passed on to consumers.

retail

IX-3

Resource-Related Industries
The wood

has continued

to perform well, although

strikes have occurred at some Montana facilities.

A furniture manufacturer

will start

this winter.

up an

products sector

operation

in northern Minnesota

Recently,

ground was broken for a new paper machine in Michigan's Upper Peninsula, where
the operator of large

iron mines

is expecting to report increased revenues

following a small loss in 1987.

Agriculture
The condition of district agriculture has remained largely unchanged
from our last report.

Only two Minnesota counties weren't declared eligible

for low-interest disaster relief loans to farmers and small businesses.

One

estimate indicates that Minnesota farmers will receive an average of at least
$6,400

per

farm

from

recent

induced financial problems.
joint sharing of
users.

federal

legislation

to

help

relieve

drought-

Low water levels have created difficulties for

some Montana water resources

by agricultural

and

tourist

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Economic activity in the Tenth District is mixed, with

sluggishness in housing and retail sales and strength in manufacturing.

New

car sales are steady to slightly higher, but other retailers report steady to
slightly lower sales.

In the manufacturing sector, many firms are operating

near capacity and lead times and input prices continue to increase.

Housing

starts are below last month's levels and mortgage rates are rising.

Both loan

demand and deposits have increased slightly at district commercial banks.
Effects of the drought on row crops and livestock operations remain a major
concern.
Retail Sales.

Retailers generally report sales steady to slightly lower

compared with a year earlier, as well as with a few months ago.

Some

retailers report strong sales in home improvement and entertainment products,
while sales of certain lines of apparel have been weak.

Most respondents are

satisfied with current inventory levels, and are buying cautiously.

Retailers

generally expect only slow sales growth in the near term.
Automobile Sales.

Automobile dealers report that sales are steady to

slightly higher over the past month.
to the ending of the model year.

Dealer inventories are down slightly due

Most dealers express optimism for future car

sales.
Manufacturing.
full capacity.
lengthened.

Many respondents report that plants are operating near

While materials are generally available, lead times have

In general, input prices continue to increase and most

respondents expect further increases in the next quarter.

Respondents

consider inventory levels satisfactory or slightly high, and most plan to trim
inventories in the near future.

Energy.

The Tenth District's energy industry has been more resilient

than expected in the face of weaker oil prices due to surging production by
most OPEC members.

Exploration and development activity in the district

improved in July, despite domestic oil prices that averaged more than a dollar
below June prices.

The average number of active drilling rigs in the district

rose from 258 in June to 268 in July.

During the first three weeks of August

the rig count increased to 274.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Area homebuilders report that housing

starts are below last month's levels and at or below last year's levels.

New

home sales and prices are generally steady and housing market performance is
expected to remain steady.

Inventories of unsold homes vary across the

district depending on local conditions.

A few respondents report some

construction material shortages and higher material prices.
Nearly all savings and loan respondents report that savings deposit
inflows are near or above year ago and month ago levels.

Most respondents

expect flat or slightly increasing inflows in the near future.

In general,

mortgage activity has been weak and this weakness is expected to continue
Mortgage rates have been increasing, and most

through the end of 1988.

respondents expect them to rise slightly during the remainder of 1988.
Banking.

District commercial banks report a slight increase in loan

demand over the past month, with the greatest strength in commercial and
industrial loans.

All respondents increased their prime rates by 50 basis

points in the past month.

For some, this increase followed a similar increase

in July and about half the respondents expect a further increase in the prime
rate in the near term.

Consumer loan rates also increased by 50 basis points

at most of the banks surveyed.

On average, deposits increased slightly at

district banks, although a number of respondents report no change in deposits.

Agriculture.
District.

Crop and range conditions vary widely across the Tenth

The effects of the drought on corn, soybeans, and other row crops

remain of major concern.

Timely rains in many parts of the district have

improved crop growing conditions and limited crop deterioration since the
USDA's August 11 crop report.

Irrigated crops are generally in very good

condition throughout the district, but the shortage of rainfall has boosted
irrigation requirements and driven irrigation costs much higher.

Planting of

the winter wheat crop begins during the next few weeks, and timely rainfall
will be critical to the crop's early development.
The drought has also had a significant effect on district cattle feeders
and ranchers, but drought-induced liquidation of district cattle herds has
been limited.

Cattle feeding costs have risen, and scorched pastures and

reduced forage production have forced the movement of cattle from drier areas
to areas with better grazing conditions.

Development of winter wheat pastures

this fall will depend on rainfall received during the next month.

If wheat

pastures prove to be inadequate, further liquidation of district cattle herds
may occur.
Despite the drought, most agricultural bankers in the district anticipate
little change in the rate of loan repayments from last year.

Most borrowers

were able to rebuild financial reserves in recent years, and this year higher
crop prices will help offset smaller crop yields.

Most district farm lenders

and borrowers will be able to withstand the effects of the drought.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy continues to grow slowly.
manufacturers are rising modestly.
weakening.

Orders to

Oil and gas drilling activity has been

Retail sales are edging upward.

Overall, auto sales are

climbing, but they are greatly varied across the District.

The protracted

decline in construction activity appears to be over, but a major rebound
shows little evidence of materializing.

Rising prices for agricultural

products have largely offset the financial impact of drought-related
declines in District crop yields.

Assets of financial institutions are

still slipping, but the rate of decline has flattened.

Although optimism

about prospects for the District economy remains fairly widespread, an
increasing minority of respondents are expressing concern over a possible
U.S. economic downturn in 1989, and an allied decline in the District.
District manufacturers generally report rising orders, but they
say that recent sales growth has been slower than the expansions of the
second half of 1987.

Orders are rising fastest at firms producing

electronics, primary metals, and chemicals.

For chemical producers,

capacity constraints continue to hold down production below desired levels
and low product inventories are said to have become a problem at some
plants.

Reports of sales growth by apparel manufacturers are mixed.

Competition from foreign sellers in this industry is said to remain strong.
Manufacturers that supply the construction industry - including producers
of lumber and wood products and stone, clay, and glass - continue to note
that their sales are weak.

District aircraft production, much of which is

defense-related, is little changed.

Among food processors, demand growth

XI-2
is consistent with what they characterize as the overall slow growth of the
southwestern economy.
District retailers say sales have been growing recently but that
increases have been slight overall.

As a result of unexpectedly sluggish

sales, inventories are higher than desired.

Some retailers note continued

high ratios of store square footage per customer in the District's larger
cities and they say that this phenomenon has held profits down.
Respondents express guarded optimism about future sales, but they expect
the District economy to continue its recovery through the end of 1988 and
they believe their sales will go up accordingly.
District auto sales are generally up, but there is wide variation
across areas

While sales in Houston are showing strong expansion, the auto

market has been very soft in Dallas/Ft. Worth.

Dallas dealers say they are

having difficulty getting as many cars as they think they can sell because
of their weak sales in the past.
District construction activity has recently increased, but it
remains at low levels.

Due to gains in Louisiana and New Mexico, the value

of construction contracts in the District rose moderately in the second
quarter.

These recent expansions have been fairly evenly distributed

between nonresidential and residential building.

Rising residential permit

issuance is said to suggest some further strengthening in residential
activity for the near future.

Despite these increases, District

construction employment continues to decline.

Respondents say that

employment reductions are likely to abate this year in a lagged response to
the end of declines in contract values.

XI-3
District drilling is weakening.

After four months of moderate

gains, the District rig count fell in June, July, and the first half of
August.

The rig count has declined 14.4 percent since May and has reached

its lowest level since June 1987.

Although well permits were up slightly

in June, respondents do not expect any significant rebound in oil prices
and they accordingly anticipate ongoing sluggishness in drilling activity.
Drought is not expected to reduce District farm cash income
significantly in 1988.

Unlike most drought-stricken areas of the United

States, the District's moisture conditions have lately improved.
Furthermore, grain prices have risen as much as 50 percent from a year
earlier, while drought-caused reductions in production have been small.
Strong demand has also pushed up cattle prices.

The Texas All Farm

Products Price Index was 12 percent higher in July 1988 than in July 1987.
Among reported crops, only upland cotton has experienced declining prices.
Cotton yields are about the same as a year ago.
Total deposits at District financial institutions continue to show
year-over-year declines, but rates of reduction have lately diminished.
July, total deposits were only 0.1 percent below a year earlier.
weakest categories remain large time deposits and MMDAs.

In

The

Loans at large

District banks have continued to fall, led by declines in business and real
estate loans.

Holdings of securities are also declining.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The economy of the Twelfth District continues to grow, although there are
concerns about some segments of the economy. The Business Sentiment survey reveals
that respondents are generally less optimistic about conditions than they were in the
previous survey.

Respondents, particularly those in the Northwest, expressed concern

about the effects of a slowdown in housing threatened by recent increases in mortgage
rates. Manufacturers of export-related products, commercial aircraft, and electronics
report strong sales, although capacity constraints are becoming more binding.
Agriculture is performing relatively well in the District, with expectations of continued
strong export markets and strong prices.
Business Sentiment
Since the last report, respondents to the Twelfth District Sentiment survey have
become slightly more pessimistic about economic growth.

Expectations about housing

starts are now at the most pessimistic level of the year, with 86 percent now expecting
significant worsening.

Respondents are still optimistic about further progress in

reducing the trade deficit, although they are less optimistic now than at any point since
April. Concern is growing about both inflation and unemployment.
Retail Sales
Retail sales remain sluggish -

particularly sales of women's apparel -

but the

outlook for the Holiday season is healthy. Upward price pressure is cited as a result of
higher import prices, but retailers are having difficulty passing those costs along.
Retailers report some shortages of qualified sales persons and some upward pressure on
wages. Automobile dealers expect prices of domestic cars to rise with this model year,
although the mechanism will be through the inclusion of more options as standard

XII-2

equipment, rather than through direct price increases. One dealer also cites increasing
restrictions being placed on orders of domestic 1989 cars.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity is uneven across the District. Non-defense aerospace and
electronics firms are doing well in Washington, Idaho, California, and Arizona, although
cutbacks by IBM and a decision to not relocate by Hughes has hurt manufacturing in
Arizona.

California and Washington are being buoyed by the strength in Boeing's sales,

although the defense-related aircraft industry is facing cutbacks.

Forest products

remain strong, but concern is mounting about a possible collapse of demand triggered by
declining numbers of housing starts.

One respondent reports that some softening of

demand has resulted in mills operating 7 to 8 percent below capacity, and prices are
lower for plywood and lumber.

Heavy equipment manufacturers report gains in farm

equipment sales and in sales to chemical and pulp and paper producers, although overall
activity remains relatively weak.

Aluminum and paper production is at capacity.

Defense-related and durable manufacturing is picking up in Utah.
Industries in the Pacific Northwest report shortages of some raw materials and
rising costs of those materials, although the cost has not been fully passed along to
wholesale prices. Shortages of entry level workers are reported in a number of areas in
Washington and Oregon.

Moreover, shortages of low-skill workers are a concern to

apparel and agriculture producers in California because of the immigration bill.
Respondents also report a 15 percent increase in newsprint prices in Los Angeles, and a
sharp increase in the cost of imported electronic equipment.
Construction
Construction has been slowing in the District and industry observers are concerned
about further reductions in housing starts.

Housing starts are very weak in Utah,

Alaska, and Arizona. Residential construction remains healthy in California, Oregon,

XII-3

and Washington, where prices continue to escalate at an extremely rapid rate.
Weakness in energy and housing has slowed construction in the Intermountain region,
although construction on mining facilities and on highways has increased.
Resource Industries
Agriculture is performing relatively well in the District. Production is off, but
prices are up sufficiently to compensate.

Most respondents expect prices to steady or

decline. Premium grape prices are up sharply, although retail wine prices have not yet
risen. Cattle prices are rebounding and inventories are diminishing, but feed and water
costs remain high.

Seafood products have heavy inventories, and prices may decline.

Mining activity is up sharply in the District, with continued expansion of gold mining
facilities in Nevada. Energy activity remains sluggish.
Exports
Exports remain strong throughout the District.

Manufactured products,

agricultural products, and forest products are all facing expanding markets. No sign of
weakening because of the rising dollar are noted yet. Wine exports have doubled in the
last two years. Activity at Pacific ports is reported to be at very high levels.
Financial Sector
Respondents reported an increase in costs of funds and in loan rates following the
discount rate hike, but conditions appear to be improving in the financial sector. Costs
of funds and loan rates have increased by 25 to 50 basis points. Competition for quality
loans remains strong in the faster growing portions of the District, reducing margins for
many banks.

Conditions in the Intermountain area and in agricultural areas are

improving with the improvement of the region's economy.
fallen 10 percent in Idaho since the beginning of the year.

Nonperforming loans have

