SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

MAY 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .

.. . . . . . . . .

First District - Boston .

i

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I-i

.................

. .

Second District - New York . .

. .
. .
. .
. . .. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
.

I -1
II-

Third District - Philadelphia.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Seventh District - Chicago . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VII-1

VI-1

. .. ..... . . . . . . . . . VIII-

Eighth District - St. Louis.

.

IX-1

.

X-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

XI-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tenth District - Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Eleventh District - Dallas .

Twelfth District - San Francisco .

. .

XII-1

SUMMARY*
Continued moderate growth of the nation's economy is again confirmed by
reports from the Federal Reserve Districts.

Manufacturing sector activity

remains strong, with export growth a major contributor.
growth generally has been modest.

Recent retail sales

Housing activity in most Districts has

shown some recent improvement, but remains below that of a year earlier.
Nonresidential construction activity is mixed.

Conditions appear to be

improving in resource industries, including energy where there is some pickup
in oil drilling activity.
improve.

Farm sector conditions are also continuing to

Generally stronger loan demand is reported at banks in a number of

Districts.
Consumer Spending
Recent improvement in retail sales is best described as generally
modest, with this year's early Easter affecting comparisons with a year
earlier.

Several individual District reports use words like sluggish, slow,

and modest in describing recent sales growth (New York, Philadelphia,
Cleveland, Atlanta, and Minneapolis).

Somewhat greater strength is suggested

by reports from Richmond, St. Louis, and Boston.

Where specific lines of

goods are mentioned, apparel sales are generally described as weak, while
strength in sales of appliances and home furnishings varies from region to
region.

General merchandise and department store sales appear to be faring

better than sales at specialty stores.

Retail inventories are being closely

monitored, with aggressive markdowns reported in several Districts in order to
keep inventories under control.

Several Districts note strong sales for

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City based on information
gathered before April 26, 1988.

domestically produced new cars, including light trucks and minivans.
Inventories of new cars were generally described as satisfactory to tight.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing sector activity remains strong.

The strength appears to

be generally broad-based, with export growth often cited as a major
contributor.

Boston, Philadelphia, and Richmond note general strength in both

shipments and orders.
heavy trucks.

Chicago remarks on the reopening of export markets for

Atlanta reports apparel exports are growing and textile mills

are running at or near capacity.

St. Louis and Dallas, however, note some

slowing in textile and apparel production.

Chicago and Cleveland report

continuing strength in heavy industries such as steel and machine tools.
Chicago reports strength in steel mill orders into the third quarter.

Steel

fabricators have orders backlogged into the third quarter, and service center
business is also strong.
types in short supply.

Prices are up for most types of steel, with some

Manufacturers' purchasing agents in both the Chicago

and Kansas City Districts are seeing longer delays in deliveries of goods
ordered.

Respondents are also concerned about higher materials prices,

especially for steel, paper, plastics, and aluminum.
Construction
Housing sector activity in most Districts has shown some recent
improvement, but remains below levels of a year earlier.
building activity is mixed.

Nonresidential

According to the Atlanta Bank, the decline in

nonresidential construction activity in the southeast is slowing.

Chicago

reports modestly higher nonresidential building activity and expects a higher
level of industrial construction this year.

The pace of office leasing has

improved in the New York District and considerable hotel construction is
scheduled or underway in New York City.

Overall construction activity in the

Dallas District continues to decline with little evidence of recovery in the
near future.
Resource Industries
Conditions appear to be improving in resource industries, including the
energy sector.

San Francisco, Minneapolis, and Kansas City all report some

pickup in oil drilling activity, but Kansas City notes further improvement may
be limited by uncertainty about oil supplies and prices.

Dallas notes a sharp

rebound in oil drilling, concentrated in Texas where the rig count increased
for the first time in six months; further gains are expected.

Forest products

companies and copper mining in the San Francisco District are benefiting from
strong prices and improved cost structures.

Minneapolis reports its important

forest products industry is currently running at capacity.
Agriculture
Conditions in the farm sector generally continue to improve.

Farm

incomes are expected to be relatively high again this year but not as high as
in 1987, due primarily to smaller government payments and smaller returns to
the livestock sector.

Farmland values are generally rising in most areas and

farm financial conditions appear to be strengthening.

Dallas reports the

number of farmers and ranchers leaving agriculture is slowing considerably.
Cotton acreage planted is expected to increase substantially in the Atlanta
and St. Louis Districts.

Dry conditions are of some concern in several

states, with water shortages of increasing concern in the San Francisco
District where livestock producers are already suffering and crop irrigation
may be reduced this summer.
Banking
A number of Districts report stronger loan demand.

Relatively strong

loan demand in the Cleveland District is concentrated in business lending,

iv

with smaller gains in consumer installment lending.

Consumer lending growth

is mentioned by several Districts, with Richmond and Philadelphia noting some
strength in the demand for home equity loans.

San Francisco, however, reports

overall loan demand appears about unchanged.

Also, Dallas says loans in that

District are generally still in a slide, with business loans declining most.
Dallas also notes, though, that the rates of decline in loans at large banks
slowed markedly in the first quarter compared with the last half of 1987.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Most of the First District manufacturing and retail firms contacted
are satisfied with their recent performance.

Sales are generally up,

inventories are satisfactory, and price increases have been modest.

Most

retailers report sales in March and April ahead of a year earlier and in
line with plans.

Planned spending on warehousing, new stores, and store

remodeling is higher this year than last.

Manufacturers sum up the first

quarter of 1988 with a relieved "so far so good."

With some exceptions,

new orders and shipments have risen by double-digit percentages.

While

optimistic, manufacturers are watching carefully for any signs of
deterioration later in the year.
Retail
First District retailers generally reported rising sales in recent
weeks, but their experiences were quite varied.

While one upscale merchant

enjoyed a 20 percent sales increase in March, another reported a slight
decline in revenues during the first quarter of 1988.

Two chains -- both

with locations concentrated in rural and suburban areas steady 10 percent advance over year-ago levels.

reported a

But a third serving the

same market saw its sales momentum decline as year-to-year increases fell
from double digits in January to barely positive in March.
prices were stable to 3 percent above year-earlier levels.

Meanwhile,

I-2

Most retailers are pleased with their profit picture despite rising
costs.

A shortage of retail clerk and warehouse labor has resulted in

higher compensation and turnover as well as suboptimal staffing levels.
Rent, insurance, and other overhead costs are also rising.

Gross profits

generally expanded in line with sales, however, and net income grew.
A movement toward increased quality characterizes local retail
markets.

Both upscale merchants and discounters described changes intended

to upgrade their merchandise mix, especially apparel.
Retailers are optimistic about future growth and are confidently
proceeding with various capital spending initiatives.

All are adding

outlets, some are expanding or remodeling, and some are investing in more
warehouse space and associated material handling and computerized inventory
control equipment.
Manufacturing
Factory contacts report that shipments are 10 to 14 percent above
year-ago levels in real terms, while new orders are running flat to plus 10
to 12 percent.

Producers with customers in financial services, housing and

the government sense some softening in those sectors and newspaper accounts
suggest that computer sales are slower than expected.

By contrast,

retailers' purchases, which had been weak early in the year, were strong in
March.

Other areas of strength included commercial instruments, electrical

cables and electronic components, particularly for the automotive market.
Inventories are generally termed satisfactory.

While two

respondents reported improvements over the fourth quarter, two others
indicated that inventories are a bit too high.

I-3

Most First District manufacturers reported small increases in
materials prices.
woods.

Items singled out included paper, steel and imported

Postage costs were also mentioned as were shortages of DRAMs.

Manufacturers' own prices were flat to up 4 percent, except for computer
makers and government contractors whose prices are falling.
The employment picture is mixed.

One firm mentioned employment

gains of 10 percent.

Another, active in government work, reported a

significant decline.

Elsewhere employment was flat to down slightly.

Two

recurring themes were the tight labor market in Massachusetts and Rhode
Island and the impact of increased labor productivity in reducing
employment needs.
A majority of First District respondents plan to increase capital
spending from modestly to significantly above last year's level.

In

general these expenditures reflect replacement needs and a continuing
emphasis on installing more efficient equipment.

A couple of the firms

plan some expansion - in the Southwest, Canada and abroad.

Among those

planning to reduce capital spending were some high tech firms; excess
capacity was the reason given.
Most First District manufacturers are encouraged by the year's
performance so far.

They expect a "reasonable" year with revenues up 10 to

15 percent and earnings up even more, thanks to continuing efforts to cut
costs.

However, several contacts also mentioned that they will be watching

very carefully for any signs of weakening later in the year.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District economy varied among sectors
General business conditions improved moderately and

in recent weeks.
commercial

in much

leasing

of

the

Residential

expanded.

District

construction has been somewhat sluggish, however, and retail sales have
generally been below plan.

Small and medium-sized banks also report that

demand for home mortgages has been weak.
Consumer Spending
Sales at District retail stores have been rather sluggish since
the

last

report.

This was particularly true

respondents experienced disappointing results.

in February when

all

Sales improved in March,

but generally remained somewhat below expectations.

While one retailer

attributed the recent slowdown to continuing resistance to the current
styles in women's apparel, others noted a more widespread sluggishness
which they were unable to explain.
For February, year-to-year changes

in District retail

sales

ranged from -6.7 percent to +2.0 percent, results which ran from slightly
below

to

"way

behind"

plan.

Aided

by

this

year's

early

Easter,

over-the-year gains of from 3 percent to 11 percent were registered in
March--results which ranged from somewhat below to slightly above plan.
Despite the lackluster

sales,

inventories are generally reported at

relatively comfortable levels as a result of close monitoring and some
aggressive markdowns.
Business Activity
The Second District's economy
weeks.

expanded moderately

in recent

The percentage of purchasing managers reporting improved business

II-2

conditions in the Rochester survey jumped from 38 percent in February to
A

The Buffalo survey registered a smaller rise.

53 percent in March.

much larger percentage of surveyed Buffalo firms also reported lower
inventories in March than in February.
Recent

developments

District's economy.

point

to some

further

strength

in

the

In Syracuse, General Electric has begun working on

its almost $1 billion submarine combat system contract which the company
was awarded by the Navy late last year.

In the Buffalo area, Sierra

Research just received a $100 million award from the Air Force for the
production of computerized flight inspection systems with the possibility
of additional support work later on as well.
for

the

construction

manufacturing

of

several

large

Plans have been announced
co-generation

firms hope will reduce energy costs.

that

plants

A recent negative

announcement was that Grumman Corporation will reduce its workforce on
Long Island by 2300 employees as a result of losing a Navy aircraft bid.
With Long Island's February unemployment rate at 3.3 percent,

observers

anticipate that these workers can be absorbed without much difficulty.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Activity in the District's residential construction market has
been somewhat sluggish due in part to the unusually cold weather this
spring

season.

Homebuilders

report

some

recent

improvement

anticipate much more traffic and interest in the months ahead.
few expect the 1988 pace to match that in recent years.

and

However,

Less pent-up

demand, a growing shortage of suitable land in some areas, and the high
level at which home prices seem to have stabilized are cited as factors
which are expected to contribute to some slowing this year.

II-3

The pace of office leasing generally has improved within the
District.

Demand

for

office

space

in midtown

Manhattan picked

up

substantially in recent weeks, but downtown Manhattan leasing remains
slow.

Elsewhere in the metropolitan area demand is reported strong.

Some Fairfield County spokesmen state that a real upturn is occurring.
The relatively few new office projects currently planned there and in
Westchester County are generating some optimism that the high vacancy
rates may soon decline.

Hotel construction is one category in which

considerable building is either planned or underway--most noticeably in
Manhattan where four hotels are currently being built and four more are
scheduled.

Higher rentals, relatively high occupancy rates, and a record

number of visitors are spurring this development.
Financial Developments
According to loan officers of small to medium-sized banks in the
Second District, demand for home mortgages is rather weak.

Though the

number of loan applications has recently begun to rise, most bankers
attributed this to seasonal factors.

Some officers, especially those in

the New York metropolitan area, believe that the stock market unrest has
made some potential homebuyers wary.

Given the relatively low mortgage

rates, buyers currently prefer fixed-rate loans.

However, most bankers

expect that interest rates will rise by the end of the summer and demand
will shift back to adjustable rate mortgages with their typically lower
introductory rates.

Demand for home equity loans is still strong, but

considerably below last year's level when they were heavily promoted.
Nearly all respondents believe the high cost of housing has resulted in a
significant drop in the percentage of first-time homebuyers.
seems to have become more pronounced in the last two years.

This trend
Increasingly,

those in the real estate market are either trading up to a better home or
buying vacation homes.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy is growing at a moderate pace in April.
Manufacturing activity has picked up somewhat during the month and factory
payrolls have grown.

Retail sales have advanced modestly for department and

general merchandise stores, but remain weak at specialty stores.

Bank lending

to businesses has improved and consumer lending has increased slightly.

Deposit

growth has fallen below banks' expectations.
Businesses contacted in April have altered the forecasts they made earlier
this year, but generally foresee a continuation of current trends.

Area

manufacturers are optimistic about the next six months -- a turnabout from
opinions expressed in the last two months -- but still see only slow growth
ahead.

Department store officials have lowered their sales forecasts for the

year, but still predict gains, while specialty merchants see no improvement in
the near future.

Bankers expect continued growth in business lending, slight

expansion in consumer credit, and a possible slowdown in the growth of real
estate lending by year-end.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the region is accelerating, according to the
April Business Outlook Survey.

Overall, survey respondents stepped up

operations a little more briskly during the month than they did in the first
quarter.

More than one-third of the firms polled in April said business was

improving while only one-tenth indicated slower business compared to March.
Conditions are similar in the nondurables and durables sectors, although durable
goods makers reported a relatively greater increase in shipments for the month.

III-2

Most measures of industrial activity reflect improvement.

Shipments are

increasing, allowing area plants to work down inventories; but the current rate
of shipments is also keeping pace with new orders at local firms, so order
backlogs are only steady.

The employment situation remains positive: more firms

reported hiring workers than reported cutting back payrolls in April, marking a
year of continuous growth in jobs at surveyed companies.
Industrial prices continue to rise, according to survey respondents.

Among

firms contacted in April, 57 percent report higher input charges compared to
March, and 30 percent are raising the prices of their own products.
Looking ahead, positive views edged out negative forecasts among area
manufacturers in April, reversing the pessimistic balance of opinion that
characterized the previous two months.
remain cautious.

Overall, however, survey respondents

They expect some increases in new orders and shipments over

the next six months, but they do not anticipate demand improving enough to push
up order backlogs.

Local firms also plan to boost payrolls slightly, but they

will hold capital spending to the current pace.
RETAIL
Third District retailers report mixed results.

Department store executives

contacted in late April said sales in March ran comfortably above the year-ago
period, prompted by an early Easter this year, and some of that momentum was
carrying through April.

General merchandise stores in the mid- and low-priced

ranges indicate similar results.

Specialty stores generally report

disappointing performance in sales and profits.

Women's apparel sales are

running below a year ago while many stores must meet higher expenses resulting
from recent expansion.

Sales of appliances and electronic goods are flat to

down compared to last year.

Retailers say increased prices for imported items

in these categories have hurt sales.

III-3
Looking ahead, Third District retailers expect a continuation of current
trends.

Department store officials are guardedly optimistic; although they see

no negative developments on the horizon, they are trimming their sales forecasts
from predictions made earlier in the year.

Specialty merchants foresee no

turnaround in sales immediately ahead and they are focusing on cost-cutting
steps to bolster profits.

Overall, retailers in the region expect sales growth

in 1988 to match or only slightly exceed inflation.
FINANCE
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks in March was
approximately 9 percent above the year-earlier amount.
April reported a slight pickup in the pace of growth.

Bankers contacted in
Commercial and industrial

lending is advancing, especially in fixed-rate loans to middle market companies.
Consumer lending is described as improving, but not strong.

Auto leasing and

home equity lending are the best performing categories; credit card loan volume
is up only slightly from last year.

Real estate loan growth remains strong,

continuing a trend that has been running for more than a year in the region.
Bankers expect continued improvement in business lending in the months
ahead, reflecting healthy conditions in the manufacturing sector.

Although some

improvement in consumer loan growth is noted currently, bankers do not expect
strong performance in this category.

Some reservations are also being expressed

about real estate lending: most bank credit officers forecast some softening in
this area by the end of the year.
Bankers note a falloff in deposit growth and some banks have boosted rates
on short-term certificates of deposit to gain funds; others are tapping the
money markets more than they had planned.

Lackluster deposit growth is

prompting reevaluations of planned asset expansion at some banks.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
Economic conditions in the Fourth District generally continued to be
positive.

Auto sales remained strong, but other retail sales continued to be

sluggish.

Although the unemployment rate in Ohio rose to 7.7 percent,

employment levels remained above 1987 levels, and further hiring is planned at
businesses throughout the District.

The manufacturing sector continued to

show strength, though fewer firms reported increases in orders.

Bank loans

outstanding rose significantly, largely from a pickup in business lending.

Retail Sales
Department store sales in this District are growing slowly, if at all, in
current dollars and are constant or declining in constant dollars.

Apparel

sales are the weakest, while furniture and appliance sales are still
increasing, albeit more slowly than in 1987:IVQ.

Furniture, appliance, and

apparel sales are weaker in specialty stores than in department stores.

A

major department store chain reports that only part of its decline in current
dollar sales in the first half of April compared to a year ago is accounted
for by this year's earlier-than-usual Easter shopping season.

Following its

disappointing first-quarter results, another major chain lowered its forecast
for sales growth for 1988 from 6 percent nominal to 3 percent nominal, which
is expected to mean 0 percent real growth.
Inventories rose last quarter at most department stores, and are
uncomfortably high at some stores.

In general, inventories are higher than

desired levels at specialty stores rather than at department stores.

A

IV-2

representative of one major retail chain asserts that although the retail
inventory/sales ratio is too high, it is nevertheless overstated because the
sales reflect price discounting, while inventories do not.
The auto market is quite strong in this District.

Dealers report strong

new car sales, and several report that inventories are, or soon will become,
inadequate.

Used car sales are also robust.

Dealers say that sales

incentives have become much less important in closing sales than in previous
months and have little effect in stimulating customer inquiries.

They

attribute the first-quarter decline in imported cars' market share to the
improved price competitiveness, quality, and style of domestic cars.

Dealers

expect the trend to continue and do not think it is a result of the domestic
manufacturers' sales incentives.

Labor Markets
After a year of progress in narrowing the gap between the national
unemployment rate and the state rate, the seasonally adjusted unemployment
rate for Ohio rose from 6.4 percent to 7.7 percent in March.
However, other indicators of labor market activity remain strongly
positive.

The labor force continues to grow, and employment remains above the

level reported in the latter part of 1987.

In addition, employment prospects

for the second quarter of 1988 are up over those of a year ago in most
metropolitan areas in the District.

Hiring plans are particularly strong for

companies in Cleveland, Dayton, Toledo, Warren-Youngstown, and Erie,
Pennsylvania.

Industries with the most consistent hiring plans in the

District are construction, finance-insurance-real estate, services, and
wholesale-retail trade.

Durable and nondurable manufacturers appear to be

mixed in their hiring plans.

IV-3

Foreign companies have continued to open facilities in the District.

For

example, in March, a Brazilian windshield wiper maker announced its intention

to establish a subsidiary and warehouse in Dayton.

At the same time, a major

Japanese electric-equipment manufacturer made public its plan to manufacture
jumbo television tubes in Dayton.

Manufacturing
Area economists are continuing to predict a good year for Ohio.

There is

some concern about the possibility of rising inflation and interest rates, but
most analysts see the lower dollar keeping area manufacturers busy,
particularly those in heavy industry such as the machine tool and steel
sectors.
Reports from purchasing managers indicate continued broad-based strength
in manufacturing, though there are some mixed signals for the future.

In the

Cincinnati area, output, employment and orders continued to be strong in
March, but raw materials inventories rose at a large number of firms.

In

Northeast Ohio, purchasing managers generally indicated that inventory levels
have stabilized.

One-third of the Cleveland area producers surveyed reported

increases in output and orders, though this number is down from February.
Seventy-one percent of respondents reported higher prices.

At least one

survey participant cited the increase in exports as the cause of shortages,
and expects continued upward price pressures, particularly in paper and
plastics, where capacity is tight.
The steel sector in the District continues to enjoy favorable economic
conditions.

Raw steel production climbed almost 2 percent in the Youngstown,

Pittsburgh, and Cleveland regions from February to March 1988.

Prices have

increased in most types of steel products, particularly in stainless steel

IV-4

(flat rolled and strip).

Galvanized and cold-rolled steel coils are

reportedly in short supply, and price increases are expected for corrugated
steel.

Banking
Loan demand has been relatively strong at District banks.

Total loans

outstanding at large banks grew at an annual rate of 22 percent from
mid-February to the beginning of April.
business lending.

The loan growth was concentrated in

Commercial and industrial loans outstanding rose at an

annual pace of more than 40 percent.

Marginal gains in consumer installment

lending represented an improvement over the decline in personal expenditure
loans outstanding during January.
to increase at a moderate pace.

In addition, real estate lending continued

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND
Overview
The District economy made modest gains in March and prices rose further.
Retail sales appeared to increase at a somewhat faster pace than in previous
months, although big ticket items were steady.

As compared with our previous

survey, a slightly smaller proportion of retailers reported increases in the
prices of their purchased products and of the items they sell.

Most

manufacturing indicators were higher in March, but shipments were steady to
lower in early April.
March.

Prices of manufactured goods and materials rose in

Housing activity remains relatively strong.

Reports of seaport

activity indicated that exports grew faster than imports in March, although
both rose.

Tourism was strong in the winter compared to a year ago and is

expected to remain robust throughout the spring and summer.

The agricultural

and financial sectors were little changed, although each demonstrated some
signs of strength.
Consumer Spending
District retailers responding to our regular survey reported somewhat
higher sales in mid-April compared to March, with half indicating higher sales
and 30 percent indicating lower sales.

About half said their sales of big

ticket items were unchanged while the remainder was split evenly between those
reporting higher sales and those reporting lower sales.

The majority of

respondents expect their sales to increase in the next six months.
Retailers continue to report price increases, although there was some hint
of abatement in inflation in their reports for March.

About one-third of our

retail respondents increased their prices while 63 percent reported no change.

In the previous survey, about 40 percent had reported increases while about
half indicated no change.

Moreover, 43 percent indicated that the prices of

items they purchased had risen, compared with over half in the previous
survey.

Forty-four percent of our respondents expect to raise the prices they

charge sometime in the next six months.

The remainder expect to make no

changes.
Manufacturing
Sizeable increases in March shipments compared to February levels were
indicated by respondents to our regular survey.
indicators rose modestly.

Other manufacturing

More manufacturers reported increases than reported

decreases in new orders, the backlog of orders, and material and finished
goods inventories.

Employment and the length of the workweek also reportedly

increased slightly in March.
When respondents compared manufacturing activity in the first half of
April to late March, they reported that the more recent period was not as
strong.

For the first half of April, more manufacturers reported decreases in

shipments than reported increases.

Likewise, new orders and the backlog of

orders were weaker over this period than in March.
The prices of raw materials and finished products rose further in recent
weeks according to respondents.

Sixty-eight percent reported they paid higher

prices for raw materials in March and about one-fourth said they raised the
prices of their finished products over the period.

Three-fourths of the

respondents look for further increases in the price of raw materials over the
next six months.
Most manufacturers expect their business activity to increase in the next
six months.

Half of the respondents believe their shipments will rise during

V-3

the spring and summer, as compared with 15 percent who expect declines.
Increases are also expected in new orders.

The majority of manufacturers plan

to keep their inventories at current levels in the next six months.
Ports
Reports received from the three major District ports--the Port of Hampton
Roads (Norfolk), the Port of Charleston, and the Port of Baltimore--noted
general increases in import and export activity for the month of March.
Import shipments were higher at Hampton Roads and at Charleston but were
reported unchanged at Baltimore.
volume in recent weeks.

All ports indicated an upturn in export

When compared to a year ago, recent growth in export

activity was outpacing that of imports.
Tourism
A telephone survey of resorts and hotels throughout the District
indicated strong tourist activity.

The majority of the respondents said that

the winter convention season was good in their areas, and they expect stronger
activity this spring compared with previous years.
running well ahead of last year.

Summer bookings are

Only one-fourth of respondents expect the

decline in the exchange value of the dollar to boost tourism this summer.
Housing
A special survey of District builders and realtors indicated an upturn in
activity in the District's housing sector.

Realtors reported that sales of

single-family homes rose in March and remained strong through early April.
Starts of single-family homes were also up in the period.

Respondents noted

continued strong construction and sales activity in the homes priced in the
higher end of the market.

A majority of respondents expect mortgage rates to

remain at current levels or to decrease slightly over the next six months.

Agriculture
Preliminary results from a recent survey of District agricultural bankers
showed that farm financial conditions appeared to be strengthening somewhat
but were not yet robust.

Farmland prices were relatively stable in the first

three months of this year, and 45 percent of the rural bankers expect farmland
prices in their areas to rise over the next three months.
prices to fall.

None expect land

Farm loan demand is higher compared to our survey three

months ago, but 20 percent of the bankers still characterize demand at their
institutions as below normal, while only four percent reported it as above
normal.

Funds are reported to be readily available at almost 90 percent of

the responding institutions, and only four percent indicated that loans were
refused due to shortages of funds.

Interest rates were reported to be lower

across all agricultural loan categories, but bankers anticipate farm loan
demand will be generally weaker in the coming three months.
Financial
The reports of executives of commercial banks and thrift institutions
indicated little if any change in banking activity except in consumer loans.
These loans, including home equity loans, rose at a faster pace in recent
weeks, although at least some of the increase may have been due to seasonal
factors.

On balance, the reports indicated that commercial loans and deposits

were about flat to up slightly.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The southeastern economy still shows moderate strength. Manufacturing of most
types continues to expand.

Non auto retail sales are flat when compared to last year;

nevertheless, inventories are not excessive and auto sales are improving.

Although

commercial construction continues at a low ebb, absorption is strong in most markets.
Residential building is improving in some areas.
commercial banks.

Loan demand has turned up at

Crop acreage is up over last year because of increased planting of

cotton. Petroleum and coal extraction seems to be reviving.
Employment and Industry

Industrial activity remains strong in the region.

Computer software and data processing firms note expanding business activity, as do
health care services.

Space related government contracts continue to benefit the

Alabama and Mississippi economies. Pulp and paper output continues to grow with recent
announcements of plans to build new mills in the southwest region of the district.
Although apparel

exports

are growing,

imports continue

to provide stiff

competition for domestic firms. The outlook for apparel firms is uncertain at this time;
however, price increases appear to be benefiting some domestic producers. Textile mills
are operating at or near capacity, and prices are up.

Carpet producers anticipate that

the strong spring residential sales will further stimulate their business.
Regional appliance producers are encouraged by the recent jump in housing
starts; however, they express concern over rising raw material costs for steel and
plastic. Primary metals prices have generally been increasing, however a contact reports
lower prices of iron and steel scrap in recent days. There has also been a strong pick up
in demand for specialty metals; exports and prices are up thanks to the weaker dollar.
Consumer Spending Most retailers report sluggish or moderate sales during April
following a strong March.
in line.

Markdowns are prevalent as retailers try to keep inventories

With respectable spring sales, retailers are slightly more optimistic about

summer sales; most expect real sales to equal or slightly exceed last year's levels.

VI-2
Retailers are not yet experiencing widespread price increases although most expect
higher prices in the near future.
Unexpected strength in this year's car sales continued through early April,
surpassing both year ago District and current national sales growth. Car sales were soft
in early April, but domestic vehicles were selling at a better-than-expected clip. Sales
of lower-priced imported vehicles in the region continue to boom despite rising prices
and intense promotional activity from rivals.
Construction The region's housing market, reacting to lower mortgage rates, has
picked up a bit in sales, but construction fell by almost 8 percent from January to
February. Downtown residential construction has become popular in several cities in the
District.
Following a weak January, nonresidential construction has slowed its descent
around the U.S. and the southeast region, down only 6 and 5 percent, respectively, from
last year's pace.

New Orleans and Jackson still report high office vacancy rates; other

District cities report strong absorption that has helped lower vacancy rates. Developers
have displayed a resiliency that continues to resist a cyclical correction and are finding
selected opportunities in overbuilt office markets where significant levels of preleasing 50 percent in some cases - must be secured before financing.
Financial Services Total loans at large commercial banks throughout the Sixth
District continued to increase steadily through March of 1988.

Lenders in Georgia and

Mississippi note renewed emphasis on providing a wide range of services for small
business clients. Contacts in Louisiana note, however, that the availability of capital is a
problem for small businesses and entrepreneurs, especially those outside of New Orleans.
Across all states except Louisiana, lenders report significant increases in
automobile installment loans. Banks are also expecting a last effort surge in demand for
home mortgage loans before an expected rate increase in the next few months.
Tourism

Early indications point to the possibility that tourism is off slightly

from last year in Florida. Both Orlando and Tampa had hotel occupancy rates that were

VI-3
lower during the first few months of 1988 compared to a year ago. Certain segments of
the tourism industry like business travel, conventions, and cruises, however, continue to
outpace 1987 levels.
Agriculture, Forestry, and Mining Acreage planted to major crops in the District
will increase slightly in 1988 if farmers follow through on planting intentions.

A

substantial rise in expected cotton plantings offsets declines in corn, soybeans, and
sorghum acreage.

Recent rainfall has reduced earlier concerns about inadequate soil

moisture in some areas, especially Georgia.
Crude oil production in the District continues it's slow decline, falling one
percent since the beginning of the year and down 2 percent relative to a year ago. The
number of drilling rigs currently in operation, however, has fallen 15 percent since the
beginning of the year, although it remains far above the low levels of early 1987.

Even

so, Louisiana Gulf Coast refineries have been operating at a much higher capacity, 91
percent recently compared with 83 percent a year ago. There is rising interest in oil and
gas exploration in the Gulf of Mexico.

A sale of tract leases by the U.S. at the end of

March achieved a new record in bidding activity.

While coal production in March fell

modestly, the region's coal industry ended first quarter with a five percent production
increase over the same period in 1987.

VII-1

SEVENTH

Summary.

DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Business activity has continued to expand in the District.

Employment growth in the year through February was about even with the nation,
apart from sizable cuts at Michigan auto and parts plants and in related
manufacturing industries.

Chicago purchasing managers reported further

increases in output and orders through March, accompanied by longer delays in
deliveries of goods ordered and widespread price increases.

However, a large

diversified manufacturer reported that increases in prices paid for its inputs
recently have been less widespread.

Contacts see strength in orders,

production, and shipments across a range of manufacturing industries.

Firms in

the District continue to gain from the fall in the dollar since early 1985,
both in competition with imports and in export markets.

Although some

companies in this region face loss of business due to military spending cuts,
defense procurement is more heavily concentrated in other regions.
cuts aimed at increasing efficiency continue to be reported.

Employment

Farmland values

in the District rose further in the first quarter.
Motor Vehicles.

With auto inventories back in line with sales, following

production cuts and a sales upturn in the first quarter, domestic car
manufacturers plan to boost second and third quarter production above a year
earlier.

Truck sales continue robust, and second shifts are being added at two

pickup truck assembly plants in the District.

A maker of medium and heavy
Export markets for heavy

trucks has raised its sales forecast for the year.
trucks are reopening.

Auto makers are predicting total motor vehicle sales

this year only slightly below the 1987 pace.
Steel.

Order books at steel mills in the District are full for the second

quarter, and the third quarter is being booked.

Small steel users report an

inability to get firm price quotes and delivery dates.

The stronger-than-

VII-2

expected auto market has improved the outlook for shipments of steel this year
to motor vehicle manufacturers.

Demand for structural

steel is very strong,

reflecting in part the upturn in construction work on factories.
and parts plants under construction
toward rapid completion.
are increasing.

in the U.S.

Japanese auto

are reported being pushed

Investments in paper plants, heavy users of steel,

Steel fabricators are backlogged into the third quarter and in

rare instances the fourth quarter.
strengthened further.

Buying of steel by equipment makers has

Steel service center business

continues

strong.

Inventories are thought to have been rebuilt to desired levels at some service
center customers whose stocks were low.
Machinery.

Demand has strengthened for numerous types of machinery.

supplier of components to equipment manufacturers
across a range of industries.

A

reports stronger demand

Capital spending is described as "booming."

Export orders continue strong.

A large machine tool maker reports very

favorable sales prospects, helped by the lower dollar which has contributed to
reduced import penetration.
substantially.

Orders for construction equipment have risen

Buying of food industry machinery is said to be doing well, and

special industry machinery is up moderately.
have been

Sales of farm equipment this year

sharply above the depressed

Construction.

year-earlier pace.

Residential construction contracts (in square feet) and

shipments of building materials--concrete,

cement, and gypsum board--in the

first two months of 1988 were well below a year earlier in the five District
states.

More normal weather and resulting construction delays,

after last

year's exceptionally mild winter, may have accounted for a large portion of the
decline.

However, the decline may also be a result of many desired purchases

of new or upgraded homes having been completed in recent years; the small
number of listings of existing homes with Chicago-area real estate brokers is

VII-3

viewed as evidence of this.

Mortgage interest rates have been relatively

favorable; fixed-rate 30-year loans were offered in the first

quarter at

interest rates as low as 9.5 percent (plus 3 points), though they have since
generally risen to 10 percent or higher.

First-year interest

rates on

adjustable-rate loans are also edging up in the Chicago area, from around 7
percent to 7.25 percent.

Nonresidential

building contracts in the District

states were modestly higher in total reflecting increases
Wisconsin.

Industrial construction will be higher this year, including work on

steel mills in Indiana, paper plants in Wisconsin,
around Chicago.
be strong.
markets,

in Indiana and

and warehouse facilities

Public works projects, large and small,

are also expected to

Prices of some construction materials have fallen reflecting slower
overall,

and

Consumer Spending.

ample capacity.
Retailers in the District reported mixed results for

February and March, attributed to weather and the early

Easter.

A survey of

243 stores in Illinois and northern Indiana showed sales in February 2 percent
below a year earlier.
the warm weather.
delinquencies
Agriculture.

However, sales in February 1987 were strong, reflecting

Retail inventories are viewed as in good shape.

Credit

have been falling.
Our latest survey of agricultural

values rose further in the first quarter.

banks shows that farmland

District land values, on average,

were 3.5 percent higher at the end of March than at the end of 1987, and 11.5
percent above a year earlier.

The largest increase was in Iowa, where farmland

values averaged 19 percent higher than in March

1987.

Little or no increase

was reported for Michigan and Wisconsin land values over the past year.
Farmers in the District plan to increase planted acreage this year by 3 percent
for corn and 2 percent for soybeans.

Spring field work in most areas of the

District is behind the accelerated pace of the past two years, but ahead of
normal.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The Eighth District economy has continued to grow moderately.
Widespread employment growth has resulted in a steady reduction in the
region's unemployment rates, and exports continue to stimulate
manufacturing activity and employment.
in recent months.

Consumer spending has accelerated

Construction activity has picked up, but remains

weaker than a year earlier.

Bank lending has been relatively weak.

The

outlook for the farm sector is optimistic.

Employment
District nonagricultural employment rose at a strong 7.6 percent
annual rate in the three months ending February, outpacing the nation's
4.1 percent rate.

All major divisions of the regional economy, except

for mining, generated new jobs.

The wholesale and retail trade and the

construction sectors grew most rapidly.

Both residential and

nonresidential construction activity increased slightly in recent
months.
level:

Residential building, however, remains below its year-ago
the value of residential construction contracts issued in the

three months ending February was down 10.2 percent from a year earlier.
Construction of a $1.2 billion-dollar breakfast-cereal plant in Memphis
is expected to boost area construction employment by 2,500 over the next
three years.
Regional manufacturing employment grew at a 4.9 percent rate in
the November-February period, despite a slight decline in Tennessee.

VIII-2

Much of the growth was concentrated in the production of electrical
equipment, fabricated metals and transportation equipment.

Growing

export demand is responsible for the increased production of electric
motors, appliances, consumer power tools and fabricated metals, with some
plants running at full capacity.

In the production of transportation

equipment, growth stems from increased auto parts production in Arkansas
and Kentucky and the expansion of auto assembly, which is due to
better-than-expected car sales.
Exports of processed food products, including processed poultry
and canned goods, have contributed to job growth in Arkansas.

Meanwhile,

after steady expansion last year, textile and apparel production is
slowing as employment fell slightly in recent months.

Some textile and

apparel plants are operating at full capacity, however, and several
apparel makers are expanding their productive capacity.

Consumer Spending
Reports indicate that District consumer spending has picked up
in recent months.

Retail sales in Arkansas grew at a 5 percent annual

rate in the first quarter.

Arkansas' sales were concentrated in

incentive-induced auto sales while other sales, particularly those of
clothing and in restaurants, continued to be quite sluggish.

Sales in

Kentucky and Tennessee also have accelerated, particularly for home
appliances and furniture.

Contacts report that the prices of some

building materials, including plastic pipe and wiring, have increased
rapidly in Louisville.

VIII-3

Banking
Total loans at weekly reporting District banks grew at a 5.9
percent annual rate for the first quarter, down from 13.2 percent for the
same period last year.

Commercial loans grew at a 15.5 percent rate,

similar to their growth in the first quarter of 1987.

Both consumer and

real estate lending were considerably weaker than a year earlier.

On

April 19, two of the largest banking companies in the District announced
a plan to merge, which would create the largest banking company in the
Eighth District with assets of $11.6 billion.

Agriculture
The outlook for the District's farm sector is cautiously
optimistic.

The price of soybeans, the District's leading crop in total

sales, is at its highest level in many years.

Because of the high

prices, local sources have reported some imports of soybean products from
South America.

Despite higher prices, little expansion of soybean

acreage is planned because farmers are reluctant to remove acres from the
government's corn program.

Cotton and rice acreage, however, is expected

to increase by over 15 percent because of higher prices.
Farmland values in 1987 rose in all District states except
Kentucky where they fell by 1 percent.

Farmers have made early progress

in planting because of favorable weather; farmers in Kentucky and
Tennessee, however, are worried about possible drought.

The District's

wheat crop is in good-to-excellent condition after a relatively mild
winter.

Cattle producers continue to earn profits while pork and poultry

producers are experiencing lower prices.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District's economy seemed to strengthen a bit in the first
quarter of

1988.

Labor market

conditions remained

components of consumer spending grew.
reaffirmed by many observers.

favorable, and

several

The recent stability in agriculture was

And some positive developments occurred in the

district's major resource-based industries.

Labor Markets
In the first quarter, labor market performance strengthened.
sota's unemployment

rate dropped

March, falling to 4.8 percent.

1.3 percentage points between

Minne-

January and

In addition, Minnesota's initial unemployment

claims declined during both January and February, and the Minneapolis-St. Paul
help-wanted advertising index rose in those months.
conditions extended beyond Minnesota.
rates dropped

The favorable employment

In North and South Dakota, unemployment

significantly between last February and

this February.

And

preliminary estimates from Montana and Michigan's Upper Peninsula also indicate

falling

growth at

unemployment.

Malmstrom Air

In Montana,

Force Base,

employment will be helped by job

where 650 more military personnel

and

their families are expected to arrive by year's end.

Consumer Spending
Sales of general merchandise appeared to grow modestly.

Two major

chains operating in the district report reasonable year-over-year sales growth
in March, although these reports reflect last April's Easter sales.

Another

smaller chain reports slack sales in the first quarter and says its inventories have started to rise.

However, a group of department stores, operating

in many smaller cities of the district, reports good sales increases during
March and April.

This favorable performance was attributed in part to in-

IX-2

creased optimism about the outlook for the rural economy.

None of our retail

sources experienced any unusual consumer credit problems.
District managers of domestically manufactured motor vehicles report
that their operations again rolled up sizable sales gains.
that his year-to-date sales were up
trucks.

One manager notes

10 percent for cars and 20 percent for

Another manager reports year-to-date sales increases of 7 percent for

cars and 13 percent for trucks.

Inventories were no higher than normal.

In the first quarter, home sales appeared to fall off from their
rapid pace of a year ago, but year-ago sales were unusually brisk.
Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area, home sales were off 33 percent.

In the
The most

recently available figures show that residential building contracts in Minnesota were off during February.
Montana,

notes

that housing

A director of this Bank's branch

starts

in

Billings were negligible,

in

Helena,

but another

director notes that housing prices had stabilized in Miles City, Montana.
Bank directors also say the outlook for tourist spending is favorable.

According to a director from South Dakota, advance bookings for summer

visits were coming in at a good clip.
gambling operations

in Michigan's

Another director reports that tribal

Upper Peninsula

were doing well.

And a

representative of this Bank's Advisory Council on Small Business, Labor, and
Agriculture reports that its members expect a 15 percent increase in Michi-

gan's tourist activity, and an 8 percent increase in South Dakota's.
Agriculture
The district's agriculture sector continued to stabilize.
the Minnesota

farm price

index showed a

1 percent decline in

between February and March, this still left prices
year earlier.

Although

crop prices

12 percent higher than a

Beef-cattle prices reached their highest level on record and,

as a director from South Dakota notes, sheep prices were good, too.

Of the

IX-3

rural bankers

responding

credit conditions, 61

to

debt limits

than

quarterly survey

of agricultural

percent believe that first-quarter farm profits were

higher than a year earlier.
more farm equipment.

this Bank's

More bankers also believe that farmers purchased

And the surveyed bankers placed fewer farmers at their

they did a year earlier.

But some North Dakota bankers

mention that a shortage of boxcars has made grain shipment difficult.

And

several observers report excessively dry conditions in parts of Montana and
the Dakotas.

Resource-Related Industries
Some
sector.

positive

Drilling

in

developments

occurred

in

the

district's

resource

the oil patch of western North Dakota appears to be

picking up, though it is not nearly as active as during the better years of
1983-85.

In Montana, interest in new mining ventures is running high:

new gold mines and a silver and copper mine have been proposed.

four

New proces-

sing technology is expected to help a big iron-ore mine in Michigan's Upper
Peninsula.

And this area's slightly bigger forest products industry is cur-

rently running at capacity.

-X1-

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.
improvement.

The economy of the Tenth District continues to show slight
Retail sales are generally above year-ago levels, and unchanged
New car sales have also improved

to slightly improved in recent months.

While still weaker than a year ago, housing activity is increasing

recently.

slightly as is home mortgage demand.

While manufacturers' input prices are

generally rising only moderately, the prices of some materials are increasing
more rapidly.

Lead times for some materials have increased.

Both

manufacturers and retailers report some trimming of inventories.
and deposit growth at commercial banks are both somewhat stronger.

Loan demand
Farm

incomes will likely be below those earned last year.
Retail Sales.

Tenth District retailers generally report sales above

year-ago levels, and unchanged or slightly improved sales over the past three
months.

Overall, retailers report few price increases.

Although respondents

are generally satisfied with present inventory levels, nearly all have been
trimming inventories and may trim further.

In general, retailers expect

slightly improved sales over the next several months and anticipate few price
increases.
Automobile Sales.
in sales.

Auto dealers generally report some recent improvement

Adequate financing is available for both dealer inventories and

customer purchases.

Dealers are cautiously optimistic about 1988 auto sales.

Reports on inventory changes are mixed.
Manufacturing.

Most input prices have risen only moderately in the past

year, but increases for steel, plastic, aluminum, and paper products are
reported to have been more substantial.
but lead times have increased.

Materials are generally available,

Respondents report continuing efforts to

reduce inventory levels, now considered somewhat high.
rates vary widely, ranging between 70 and 90 percent.

Capacity utilization

-X2-

Energy.

Crude oil prices have firmed significantly in recent weeks due

to potential cooperation between OPEC and non-OPEC producers and the tension
in the Persian Gulf.

Nonetheless, uncertainty about supplies and prices will

probably limit further improvements in the district's energy industry.

The

average weekly number of operating drilling rigs in the Tenth District
increased slightly from 273 in February to 279 in March, about 14 percent
above the average recorded in March 1987.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Activity in the housing market has

improved recently, but continues to be weaker than last year.

Housing starts

are reported slightly above last month's levels, but down substantially from a
year earlier.

The recent increase in activity is generally the result of

single-family construction.
most of the district.

Multi-family construction remains weak across

Most respondents report improved sales of new homes.

Homebuilders report no problems with materials availability or delivery times.
Nearly all respondents report that savings deposit inflows are slightly
higher than a year ago and have been steady over the last month.
expected to remain steady.

Inflows are

Recent mortgage demand has generally increased,

due mostly to seasonal factors.

However, most respondents report that demand

is not as strong as last year at this time.

Mortgage rates are reported

trending higher and are expected to stabilize or rise slightly further.
Banking.

District commercial bankers report generally stronger loan

demand over the past month.

Demand for commercial and industrial loans,

agricultural loans, and commercial real estate loans have shown the most
strength, while demand for consumer loans and residential real estate loans
have, on balance, shown little change.

Virtually all of the respondents

report no change in the prime rate over the past month, but nearly half expect
some movement in the near term.

Consumer lending rates have been stable and

-X3-

are expected to remain so.
month ago.

Total deposits are reported up somewhat over a

Conventional NOW accounts, Super-NOW accounts, MMDA's, and

IRA's/Keough's have shown some strength, while demand deposits and large CD's
have shown some weakness.

Passbook savings accounts and small time deposits

are, on balance, little changed.
Agriculture.

Agriculture's strong income performance in 1987 is apparent

in spring credit reviews at district agricultural banks.

Bankers report that

most borrowers had positive incomes last year, with livestock producers'
incomes exceptionally strong.

However, smaller government payments and

smaller livestock returns will likely push incomes modestly below those earned
last year.

Very few farm borrowers were denied credit at district

agricultural banks this spring.

District bankers also report that competition

from the Farm Credit System (FCS) has intensified, especially since the
enactment of the Agricultural Credit Act of 1987.

Interest rates offered on

loans by FCS units are 50 to 100 basis points below local bank lending rates
in some markets.
Crop growing conditions vary widely across the Tenth District.

Soil

moisture is plentiful in some areas, but inadequate soil moisture is
threatening crop yield prospects in others parts of the district.

Much of the

progress many farmers have made toward financial recovery could be reversed by
drought-shortened crop yields.

Moreover, cattle feeding margins are being

squeezed by continued high feeder-cattle prices and developing weakness in
fed-cattle prices.

With current profit margins low and a market outlook that

suggests fed-cattle prices may move lower, many feedlots in the district are
now operating at below capacity.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District economy is recovering modestly.
Manufacturing continues to expand overall, but weaknesses in some
industries are partially offsetting strengths in others.

Despite recent

increases in retail sales due to the Easter season, retailers remain
pessimistic that these gains are sustainable.

Auto dealers, on the other

hand, are quite confident that sales will continue to be strong.
Construction continues to be a drag on the region's economy.

Although

District farmers and ranchers anticipate relatively high incomes for 1988,
they expect a slight decline from the levels of 1987.

Deposits at District

banks remain below year-earlier levels, while thrift deposits are
expanding.
Most District manufacturers are optimistic that sales will
continue to grow during 1988.

Notable exceptions are in the

construction-related and apparel industries.

Respondents in these

categories report that inventories are higher than desired and that sales
are down.

Manufacturers of oil field machinery and equipment portray their

sales as above a year earlier, but still not strong.

Petroleum refiners

and chemical manufacturers say that they expect sales to continue to grow
moderately while steel producers foresee increasing demand.
electronic equipment producers report rising orders.

Electrical and

Orders for food and

kindred products are expanding slightly and producers expect only small
improvements in 1988.
Drilling rebounded sharply in the District states in March,
renewing the strong year-over-year gains achieved in the last half of 1987.

XI-2
The March gain was concentrated in Texas, where the rig count increased for
the first time in six months.

Recent increases in oil prices are said to

portend further gains in the rig count, thereby maintaining the yearly
growth in this indicator.

The seismic crew count, a leading indicator of

drilling, showed renewed strength in early 1988, confirming the prospects
for sustained modest growth in energy industry activity.
March retail sales were substantially stronger compared to
year-ago levels, but retailers attribute this to an earlier Easter season.
Optimism is being tempered by preliminary reports of declines in the first
half of April.

Despite aggressive markdowns, inventories are said to

remain above desired levels
District automobile dealers report that first-quarter sales
increased significantly from a year earlier.

Domestic sales are very

strong, but imports are growing more slowly than during the past few years.
Prices are holding steady.

Dealers are optimistic that the second quarter

will show further growth, provided the District economy continues to expand
overall, and they expect sales in 1988 to be much higher than in 1987.
District construction activity continued its decline with little
evidence of recovery in the near future.

Despite February increases in

residential and nonresidential contracts, which were concentrated in Texas,
total contract values declined because nonbuilding construction contracts
dropped sharply.
remains low.

Likewise, the number of residential building permits

Nevertheless, a sharp February rise in single family permits

offset another decline in multifamily issuance to increase total permits.
Construction employment in Texas has reached its lowest level in over ten
years.

XI-3
District farmers and ranchers are still anticipating relatively
high incomes in comparison with recent years although they do expect income
in 1988 to fall below 1987 levels.

Recent surveys indicate that in most

areas of the District the number of farmers and ranchers leaving
agriculture was down almost one-third in 1987 compared with 1986.
Adjustments continue as more high-cost farms brought into production during
the farm boom of the 1970's are unable to compete in the climate of the
1980's.

Prices for crops and livestock are up over a year ago, but crop

prices have fallen from February's levels.
Although deposits at District financial institutions fell in March
from February's level, they remained above the averages for the third and
fourth quarters of 1987 and were essentially unchanged from a year earlier.
These overall data mask differences between deposit growth at District
thrifts and at banks.
year.

Deposits at thrifts have shown growth over the last

At District banks, however, deposit declines have been substantial,

with particularly acute reductions occurring at large District banks.
First quarter year-over-year declines in both the commercial bank and large
District bank samples were markedly larger than for either of the two
previous quarters.

On the asset side, loans generally remain in a slide at

the large banks, with business loans declining the most.

Nevertheless,

rates of decline in loans at large banks slowed markedly in the first
quarter from the reductions of last year's third and fourth quarters, at
the same time that growth in securities holdings has moved from positive to
negative rates.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The Twelfth District economy continues to grow at a healthy pace, and this Bank's
survey indicates that conditions have improved during the past two months. Consumer
spending is growing slowly, but car sales have improved.

Manufacturing, agriculture,

forest products, and mining continue to post healthy gains.

Respondents report that

prices of many products have risen in recent months, but the increases do not appear to
be broad-based. Where wages are increasing, in most cases the increases are less than 5
percent.

Real estate activity remains mixed, with strength reported in California.

Financial institutions report thin profit margins and stiff competition for high-quality
borrowers.
Business Sentiment
Respondents to the Twelfth District business sentiment survey expect real GNP
growth to be somewhat slower than 3 percent during the next four quarters.

The

proportion of respondents anticipating growth at or above three percent has grown since
the last survey, due in large part to expected strengthening of business investment. As
was true last time, respondents expect housing activity and consumer spending to slow
somewhat, while the trade deficit is expected to improve.

Sixty percent expect

somewhat higher inflation, but none expects inflation to worsen seriously.

Most

anticipate no change in the unemployment rate, and the remainder are almost evenly
divided between expecting a higher or lower unemployment rate.
Consumer Spending
The pace of consumer spending growth is reported to be stable to soft. Although
some respondents noted growth rates a little slower than they were before October 19,

XII-2

the March pace is reported to be stronger than it was in January and February. Some
Washington state respondents report slight improvement across a broad range of
products, but spending on big-ticket items such as cars, houses, and furnishings is
reported to be slow in Arizona.

Some southern California retailers report sluggish

appliance and home decorating sales, despite booming new home sales there.
An auto dealer reports that domestic new car sales have firmed, and current
inventories are satisfactory to tight. New domestic truck and minivan sales remain
strong, with very lean inventories. Sales of Japanese imports, in contrast, are soft, with
excessive inventories relative to sales.

As a result, some manufacturers increasingly

are using incentives to sell these vehicles. The used car market continues to strengthen,
in terms of both activity and prices.
Manufacturing
Overall,

manufacturing activity in

the West continues at a healthy pace.

Aluminum producers have greatly expanded their output in response to dramatic price
increases.

An electronics manufacturer reports order and sales improvements of about

10 percent during the first quarter of 1988.
However, cutbacks in defense spending are beginning to be felt in the West.
Defense-related revenue at one large contractor fell 18 percent during 1987.

While

total sales for this firm are expected to set a record in 1988 due to strong demand for
commercial aircraft, the pace of employment growth seems to be slowing.

Job

advertising patterns also suggest that aerospace employment growth is flattening out.
Agriculture and Resource Related Industries
Prices and general market conditions continue to bode well for most western farm
products.

However, water shortages are a source of increasing concern among western

farmers, and recent rains have not been sufficient to replenish reservoirs in many areas.
Livestock producers already are suffering.

If irrigation is reduced this summer, some

permanent plantings could be lost, and crop yields likely would fall.

XII-3

Forest products companies and copper mines continue to benefit from strong
prices and improved cost structures.

In addition, oil drilling activity ran about 30

percent higher than its year-earlier level throughout the first quarter.
Wages and Prices
More than forty percent of respondents reported little or no increases in wages or
prices.

However, price increases have been dramatic for some products, including

aluminum, copper, wheat, logs, wool, and steel.

Finished soft goods from Europe and

Japan reportedly are prohibitively priced, even for the upscale U.S. market.
Price increases for intermediate and finished products appear to have been less
dramatic, although several respondents expressed concern about the possibility of
substantial increases during the next six months. Consumer resistance has kept a lid on
apparel price increases associated with the dollar's decline. One respondent noted that,
while U.S. firms are encountering capacity constraints, substantial excess capacity
abroad is likely to restrain price hikes. However, production bottlenecks in lumber and
paper have shown up in increased newsprint prices.
Wages are increasing in some regions and industries, but rates of increase appear
to be well under 5 percent in most cases.

However, the 27 percent increase in

California's minimum wage, effective July 1, could place upward pressure on wages for
some California retailers, farmers, and service firms.
Construction and Real Estate
Housing activity has not recovered to the levels seen during September and early
October.

One large firm reports that sales activity improved slightly in March and

April, but still lags far behind last year's level in most markets, except in California.
Real estate development in southern California reportedly is continuing aggressively,
which some attribute to anticipated growth moratoria.
Sales of new homes in Arizona are reported to be slow. The fourth quarter of 1987
was the slowest in the last ten years for southern Arizona. Commercial, industrial, and

XII-4

multifamily construction in the state is reported to be at a standstill, except for some
small retail projects.
Financial Sector
Overall loan demand appears to be unchanged, with respondents divided as to
whether demand is strong or weak, even in similar markets.
report extremely thin profit margins.
quality mortgage borrowers is stiff.

Thrift representatives

They are flush with funds, but competition for

