SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

March 1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

SUMMARY.............................................................
First District - Boston .................................................

I-1

Second District - New York.............................................II-1
Third District - Philadelphia .........................................

Il-1

Fourth District - Cleveland............................................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond .............................................
Sixth District - Atlanta .................

..............................

V-1
VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ..........................................

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis ...........................................

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis ............................................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City............................................

X-1

Eleventh District - Dallas ............................................

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco ......................................

XII-1

SUMMARY*
Economic activity for most of the country is reported to be expanding at a
moderately strong pace.

Consumer spending, except for autos, has apparently gained

momentum while manufacturing, especially for export, continues to show strength almost
everywhere. Energy and, to a lesser extent construction, remain the weakest sectors.
In this environment, there is evidence of pressures on costs and prices.

Despite

additions to productive capacity and improvements in efficiency that are forestalling
widespread bottlenecks, materials and product prices are edging up, albeit sporadically
and at an uneven pace.

Labor markets continue to tighten, with labor shortages noted

for both skilled and unskilled workers. Due largely to weather, there are also indications
of present and possible future price pressures in agriculture.
Aside from widespread evidence of cost and price pressures, several imbalances
are reported. There are signs that excess construction inventories are being perpetuated
in some areas.

Also while reports of credit problems are isolated, deposit growth is

generally weak.
Consumer Spending
Most Districts reported strong gains in consumer expenditures for January and
February, with the exception of autos.

Growing shortages of retail workers as well as

other cost and price pressures were noted in a few Districts.
women's clothing, contributed significantly to strength.
brisk purchases of home furnishings and electronics.

Apparel sales, particularly

Some Districts also pointed to
In contrast, new car sales have

slowed and new incentive programs are said to be needed to reduce higher-than-usual
inventories. General merchandise inventory levels are typically viewed as lean.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta based on reports received prior to
March 8, 1989.

General merchandisers are typically optimistic about spring sales, although
Philadelphia expressed concern that an early Easter this year could lower overall sales in
advance of the holiday.

In a number of Districts, retailers expressed uncertainty about

the long range outlook.
Manufacturing
Most Districts cited some tightness in manufacturing labor markets.

Of the

Districts that reported on costs and prices, most anticipate increasing pressures due
either to current strong conditions or attempts to pass through last year's large increases
for particular inputs. In other Districts such as Philadelphia and Boston, more moderate
pressures were reported.
Manufacturers generally are optimistic about near-term production prospects,
frequently because exports are outpacing growth in domestic demand.

Orders for

producers durables are strong in the Districts where this industry is relatively important
to the economy.

Aside from machine tools and the like, transportation equipment sales

are also strong.

Factory orders for apparel are up strongly in Dallas, and apparel and

textiles production is rebounding in Richmond and St. Louis.

Production for defense is

generally reported as weak except in the St. Louis District, where backlogs are
supporting activity.

The paper and chemical industries continue to turn in strong

performances according to Dallas and Atlanta, although their growth rates have slowed
recently.
As far as capital spending is concerned, some of the largest and most broadbased increases are noted by Chicago.

However, in the industries where reports were

obtained on capital spending, it was generally not expected to exceed last year's strong
pace. Often, investment was said to be improving efficiency and modernizing equipment
rather than for expanding capacity.

While industries in several Districts are said to be

operating close to full capacity, there are few comments about serious bottlenecks. In

this regard, Chicago and Richmond note capital spending directed towards reducing
bottlenecks.

San Francisco reports one of the exceptions--capacity constraints are

binding and long delivery times typify production of commercial aircraft and aerospace
supplies.
Construction
Comments characterize housing and real estate activity as ranging from stable
growth to weakness.

Several of the Districts that reported on this noted high vacancy

rates in this area.

In construction, multifamily appears weaker than single-family

homebuilding almost everywhere.
Nonresidential activity also reflects a heavy inventory condition in several of the
Districts that reviewed this.

At the same time, building is strong in the St. Louis and

Chicago Districts, reflecting industrial expansion in the latter. Chicago also reports very
heavy demand for construction steel, whereas in other Districts softening domestic
demand for construction materials was seen.
Resource-Related Industry
Several Districts noted a cautious optimism in resource-related

industries.

Expectations of higher farm income are fairly widespread and export demand for several
products, such as lumber, shows continued strength.
Of the nine Districts that reported on agriculture, four observed concerns that
soil moisture problems could threaten crops.

The winter wheat crop is already

threatened in a number of Districts with the exception of Richmond. The effect of herd
reduction during last year's drought has pushed cattle prices higher. Descriptions of the
energy industry suggest continued weakness.
Financial Services
The comments on loan demand suggest little growth, with the exception of
Philadelphia.

Two Districts reported no trend in delinquencies and San Francisco

iv

indicated credit standards for auto loans were tightening.

Some others indicated that

concerns were expressed about forthcoming upward adjustments in rates on outstanding
ARMs.

Atlanta noted that delinquencies, defaults and bankruptcies are on the rise in

real estate, with developers in certain overbuilt areas under pressure.
was described as weak by all of the Districts that reported on this.
outflows at thrift institutions in recent months.

Deposit growth

Two noted deposit

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District retailers and manufacturers generally experienced
good sales growth in January and February.

Cost pressures seem to be

abating for manufacturers but not for retailers, who continue to find
labor markets tight.

Nonetheless, merchants remain optimistic because

consumer demand seems strong.

Most manufacturers are also bullish about

their own firm's potential in 1989.

Retailers view recent increases in

interest rates as a necessary evil; manufacturers feel somewhat immune.
Retail
A sample of First District retailers reports generally healthy
sales during January and February.

While tracing some of this strength

to the mild weather, respondents see underlying vigor in consumer
demand.

The continuing pickup in women's apparel contributed importantly

to the general satisfaction with retail conditions.
Retailers report no major price movements.

However, operating

expenses are increasing, and retail profits are generally down.

With the

supply of entry-level labor especially tight, personnel shortages
continue and compensation costs are rising.

Interest expenses are also

climbing, as all retailers contacted are financing significant expansions
as well as operating inventories.
Because of rising interest rates, retailers are growing cautious
about inventory and other expenditures.

However, no respondent has

I-2

curtailed or stretched out construction programs.

Indeed, respondents

report that the optimal size of a retail chain has increased of late.
Investments in centralized distribution - the retail version of

just-in-time inventory management - apparently allow firms to operate
more outlets from a given warehouse, with lower inventory levels, less
in-store labor, and greater overall control.

Most retailers see inflation as a cause for concern, especially in
the labor market.

While expressing anxiety about current interest

charges and the extent of credit sales, the respondents thus support
recent Federal Reserve anti-inflation policies.

They also remain

optimistic about 1989 because of continuing strength in consumer demand.
Manufacturing
Most First District manufacturing contacts began 1989 with good
sales growth.

For the majority, sales and orders are running 5 to 15

percent above year-ago levels.

Only one firm reports declines in new

orders, but two others detect recent signs of slowing.

Pockets of

weakness involve defense-related products and electronic components.
Almost all respondents indicate that exports are "booming."
Unlike the recent past, few manufacturers complained about cost
pressures.

Most report that input prices are leveling off.

In contrast,

half of the respondents are raising their own prices (3 to 10 percent) in
an effort to increase profit margins.

For others, selling prices are

stable or down, reflecting falling costs or continued competition in
their industries.
On the employment front, all contacts are trying to run lean.

The

majority report that employment levels are stable or declining slightly.

In contrast to retailers, only two manufacturers complain of tight labor
markets.

One respondent suggested that the New England labor market has

softened recently.

Others are trying to avoid this market, for example,

by moving high-labor-content jobs to Mexico, or by subcontracting much of
their routine manufacturing work.
pressures are building.

Contacts do not believe that wage

Reported wage increases were between 2 and 4

percent.

Among firms discussing capacity, half reported some constraints.
Contacts reporting no constraint indicated they could add shifts or lease
space if necessary.

One observer suggested that new technology has

raised manufacturers' preferred capacity utilization rates by a couple of
percentage points.

Capital spending plans were mixed, with most contacts

reporting no dramatic changes from last year's expenditures.

Spending

plans focused on retooling and maintenance.
Most First District manufacturing contacts have a "bullish" view
of 1989.

However, firms that depend on military contracts and firms that

are targets of hostile takeovers expressed caution.

One-third of the

respondents project very slow GNP growth in the second half of the year,
but they generally expect their own firms to outperform the economy.
Most contacts are not distressed about recent interest rate increases.
Some firms believe that, because they and their major customers are
conservatively capitalized, they may benefit from higher interest
earnings and opportunities to make acquisitions from highly leveraged
firms.

Another respondent suggested that just-in-time inventory systems

may have reduced the impact of high interest rates on most manufacturers.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Recent reports on District developments have tended to be generally on
the positive side.

Retail sales were mixed during January, but showed some signs of

improvement in February.

Reports on upstate New York business conditions indicate a

strong new orders picture and an optimistic outlook for 1989, but with indications
of capacity pressures and rising input prices.

Unemployment in the District

continues below the national average, though the unemployment rate in New York State
did rise on a year-to-year basis in January and employment growth in the District
has been slower than in the nation as a whole.

The demand for new housing remains

generally weak in the District, but a slight increase in buyer interest has been
noted recently and office leasing activity has picked up.

Following the actions of

major banks, small and medium-sized banks raised their prime lending rate a full
percentage point in February.
Consumer Spending
District retail sales were mixed during January but respondents reported
an improvement in February.

The February upturn was primarily centered in home

furnishings and men's and women's apparel, with retailers stating that the current
fashions finally seem to have caught on.

Year-to-year changes in January ranged

from -4 percent to +3 percent, results which were below or on plan, while February
gains were generally on plan at +4 percent to +8 percent.

For one chain February

marked the first time sales reached targeted levels in several months.
A survey of major consumer electronics firms in the District found that
during the 1988 Christmas season, stores posted strong over-the-year gains of 20 to
30 percent, in sharp contrast to the past two years.

Firms are cautiously

optimistic about future demand since, at a recent trade show, a number of them
commented about a shortage of televisions and VCRs.

II-2

Business Activity
Unemployment rates in New York and New Jersey--4.9 percent

and 3.9

percent, respectively, in January--remain lower than the national average.

However,

while the national rate declined by 0.4 percentage point between January 1989 and a
year earlier, New York's rate rose by 0.5 percentage point and New Jersey's showed
virtually no change.

Over this same period, nonfarm employment growth in botn New

York and New Jersey was only about half as rapid as the national average, due in
large part to sizable declines in manufacturing and in New York's banking and
brokerage industries.
The percentage of surveyed Buffalo purchasing managers reporting
increased new orders rose in January to its highest level since late 1987 while the
percentage reporting higher input prices also showed a sharp rise.

Elsewhere in

western New York, 65 percent of the purchasing managers in Rochester's annual
outlook survey anticipate an improvement in general business conditions during 1989
and 83 percent expect their capacity utilization to top 90 percent this year.
Among recent developments in the District, plans were announced to build
a new police academy and a large middle-income housing complex in the South Bronx.
The complex is to include almost 3000 units in new two-family homes on a 40-acre
site now containing dilapidated and burned-out buildings.

In the Buffalo area

Du Pont will undertake a multimillion-dollar expansion of its plant and Ford Motor
will make a major investment in new equipment at its stamping plant.

Elsewhere,

Crouse-Hinds approved a multimillion-dollar project to modernize its iron and
aluminum foundries in Syracuse; and in Connecticut, the Stamford Urban Redevelopment
Commission has chosen a builder for a large, mixed-use downtown project. As part of
a plan to bring residents and nightlife to the city's center, it will include
housing, restaurants, cinemas and medical office space.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Demand for new homes continues weak in much of the District but a slight
increase in buyer interest occurred in the New York metropolitan area, and builders

II-3

are somewhat more optimistic about the outlook than they were earlier.

With a heavy

supply of homes for resale still remaining, more owners reportedly are lowering
their prices.

Some builders are doing the same while others are providing "extras"

and maintaining stable prices.

However, builders in western New York and some other

upstate areas anticipate good housing demand following last year's strength.
Office leasing activity picked up further in recent weeks and several
areas with relatively high vacancy rates report some improvement.

Demand from

tenants requiring small to mid-sized space was especially strong in midtown
Manhattan while some renewed interest from securities and financial services firms
was noted downtown.

Leasing activity on Long Island and in Fairfield County has

also been good and some observers state that the worst of the Fairfield overbuilding
is now past.

Office vacancy rates in Westchester and northern New Jersey have moved

down as a result of virtually no new construction in the former and a slowdown in
new undertakings in the latter.

However, with almost 7 million square feet of new

office space scheduled for completion this year in midtown Manhattan and more than
2 million on Long Island, higher vacancy rates are expected there.
Financial Developments
Following the actions of major banks, small and medium-sized banks in the
Second District raised their prime lending rate a full percentage point in
February--though several bankers stated that they had been surprised at the
back-to-back increases by the major banks.

Most reported that rates on adjustable

rate mortgages tied to the prime reflected the full increase while fixed rate
mortgages were up only twenty-five basis points.
for business loans is steady or growing.
with pockets of slowness.

Despite the higher rates, demand

Home mortgage loan demand is more sporadic

One banker did note that the mortgage market should not

be greatly affected unless rates climbed to thirteen percent or more.

In the

deposits market, sharp increases in rates on certificates of deposit were cited,
while rates on money market accounts were unchanged or slightly higher.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications

from most

sectors of

the Third District economy

in late

February and early March suggest very moderate growth. Manufacturers are posting
modest gains, with increases in shipments and orders, while employment is flat
and order backlogs are edging down.

Retailers say the first two months of the

year ran about on plan, as dollar sales rose about 5-10 percent above last year's
level.

Auto dealers indicate that unit sales are running about even with the

year-ago pace.

Bankers report fairly steady growth in lending, but note that

deposit growth is slipping.
The consensus outlook in the Third District business community is subdued.
Manufacturers anticipate only steady activity over the next six months, although
this is an improvement from January and February when they were forecasting a
downturn.

Retailers expect real sales this year to be around even with last

year's results, but they say the spring season could be adversely affected by
the early Easter.

Auto dealers believe they can match last year's unit sales

as long as interest rates hold steady or increase only "moderately."

Bankers

foresee some easing in business loan demand over the next two quarters but they
expect both consumer and real estate lending to stay on their growth trends.
MANUFACTURING
Preliminary results of the Business Outlook Survey for March indicate that
manufacturing activity in the Third District continues to gain slightly. Twentysix percent of the survey participants responding in early March said their
business

was moving

operations.

up

from last

month

while

12

percent

reported

slower

Specific measures of industrial activity reflect this fractional

III-2

growth. Area firms are booking more new orders than they did last month and they
are stepping up shipments enough to work down order backlogs a bit.
are level with last month.

Inventories

Employment shows only a little improvement as both

payrolls and working hours are moving up just marginally.
Survey respondents

continue

to

report rising

prices,

although

such

indications do not appear to be as widespread this month as they have been for
the past year.

Nearly one-half of the firms polled for the March survey are

paying higher prices for purchased goods compared to a month ago and one-quarter
are charging more for their own products.
Local manufacturers forecast only steady activity for the next six months,
an improvement from the January and February surveys in which expectations of
a downturn prevailed. The balance of responses to the most recent poll indicates
that managers at area plants expect the rate of both new orders and shipments
to be fairly flat for the next two quarters, and they anticipate a further
decline in order backlogs.

In accordance with these expectations, local firms'

employment plans call for steady payrolls and some shortening of the workweek
between now and September.
RETAIL
Retailers contacted in late February said that sales since the beginning
of the year have been about even with plans, and that inventories remain under
control.

Growth in dollar sales are generally reported to have run 5-10 percent

above last year for January and February.

Discount merchants have achieved

somewhat better results than other retailers, probably due to greater promotional
efforts, according to store officials.

Most retailers say apparel sales are

showing some improvement after the slowdown of the past few years, and several
merchants noted renewed consumer demand for hard goods and electronic items.

III-3

Retailers say the outlook is problematic.

Store officials note that with

an early Easter, such as this year's, consumers tend to do less holiday shopping
while postponing purchases for warm-weather apparel and other merchandise, thus
raising the possibility that sales for the spring season overall could be weak.
Consequently, merchants do not expect to be able to get a clear reading on first
half results until the spring season is well underway.
the prospect is still unclear.

Looking further ahead,

Several merchants have noted unusually large day-

to-day variations in sales in the past two months, and they interpret this as
indicating a fragile edge to an apparently high level of consumer confidence.
At this time, the most optimistic retailers generally expect real sales in 1989
as a whole to match those of 1988.
Third District automobile dealers report a pickup in sales in late February
as manufacturers stepped up incentives in response to some mid-January slowness.
Dealers believe that matching last year's rate of unit sales is possible this
year as long as consumer income remains strong and interest rates do not rise
sharply.

Nevertheless, dealers say their profit margins remain under pressure

from rising costs and declining gross receipts.
FINANCE
Loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks in February was
approximately 13 percent above the year-ago level and bankers contacted in early
March said this pace of growth was being generally maintained.

Some bankers

noted a slowing of growth in consumer loans, including home equity credit lines,
which they said is at least partially seasonal.
Most of the bankers contacted for this report anticipate an easing in the
expansion of commercial and industrial lending as the year progresses.

Although

they do not foresee a substantial slackening in overall economic activity in the

III-4

next two quarters, they do believe credit demand by businesses will ease. Most
expect consumer and real estate lending to continue growing at their current
rates through the greater part of this year and possibly beyond.
The rate of growth in bank deposits continues on the slowing trend that
began last November, according to Third District bankers.

Demand deposits have

fallen since the start of the year, and bankers say some of that money has been
shifted into interest-bearing accounts.

In order to maintain asset growth, some

bankers say they are more likely to boost deposit rates to gather funds than to
borrow in the money markets given the current interest rate differential.
However, others believe the recent run-up in rates will be short-lived, and they
will accept slower asset growth temporarily in anticipation of lower funding
costs later this year.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Developments of recent weeks have not altered the outlook for the economy
and for inflation, according to Fourth District respondents.

They are

optimistic that nonresidential fixed investment will increase more this year
than last because of further strengthening in traditional capital goods
industries. Retailers, buoyed by much stronger-than-expected spending since
last fall, are optimistic over consumer spending at least through the spring.
Financial industry respondents do not yet see signs of slower loan growth
because of higher interest rates.

Thrifts are very competitively pricing CDs,

although many experienced another loss of deposits in February.
The Economy.

Respondents still expect a slightly slower growth rate in

output this year than last, and a slightly higher inflation rate.

Even the

most optimistic of the forecasters remain confident about their real GNP
forecast of slightly more than 3% growth this year.

One respondent, however,

expects that there are downside risks to his slower growth forecast if
interest rates continue to rise, and another believes that higher interest
rates make his forecast of no-growth late this year more plausible.
Inflation.

Further upward cost/price pressures especially in

manufacturing, are expected in 1989 by most respondents.

Steel prices are

expected to rise further this half before weakening later in the year, and
strong demand for heavy-duty trucks, bearings, and special industry machinery
is expected to boost prices more in 1989 than in 1988.

Many manufacturers are

expected to operate at or close to capacity, and will attempt to pass through
higher costs of materials incurred last year when conditions may not have been
as favorable.
workers.

Wage rates in retailing are rising because of a shortage of

An alternative view of inflation, however, anticipates moderating

IV-2

inflation because supply will increase faster than demand and energy and food
prices will increase less this year than last.
Manufacturing.

Capital goods prospects for 1989 are strong, especially

for traditional capital goods industries.

The bearings industry is still

operating at full capacity and may be allocating its output for most of the
year.

Some industrial equipment producers are also operating at or close to

capacity, with orders and backlogs still rising.

"Boom" conditions mark the

heavy-duty truck business, with operating rates the highest since the late
1970s.

A producer of motors and engines reports that the surge in orders last

quarter has continued into February and March, although operations are not
close to full capacity.

Nevertheless, their orders and shipments will be

several percent higher than they previously forecast.

Strength in most

traditional capital goods industries has led one economist to conclude that
his forecast of a 6% increase in real nonresidential fixed investment this
year could be on the low side.

Industry respondents generally do not expect

that higher interest rates will dampen capital goods at least this year.

They

uniformly report that tightness in capacity is being met by productivity
improvements and "de-bottlenecking."

Steel producers have been operating at or near capacity, and expect to
continue to do so at least through the second quarter.

Flat-rolled steel

products are still on allocation, although there is excess capacity for steel
consumed by the construction and petroleum industries.

Lead times are

lengthening to as much as 10 weeks because of strong orders that may reflect
hedge-buying.

Steel respondents expect that a let up in consumption and in

inventory buildup in the second half will ease pressures on operating rates
and end the allocation of steel now in tight supply.

IV-3

Consumer Spending.

Nonautomotive retailers have been surprised by strong

sales since last fall, which they expect to continue at least into the spring
months. Inventories, however, will be built only cautiously. A major retailer
reported that sales strength continued in February, and he expects March and
April sales will show about the same rate of increase. Another retailer is
concerned that further increases in interest rates will choke demand because
of the link between consumer debt and interest rates.
Auto dealers report February sales were average to a little below average
for this time of year and assert that publicity about rising interest rates
has begun to affect sales.

Many auto dealers are offering special financing

plans at below-market rates.

Dealers are generally optimistic over spring

sales, however, unless interest rates continue to increase.
Financial.

Higher interest rates apparently have had little visible

effect on borrowing activity.

Most lenders believe interest rates on loans

have not risen enough to slow loan growth, although some bank economists
expect that the latest jump in interest rates, especially mortgage rates, will
slow borrowing later this year.

According to one economist, the only apparent

effect of higher interest rates so far has been in trade rather than in
domestic demand; he still expects a 3% real GNP growth rate this year, with a
considerably slower second half because of higher interest rates.
Thrift institutions experienced another net deposit outflow in February,
although not as severe as in January.

Even some large, well-capitalized

thrifts had outflows nearly as large or larger than in January.

A large

thrift reversed its massive January outflow in February, but solely on the
basis of its newly introduced CD that is competitive with Treasury bill
yields.

Another experienced its second successive monthly net inflow of

deposits by very aggressive pricing of its CDs.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
The District economy generally continued to expand at a moderate pace in
February, although retail sales declined.

Manufacturing activity, which grew

unevenly in January, showed more strength in February.

Export activity rose

further at District ports while import activity was mixed.

Commercial loan

demand remained flat in February while the demand for consumer loans was
unchanged after posting strong growth in January.

The prices of new and

existing homes have apparently leveled off, although homebuilding and home
sales appear to be normal for this time of year.

In the agricultural sector,

recent snows and rains raised soil moisture from depleted levels.
Prices at both the producer and retail levels continued to rise at about
the same pace as was reported in January.

Many manufacturers and retailers

indicated that they had increased wages in the last two months.

An increased

number of manufacturers expressed concern about labor shortages.
Consumer Spending
District retail sales weakened somewhat during February according to our
regular mail survey.

Almost half of the respondents indicated that sales

decreased while about 40 percent reported increases.

In contrast, half of

the respondents to our January survey had reported increased sales.

Most car

dealers noted declines in sales in February, but most department store
representatives reported increases.

A majority of retailers expect sales to

increase over the next six months.
A telephone survey of large hotels and resorts in the District indicated
that tourist activity this winter was stronger than normal.

But District ski

resorts, with the exception of those in West Virginia, generally suffered

because of little snowfall and unseasonably warm weather.

The District's

tourist businesses expect to have a good spring and summer.

Almost all

resort areas that were surveyed reported that bookings for the months ahead
were heavier than usual.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity grew at a moderate pace in February.
Half of the responses to our regular mail survey of manufacturers indicated
no change in levels of activity.

Among the remaining responses, however,

increases outnumbered decreases by a ratio of about two to one in all
categories--shipments, new orders, backlogs of orders, employment, and the
length of the workweek.

The proportion of respondents reporting growth in

these categories was higher than in our last report.

Among manufacturers who

export, about a third indicated that new orders from abroad increased since
the first of the year; only a few reported declines.

Within the

manufacturing sector, activity in the textile and apparel industries
apparently rebounded from an earlier slump.
District manufacturers remain optimistic about growth prospects in the
nation and in their businesses for the next six months.

Respondents

expecting increases in activity outnumbered those expecting declines in each
of the categories (shipments, new orders, etc.) covered by the survey.
Prices and Wages
Survey responses indicated continued upward pressure on prices and
wages.

Prices of materials and finished goods apparently rose in February at

about the same pace as in January.

Twenty-five percent of the manufacturers

and 48 percent of the retailers said they had increased wages since December
31, 1988.

The average reported increase in wages was 4.5 percent in the

manufacturing sector and 5.4 percent in the retail sector.

In addition, more

manufacturers than in our January survey expressed concern about labor
shortages.
Ports
Representatives from the three major District ports--Hampton Roads
(Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore--generally reported continued increases
in exports, but their reports on imports were mixed.

Export shipments were

higher in February than in January at Baltimore and Charleston, while exports
at Hampton Roads remained about the same.

Although import activity was

slightly higher at Hampton Roads and Charleston, it was slightly lower at
Baltimore.

Port representatives indicated that, compared to a year ago,

export activity was outpacing that of imports, and they expect this trend to
continue.
Finance
Our telephone survey of District bankers indicated little change in loan
demand.

They reported that the demand for commercial loans remained flat in

February while the demand for consumer loans stayed at the higher level
reached earlier this year.

Roughly half of our contacts reported a decline

in consumer demand, but no change in commercial demand, for variable rate
loans.

The bankers reported no unusual rise in the delinquency rates of

consumer loans at their institutions.
Agriculture
Recent snow and rainfall across most parts of the District have reduced
farmers' concerns over soil moisture levels.

Apple and peach blossom buds in

the Carolinas are swelling and opening ahead of schedule but so far have
escaped damage from frost.
spring, should be large.

The District wheat crop, due to be harvested this
Acres of wheat planted were 24 percent higher than

a year ago, and yields should benefit from the recent moisture.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview.

Business activity, as reported by firms headquartered

Southeast, continues to move ahead at a moderately healthy pace.

in the

Manufacturers and

firms in the service sectors report shortages of both skilled and unskilled workers.
Compensation gains are said to be somewhat higher than last year at this time.
Materials and final product prices are up strongly for particular industries and, in
appear to be accelerating

general,

slightly.

Order

backlogs, vendor

delays and

inventories are said to be acceptable relative to sales in most industries. Their capital
spending plans show moderate gains over last year's levels.

Loan delinquencies at both

the consumer and business levels are reported as stable, with the exception of real estate
development where pressures are evident.

This report incorporates a new panel of

business contacts and thus is not strictly comparable to previous ones.
Labor Markets.

Wage increases this year so far are generally reported to be in

the 3-5 percent range, in line with expectations at the companies surveyed.

However,

there is some concern that rapidly rising benefits costs will accelerate increases in
overall compensation. A majority of contacts reported labor shortages for a wide variety
of skilled labor and for unskilled labor in the service sector.

At the same time, a

significant minority of firms report no problems in hiring.
Prices.

Most input and product prices are rising at a faster pace than last year

at this time, although price pressures vary widely among the industries surveyed. Prices
of many kinds of paper are up 7-10 percent since year end.

While demand is strong,

contacts are uncertain about whether all of the posted increases will stick.
newsprint

are said to be softening due to new industrial

Prices for

capacity and retailer

consolidations which are reducing advertising. In chemicals, improved supplies of plastic
resins are expected to stabilize prices, which rose by 25 percent in 1988.

The price of

polyester for textile use is up 20 percent over year-ago levels. Steel used for fabrication
in the oil and gas industry is up 7 to 10 percent and computer chip prices are said to be
soaring.

VI-2
Some price softness is occurring in construction and related markets. Except for
cement, where imports to the region have declined, building materials prices are soft.
Lumber and plywood prices at retail are reported to be up 2 1/2 percent over the last 12
months.

Overbuilding has resulted in lower effective lease rates in strip shopping

centers, helping to keep chain grocery store costs down; however, the drought's effects
have raised food costs.
In agriculture, egg prices have nearly doubled from a year ago and broilers, also
up in price, could go even higher this year as the supply of competing red meats is
expected to become tighter.

Growing international grain and soybean exports are

reported to be raising these commodity prices.

The price of domestically-produced

furniture is up only marginally whereas those on imported merchandise are showing
strong gains.
Capacity Utilization.

Capacity utilization and order backlogs are reported as

strongest for industries where prices are up sharply such as paper and chemicals, and in
the heavy equipment area.
delivery delays.

However, contacts noted only a couple of examples of

A few industries that have been experiencing excess capacity, such as

the entire energy sector, expect greater domestic production as long as oil and gas prices
remain at recently increased levels.
Excess capacity is expected to grow in the construction and building materials
industries despite strength in the remodeling segment; slowing public infrastructure
investment is said to be a new drag on activity this year.
trade, office building, and hotel space is growing.

The volume of excess retail

While construction of new space has

slowed, it is still greater than absorption. Excess capacity typifies portions of the textile
and apparel industries where foreign competition is strong.
Investment.

Reported capital spending intentions are reflective of current

industrial business conditions. Investments in the chemicals and pulp and paper industries
are expected to be significant this year, but not to exceed last year's strong levels. In

VI-3
textiles, acceleration in capital spending is being spurred by international competition,
with an emphasis on enhancing efficiency and modernizing equipment rather than
expanding capacity.
purchases.

Growth of U.S. exports is boosting railroad freight equipment

Truckers are also expanding capacity by adding equipment and new or

expanded terminal facilities.
Credit Situation.

Delinquency problems, defaults, and bankruptcies are on the

rise in real estate, with a few developers running into severe difficulty.
delinquencies,

Foreclosures,

and restructuring of developers' loans are up this year in Atlanta,

Nashville, and in South Florida; on the other hand, delinquency rates on single family
mortgages have held steady or dropped moderately.
at the business or consumer level.

No particular trends were reported

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.

Economic activity continues to rise in the Seventh District,

according to recent reports.

Total employment increased in January, partly

reflecting unusually mild weather which allowed construction work to proceed at a
high rate.

Contacts with firms in various industries in the District indicate that
Car sales have

sales and production continued to expand in January and February.

slowed and inventories have built up, leading to limited production cuts.
sales have stayed near last year's pace.
February continued to grow.

Truck

General merchandise sales in January and

Steel production this year has been above the

year-earlier pace, with demand supported by strength in equipment investment and a
high level of steel usage in industrial and other construction.
building appears likely to slow in 1989.
recover through the end of 1988.

Residential

District farmland values continued to

Farm equipment sales in the District fell last

year, but a large increase is expected in 1989.
Motor Vehicles.

Deliveries of new cars slowed in January and February,

following stronger sales in December, and dealer inventories rose.
manufacturers have enhanced sales incentives.

Domestic car

Production schedules remain strong,

but output has been pared at some facilities including a Michigan compact car
assembly plant.

Other plants have slated startups of second shifts.

Truck sales

in January were highest ever for the month, in contrast with the softness in autos,
but sales slipped somewhat in February.

Domestic truck production set records in

January and probably also in February.
Steel.

Output of steel this year is expected to remain at a high level.

Raw

steel production in the District continued above last year in January and the first
half of February, after increasing about 9 percent in 1988.

Favorable prospects

for steel reflect strength in producers' durable equipment markets and vigorous
demand for construction steel, offset by an anticipated mild slowdown in motor
vehicles.

Exports of steel have risen sharply, from a low base, and imports have

VII-2
fallen.

Raw steel production capacity is expected to increase this year, after

seven consecutive years of decline.
Equipment.

Near-term capital spending prospects are for continued fairly

broad-based increases, particularly for machinery, though the rate of rise in
investment is likely to be less rapid than in 1988.

Many investment projects

started in 1988 will continue in 1989, supporting a high level of spending.
Capacity expansion projects in papermaking and other chemical process industries
emphasize "debottlenecking."

Machine tool orders have risen strongly.

Backlogged

orders for railcars nearly tripled in the latest year, from a low level.

A railcar

plant idled for 6 years and a barge builder closed for 3 years are resuming output
in District states.

Another of numerous Japanese-owned auto components plants was

recently announced for Michigan.

Competition from these plants is holding down

wages at older components producers.

A Chicago-area maker of TV picture tubes has

increased production and employment in response to shortages.

Types of machinery

investment expected to show weakness include small earth-moving equipment,
reflecting the housing market slowdown.

A maker of small gasoline engines recently

announced layoffs partly in response to last summer's drought which reduced lawn
mower replacement and repair needs.

A worldwide shortage of compressors was cited

in the planned shutdown of an Indiana refrigerator manufacturing plant.
Construction.

Construction slowed in February after unusually mild weather in

January boosted activity.

Contracts for construction of buildings in District

states have not shown the weakness evident over the past 2 to 3 years in national
figures.

Nonresidential building contracts in 1988, in square feet of floor space,

were about even with 1987 in the District states, at the highest level of the
current business expansion.

Industrial construction is relatively strong in the

Midwest, including plants being built to supply new motor vehicle assembly plants
of Japanese manufacturers.

Industrial building has been strong in northeast

Indiana, tied to a new truck plant opened there in 1986.

Rental and absorption

VII-3
rates have been rising for Chicago-area warehouse and distribution space, including
industrial buildings in northwest Indiana, which had been depressed.

Construction

steel backlogs are described as the highest in years, and numerous projects are in
the design and engineering phases.

However, many firms continue to emphasize

equipment investment, making more efficient use of existing space.

Just-in-time

inventory programs have cut the amount of factory space needed at these plants.
Residential building has slowed, but mainly apartments.
remains at a fairly high pace.

Construction of homes

Residential building contracts in District states

last year were 4 percent below 1987, when they reached a high for the 1980s.
Mortgage interest rates have risen, with quotes on Chicago-area thirty-year
fixed-rate loans averaging 10.7 percent in the latest week and initial rates on
adjustables averaging 8.6 percent.

Higher interest rates are expected to dampen

residential construction activity in 1989.
Retailing.

A sample of general merchandise retailers in the Chicago area

reported same-store sales in February ranging from about even with a year ago to
double-digit gains.

Illinois retailers noted a 5 percent increase in sales during

the fiscal year just ended, with larger year-to-year gains during the holiday
season.
of 1989.

A large retailer expects nondurable goods sales to pick up during the rest
The share of purchases on credit has been trending upward.

Agriculture.

District farmland values, on average, rose about 3 percent in the

fourth quarter and nearly 12 percent during all of 1988, the second consecutive
year of firming following a precipitous, five-year decline.

Land values are up

about a fifth from the 1986 low but still a third below the 1981 peak.
Unit retail sales of farm tractors and combines in District states fell 4
percent last year, the ninth consecutive annual decline.

Nationwide, tractor and

combine sales rose nearly 5 percent, despite a marked drought-related slowdown in
the second half.

Initial reports show January sales below a year ago.

However,

analysts expect a sizable rise (10 to 20 percent) in sales for all of 1989.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The Eighth District economy expanded moderately in recent months,
following
District

several
states

construction

quarters

of

stagnation.

edged downward.
sectors

were

Unemployment

Employment

particularly

gains

strong.

in

rates

the

in

most

services

District banks

and

report

improved profitability and asset quality in 1988.
Outlook
A January

1989

survey of 255 District

small businesses

a slightly more favorable outlook than a year earlier.
most

respondents

felt

that general

economic

revealed

In both surveys,

conditions would not

change

substantially in the following two quarters, but far fewer respondents in
the

most

recent

survey

respondents plan to
percent

vs.

12

planning major
Both surveys

foresee

a

general

economic

weakening.

increase their workforces than in January 1988

percent),
capital

but

there

was

expenditures

found that slightly

in

more

no

the

change
near

the

future

than 25 percent

had job openings they were unable to fill.

in

of

(41

More
(24

percentage
percent).

the businesses

One quarter planned increases

in average compensation to workers in the near future, a slightly smaller
fraction than a year earlier.
Responses

from the 42 manufacturers

in

the sample

revealed

48 percent plan to hire workers in the first quarter of 1989,
percentage
more

difficulty

for

the
filling

entire

sample.
current

that

double the

The manufacturers were also having

job openings

(38

percent vs.

26 percent

VIII-2

overall)

and were

more

likely

planning

to

increase

compensation

to

workers (33 percent vs. 25 percent overall).
Employment
Payroll
quarter,

employment

rose

at a 3.4

percent

following two quarters of stagnation.

rate

in

the

fourth

Strong job growth in

services (particularly business and health services), construction and
trades was

largely responsible

employment

in

for the employment turnaround.

Although

the District transportation and public utilities

sector

trended downward in recent quarters, it has continued to grow in Memphis,
where

the expansion of three

qualified truck drivers.

trucking firms has caused a

shortage of

These firms plan to hire 1,500 drivers.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing employment rose 2.2 percent in the fourth quarter.
Employment

in

the printing and publishing and the food products sectors

rose most rapidly.

Producers of transportation equipment continued to

increase their workforces.

Because of a substantial backlog of orders

and the development of new products, the production of military aircraft
remains strong in Missouri despite an 8.2 percent drop in the state's
defense contracts in the last fiscal year.

After falling in the previous

three quarters, apparel and textile employment has stabilized because of
recent

increases

inventories.

in

denim

orders

and

gradual

declines

in

textile

Several District lumber mills are expanding this year,

in

response to sharply increased exports.
Construction
District construction activity has picked up in recent months.
In

the

three

months

through

nonresidential contracts rose

January,

the

value

of

residential

4.1 percent and 27 percent.

and

The rise in

nonresidential building was partially due to large construction contracts

VIII-3

for manufacturing plants

in

Arkansas,

office and medical buildings

Missouri and various buildings in Kentucky.
note

a

slight

softening

in

District lumber associations

in

demand

for residential

extension

agents

report

lumber

in

recent

months.
Agriculture
District

government programs is

down from last year,

more confident about profitability

in

farmer

participation

indicating

1989.

in

that farmers are

Favorable weather patterns

have brought soil moisture to near normal levels in most of the District.
Some portions of the District, however, are still experiencing drought
conditions,

while

others

are

facing

excessive

moisture

problems.

Continuing drought conditions, in conjunction with frigid temperatures in
northeastern Missouri, may have damaged the dormant winter wheat crop.
February flooding in portions of Kentucky and Tennessee has destroyed a
small amount

of the wheat

crop,

and continued wetness has

prevented

farmers from applying fertilizers and herbicides.
Banking
Preliminary

data

for

year-end

1988

indicate

that

both

profitability and asset quality improved at Eighth District banks. Return
on assets averaged 0.93 percent in 1988, up from 0.80 percent in 1987.
Nonperforming

loans

dropped sharply

in

1988,

from an average

of 2.10

percent of total loans in 1987 to 1.61 percent.

Net loan losses as a

percent of total loans remained virtually flat in

1988 as the reduction

in net loan losses by smaller banks was offset by increases incurred by
banks with assets over $1 billion.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth
good.
changes.

District

Unemployment

economic

rates

have

conditions
risen

have

modestly,

Consumer spending has been good.

continued
mostly

to

due

be

to

fairly

seasonal

Prices have increased moderately

and conditions in resource-related industries have been excellent.

Labor Markets
The employment situation has been fairly good throughout the district.
Minnesota

Between
rose

December
to 5.1

1988

and January

percent from 4.1

1989,

percent.

the

unemployment

rate

An analyst, calling

in

this

increase a normal seasonal shift, notes that since 1980 the December to January increase has averaged 1.1
Minnesota

in

January

1988

percentage points.

was 4.9

percent.

The unemployment rate in

The unemployment

rate in

the

Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area dropped to 3.7 percent in December from
4.0 percent in November.

A director notes increasing tightness in the Minne-

sota labor market, particularly in the retail sector.

North Dakota's unem-

ployment rate was 5.6 percent in December, up from 5.3 percent in November and
5.0 percent in December 1987.

The unemployment rate in South Dakota rose to

4.6 percent in December from 4.3 percent in November, but was lower than the
rate of 4.8 percent in December 1987.

Montana's unemployment rate in November

was 6.0 percent, up from 5.0 percent in October.

The unemployment rate in

Michigan's Upper Peninsula was 8.7 percent in November, up from 6.7 percent in
October, but lower than the 9.6 percent rate in November 1987.

Consumer Spending
Consumer

spending on general merchandise has

been

fairly

strong.

One large retailer reports that February sales were up 11 percent from a year
ago; and same-store sales, a measure of sales in stores open a year or more,

IX-2

were up 4.7 percent from February 1988.

Another retailer reports that Febru-

ary sales were lower than expected with an 8.5 percent increase in sales over
a year ago.

Businesses

in St. Cloud, Minnesota are very optimistic with

approximately $40 million in bids for new construction expected to be made in
the next two weeks.

Much of this construction is for schools, which is con-

sidered a good sign of population growth.

Inventories are at generally ac-

ceptable levels throughout the district.
Motor vehicles have been selling well.

Dealers for one domestic

manufacturer report that sales in the first twenty days of February were down
6 percent from the comparable period in January, but were up 10 percent over
the same period in February 1988.

Sales were good in January for this manu-

facturer with car sales up 14 percent and truck sales up 15 percent from January 1988.

March is normally the biggest selling month for motor vehicles, so

the next thirty days should set the tone for the next year.

There is some

uncertainty about the effect of recent interest rate increases on motor vehicle sales.
Housing activity has been fairly stable.

The number of new housing

permits issued in Minnesota increased by 4.4 percent from December 1987 to
December 1988.

Home sales in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area were

up 6.24 percent in January 1989 from January 1988.
Tourist spending has been good throughout

the district.

Heavy

snowfall in the resort areas attracted a large number of skiers.
Prices
Prices have generally been rising.

The consumer price index for the

Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area rose by 4.9 percent from December 1987
to December 1988.

Elsewhere, reports are mixed with one observer reporting

remarkable price stability in manufacturing durables, while also reporting

IX-3

sharp price increases for new lines of farm equipment.

One southern Minnesota

farmer estimates sharp increases in production costs for the upcoming year,
ranging from 9 percent for grain used as cattle feed, to 14 percent for soybeans.

A large wholesaler for grocery stores reports that inflation rates for

food products are currently averaging around 4.6 percent.

Resource-Related Industries
Conditions have been excellent in resource-related industries.

The

generally good snow cover in the district has restored cautious optimism in
most agricultural areas.

However,

last year's drought

concerns about soil moisture adequacy in the spring.
the lumber

industry were excellent.

continues

to

raise

Economic conditions in

By one estimate,

the pulp and

paper

industry has committed to $1 billion worth of capital investment in Minnesota
over

the

boards.

last

couple

of

years,

and

a

similar

amount

is

on

the

drawing

A large number of new lumber mills are being built and planned in the

Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

The capital investments for these mills range

from $38 million to $300 million.

Foreign markets are becoming particularly

important for the lumber industry, with 20 percent of the output of one producer going
foreign-owned

overseas.
company

Conditions
is

expected

in mining have also been
to

take

excellent.

over an employee-owned

company located in Michigan's Upper Peninsula.

A

smelting

The employees are expected to

receive about $60 million for their shares of the firm.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Slow growth continues in the Tenth District economy.

retail sales are improving, new car sales are mixed.

Although

Manufacturers report

significantly higher input prices and strains on capacity.

District farmers

and ranchers are generally in relatively good financial condition after strong
income growth last year.

Housing activity is little changed from a year ago,

however, and home mortgage demand is steady to lower as rates trend higher.
Uncertainty about world oil production and prices continues to restrict
improvement in the energy sector.

Loan demand at commercial banks remains

relatively stable, while deposit growth is somewhat weaker.
Retail Sales.

Most respondents report current-dollar sales slightly

ahead of a year ago, and all respondents report improving sales over the last
three months.

Promotional activity, in general, is at a normal level.

have been relatively steady.

Prices

All respondents are satisfied with their

inventories, which for the most part remain lean.

Retailers expect sales to

hold at current levels.
Automobile Sales.

Sales results have been mixed, with some respondents

reporting increases over the past month and others reporting decreases.
Adequate dealer and customer financing is generally available.

Most dealers

report satisfactory inventory levels, although some desire a slight inventory
reduction.

In general, dealers expect 1989 sales to be near 1988 levels.

Manufacturing.

Most respondents indicate input prices are up relative to

a year ago and are significantly higher than three months ago.
increases are expected to continue the rest of the year.

Price

Despite some

increases in lead times, firms report few difficulties getting materials and
do not anticipate future problems.

Inventory levels are generally

satisfactory, though some firms plan increases.

Plants are operating close to

full capacity, but no bottlenecks or labor shortages are reported.

Energy.

Despite the firming of oil prices since the beginning of the

year, the district's energy industry shows few signs of improvement.
Uncertainty about OPEC's resolve to rein in production has held down drilling
activity in the region and nationwide.

The average number of active drilling

rigs in the district fell from 246 in January to 219 in February, a fifth
below the average of one year ago.
Housing Activity and Finance.
unchanged from a year ago.

District housing activity is generally

Most homebuilders report housing starts were

stronger in January than in December, in large part due to good weather
conditions.

Single-family construction continues to be much stronger than

multi-family construction.
steady.

New home sales and prices generally have been

Most respondents expect steady or improved housing activity in the

coming months.
Most respondents from district savings and loan institutions report a net
outflow of savings deposits over the last month.

In almost all cases, net

deposit flows were less favorable than a year ago but either unchanged or
improved from January.

Most respondents expect net outflows of deposits to

continue over the near term.

Almost all respondents noted adverse reactions

of depositors to the recent publicity regarding the savings and loan industry.
Mortgage demand is steady to lower.
rates are trending higher.

Nearly all respondents report mortgage

Respondents expect rates to be steady to slightly

higher in the coming months.
Banking.

The majority of district banks surveyed report little change in

loan demand over the past month.

Commercial real estate loans were down

slightly, while consumer real estate loans increased.

Responses regarding

consumer loans and commercial and industrial loans were mixed.

As the survey

was taken, virtually all banks were in the process of making their second 50

basis point increase in their prime rate within a month.

Deposits at district

banks were constant to down slightly over the past month.

All categories of

transaction accounts showed weakness, and remaining deposit categories were
essentially unchanged.
Agriculture.

Most district farmers and ranchers withstood last year's

drought and entered 1989 in relatively solid financial condition.

Farmland

values continued a steady rise toward yearend and are now 16 percent above the
lows recorded in late 1986.

Results of spring credit reviews by district

agricultural bankers reflect generally high farm incomes in 1988.

Strong

incomes have allowed district farmers and ranchers to pay down debt and
replace worn farm machinery.

Bankers throughout the district report

agricultural loan demand is generally stronger this spring than in recent
years.

The greater financing requirements of a larger planted acreage and

smaller advance deficiency payments are contributing to increased demand for
operating credit.
Much of the district's winter wheat crop is under weather-related stress.
Warm early winter temperatures and a lack of snow cover left the crop
vulnerable to subsequent cold weather, but the extent of damage is not yet
known.

Some areas of the district have recently received beneficial rains,

but subsoil moisture reserves remain below normal.

Additional rainfall is

needed to ensure development of the crop through the remainder of the growing
season.
Despite continued high cattle prices, little expansion has occurred in
district cattle herds.
levels.

Operators are generally maintaining herds at current

Inadequate wheat pasture in some areas of the district and high feed

prices have discouraged ranchers from enlarging herds.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy is expanding slowly.

Growth rates in the strongest

sectors have been slowing somewhat, while some of the weaker sectors are
strengthening.
little.

The overall pace of expansion appears to have changed very

Manufacturing growth continues, but at a milder rate than late last
Retail sales are accelerating, while auto sales are climbing at a

year.

steadier and more modest pace.

After a protracted period of decline,

construction activity has lately remained level.

Oil and gas drilling activity

is unchanged at low levels, in the wake of a falloff that commenced last year.
Recent increases in beef prices have raised profits in the District's important
cattle industry, but low soil moisture is an ongoing concern for both farmers
and ranchers in much of the region.

District manufacturing continues to expand overall, but growth in orders
appears to have slowed recently.

Several firms said they had managed to keep

growing by seeking out new geographic markets. The only serious weaknesses in
manufacturing have been in energy extraction-related and construction-related
manufacturing.
months.

Oilfield equipment sales have declined absolutely in recent

Orders to construction-related manufacturers - including lumber and

wood and stone, clay and glass producers - are weak in most of the District, but
some Houston-area producers cite growth.

Reports by electronics manufacturers

vary a good deal, but sales have generally expanded somewhat in 1989, following a
sluggish fourth quarter.
strongly.

Personal computer orders are said to be expanding

Primary and fabricated metals industries continue to show some

expansion, but last year's rapid growth in fabricated metals appears to have

XI-2

slowed.

Demand for paper is still strong compared to a year earlier, but some

recent slippage in export markets has been cited.

In the chemical industry,

sales remain well above a year ago, but rates of increase have slowed.

A number

of chemical plant expansions are underway but, currently, capacity constraints
remain a problem for some producers.

Apparel industry orders are said to have

increased markedly in 1989, and producers say they have been automating in order
to compete against foreign firms.
Retail sales growth varies considerably among regions but, on average, it
is accelerating.

Sales in Austin, Houston, Dallas/Ft. Worth, San Antonio, and

on the Mexican border are all expanding at an increased rate, after adjustment
for seasonality.

Sales in west Texas, however, are weak and show little

evidence of growth.

Much of the overall acceleration is in apparel sales.

Retailers are optimistic about prospects for further growth in revenues in 1989.
A number of respondents have lately expressed concern about proposed changes in
rules covering workers' compensation, minimum wage, and employee benefits.
District auto sales have lately been mixed, but modest overall, with
strong year-over-year January gains in Houston offsetting declines in Dallas/Ft.
Worth.

Cold February weather was said to have led to more widespread sales

weakness in that month.
District construction contracting activity is weak, but it has lately
remained essentially level.

In 1988, a midyear surge subsequently reversed

course, and dollar values of contract issuance remain below a year earlier.
Construction employment is still slipping, in response to past reductions in
contracting.

Recent declines in nonresidential building and nonbuilding

construction have been largely offset by growth in residential activity, which

XI-3

is now above year-earlier levels.

The upturn in residential building is chiefly

due to single-family home construction.

Multifamily residential construction has

changed little and remains at very low levels.
After a protracted period of decline, District oil and gas drilling
activity has begun to level off.

The rotary rig count remains near its lowest

level of the decade, but the large monthly declines that characterized the
second half of 1988 have at least temporarily ceased.

The leading indicators of

drilling, including well permits issued and the seismic crew count, also appear
to be stabilizing.

According to some respondents, the recent leveling off of

drilling activity is a result of persistent relative strength in oil prices.
This strength has caused drillers to revise expectations about future oil prices.
West Texas Intermediate oil prices have remained above $16 per barrel for each of
the last three months, after averaging under $16 in every month from July through
November.

A seasonal decline of about $1 per barrel is expected this summer, but

it is not anticipated to change drilling activity.
Despite recent rains in some areas, the chief current concern in District
agriculture is continued low soil moisture.

Although dryness is still said to

be a problem in south Texas, February rains improved soil conditions there.

In

the Texas panhandle, however, drought conditions have been worsening and the
winter wheat crop has already been damaged as a result of scarce rainfall.

On

average, both crop and livestock prices received by Texas farmers remain well
above a year earlier, and prices of both crops and livestock rose in January
over December's levels.

The overall increase was 1.9 percent, compared to a 1.5

percent increase for the nation.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO
Summary
Business contacts in the Twelfth Federal Reserve District indicate that economic conditions
continue to be healthy, with little evidence to suggest that the overall pace of growth is slowing.
Expectations regarding GNP growth rebounded in March, with only a third of respondents now
expecting weaker growth during the next twelve months. Consumer spending on soft goods has
improved in recent weeks, although car sales have been sluggish. Manufacturing activity continues
healthy in most manufacturing sectors, with commercial aircraft particularly strong and mixed news
coming from electronics and defense firms. Resource industries are stable, but limited log supplies
are constraining growth in the forest products industries.

Cold and dry weather has generated

concern among farmers. Most of the District enjoys healthy construction and real estate conditions,
although reports from local observers suggest that the rate of growth may be slowing. Earnings
of Twelfth District banks rose to record levels in 1988, but some bankers are concerned that
narrowing interest margins and lackluster loan demand may cut into 1989 profits.
Business Sentiment
Respondents' expectations regarding GNP growth rebounded in March. Only 32 percent
anticipate weakening during the next year, down from 70 percent in January.

Expectations

regarding business investment are unchanged, while the prospects for housing and consumer
spending seem to have improved.

Respondents are less optimistic about improvements in the

trade deficit, however.
Consumer Spending
Department store sales have improved, primarily due to gains in women's fashions. Sales
currently are running 5 to 6 percent above year-ago levels. Reports suggest that higher interest

XII - 2

rates have had little noticeable effect on buying activity. In Arizona, one consumer confidence
index rose 9.3 percent between October 1988 and January 1989.
In contrast, car sales have slowed.

Dealer inventories are building, so dealers are being

very cautious about additional ordering. Higher interest rates are not now the determining factor
for car sales, but tighter credit requirements are hurting volumes. As a result, one dealer reports
that 30 percent of his potential buyers were turned down for their loans -- the highest turndown
rate in 3 years.
Manufacturing
Activity remains healthy in most manufacturing sectors.

Capacity limits are binding for

many aerospace suppliers and major commercial aircraft companies. Concern is rising that both
Boeing and McDonnell Douglas could lose business to Airbus Industrie because delivery times
are now so long. McDonnell Douglas is considering building new plant capacity, and reportedly
is looking outside of Southern California because of the high cost of doing business there.
Reports are mixed for electronics and defense firms. Some respondents note strong
electronics and high-tech activity, while others note recent weakening, particularly in semiconductor
orders.
Business continues relatively strong in the paint and coatings industry, with some key raw
materials in short supply and escalating in price. For several years, paint and coatings manufacturers have held the line on price increases, despite higher costs, but prices are expected to rise
soon.

Agriculture and Resource Related Industries
Although agricultural market conditions currently are good, weather poses a threat to many
western agricultural producers. Freezes have hurt the citrus and strawberry crops, although it is

XII - 3

still too early to assess total damage.

Continued dry weather through much of the winter has

heightened concerns about water availability this summer.

Unless March rains are much more

plentiful than normal, California farmers will suffer cutbacks in water allocations of as much as 60
percent.
As of early February, lumber and wood products orders were running about 7 percent
behind last year's level. 1988 production in the coast region was about 10 percent below its 1987
level, and the industry faces supply problems for 1989. Log prices are reported to be up as much
as 33 percent, as high log exports stimulate demand while Forest Service policies constrain log
supplies. Because of problems obtaining logs, 33 lumber mills on the West Coast have closed down
during the past six months.
Several reports indicate that paper has become more expensive and more difficult to obtain
in sufficient quantity. Prices rose about 5 percent for bond paper and 3 percent for newsprint on
January 1.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity remain healthy in coastal states. Several respondents
note slowing real estate and construction activity, although there is disagreement regarding whether
recent increases in interest rates have played a role.

Some note that the volume of sales has

increased recently, and attribute this rise to the fear of further rate increases.
Office building in downtown Los Angeles continues strong, buoyed by foreign investment.
Some are concerned that if current plans are carried out, over-capacity could be a serious problem
by 1992.

XII - 4

Financial Sector
Most bankers and thrift executives report that loan demand remains relatively weak. Loan
volume has been flat for about six months. Few attribute the weak demand to higher interest
rates, focussing instead on the continued small pool of quality borrowers. One banker notes that
inquiries and fundings on home equity lines are unchanged. In contrast, others argue that higher
rates have affected loan demand, making some customers more cautious about borrowing and
causing others to borrow before rates increase further.

Large banks in Oregon and Washington

report that total loans and leases have been rising slightly faster in recent weeks, with accelerating
growth in secured real estate loans and weakening growth in unsecured credit.
Some bankers report that deposit growth is strong, but others report that the recent rise
in interest rates has hurt balances in passbook savings and market interest accounts. Earnings at
District commercial banks were up strongly in 1988, following a loss in 1987.

Among District

commercial banks, return on equity was 15 percent and return on assets was 0.9 percent, both
higher than national averages. However, some bankers have expressed concern that a narrowing
gap between borrowing and lending rates may be squeezing profits. But one banker notes that the
large proportion of adjustable-rate loans should mitigate the problem to some extent.
The financial services industry in Arizona continues to show the effects of the downturn
in construction.

Results for financial institutions are mixed, with some institutions reporting

significantly improved earnings over 1987, while others recently have made additional provisions
for reserves.

