SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

ON

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

September 1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . .
First District -- Boston

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-

Second District -- New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

II-

Third District -- Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III-

Fourth District -- Cleveland

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV -1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

V -I

Sixth District -- Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

VI-1

Seventh District -- Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VII-1

Fifth District -- Richmond

Eighth District -- St. Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ninth District -- Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IX -1

Tenth District -- Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

X -l

Eleventh District -- Dallas

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

XI-1

.

Twelfth District -- San Francisco . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

VIII-1

. . . . . XII-1

SUMMARY

Summary
Most Federal Reserve districts describe the growth of economic
activity as modest or slow, although regional variation in activity is
substantial.

Consumer spending has been mixed, but most districts report

strong sales of apparel and cars recently.
generally satisfactory or improving in
regions,

but

the nation's Southern and Western

some weakening was noted in

Construction

Midwest.

activity

is

Manufacturing conditions are

New England and much of the

mixed.

Agricultural

conditions

continue to improve over much of the nation.
Consumer Spending
Merchandise sales have been mixed across
sales

have

expanded

Philadelphia,
districts.

St.

at satisfactory rates

Louis,

Minneapolis,

or

the country.

above

in

San Francisco

Retail

the New York,
and Kansas

City

Boston, Richmond and Dallas all report that retail sales have

softened in recent months, while Cleveland reports mixed sales patterns.
In

several districts,

increased sales of women's apparel have spurred

overall apparel growth.
Inventories

appear

to

be

under

control

in

the

New

York,

Philadelphia, St. Louis, Minneapolis and Kansas City districts, while in
Boston and Cleveland, inventories are a bit high.

The sales outlook for

Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis and based on
information obtained before September 12, 1989. This document summarizes
comments received from business and other contacts outside the Federal
Reserve and is
not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

the remainder of the year is

optimistic in

the Richmond,

Minneapolis,

St. Louis retailers expect

Dallas, Cleveland and Kansas City districts.

sales to be flat or slightly higher, while Philadelphia retailers believe
through

slackening

in

demand

acceleration

in

spending.

a

next

Boston

is

spring
notes

likely

more

retailers

that

than

are

an

split

half-and-half over sales potential for the rest of 1989, while Chicago
reports that retailers

expect further weakness

in

spending on durables.

A surge in auto sales has helped reduce auto inventories over most of the
In

nation.

several

districts,

dealers

are

worried

that

recent

incentive-boosted sales may cut into 1990 model sales.
Manufacturing
The performance of manufacturing is mixed, varying significantly
among districts and across

reported

Increased activity was

industries.

Weak or slowing

by New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Kansas City and Dallas.

activity was reported by Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago and Minneapolis
and St. Louis.

Although manufacturing conditions in the San Francisco

District

generally

are

defense-related production,

some

satisfactory,

continue to decline.

sectors,

such

as

Cleveland also reports

that manufacturing activity remains at a high level,

but some softening

is apparent in the production of steel and capital goods.
inventories are generally at satisfactory

levels,

from relatively high levels by producers

in

Manufacturers'

but are being reduced

the Kansas City District.

Five districts report that input pricing pressures have eased, while the
Kansas City District reports an increase in such pressure.
The outlook for manufacturing is mixed.
mentioned
anticipate

an outlook,
a

weakening

Philadelphia
in

and

conditions

Of the districts that

Richmond

while

contacts

Boston

generally

contacts

expect

activity to continue at its current pace

through the end of the year.

Several manufacturers in the Atlanta District, primarily in the chemical,
textiles

and

primary

industries,

metal

recently

revised

have

their

expectations for the near future upward.
Construction and Real Estate
District
of

reports

construction

and

indicate
real

substantial variation

estate

activity.

in

the

Recent

strength

strength

in

nonresidential construction was reported by the Richmond, Chicago, St.
Louis,

Dallas and San Francisco

reportedly

weakened

construction
picked

activity,

in

up

in

the

the

districts,

while nonresidential

Minneapolis-St.

Paul

area.

Residential

though generally weak compared with a

Richmond,

St.

Louis

and

Minneapolis

activity

year

and

districts

New York reports

remained strong in the San Francisco District.

ago,

that

homebuilding in parts of its District has been deterred by an oversupply
of existing homes.

Home sales picked up in the Boston, Richmond, Chicago

and Minneapolis districts and remained strong in the Far West, but are
slow in the Kansas City District.
in

mortgage

rates

stimulated

Several districts report that declines

the

construction

and

sales

of

existing

homes.
Labor Markets
Three

districts

report

labor

shortages.

Boston

reports

that,

although manufacturing labor market conditions are generally unchanged or
softer,
reports
sectors,

some
a

types

reduction

of
in

labor
the

continue

availability

to be
of

while San Francisco noted shortages

workers in some areas.

hard
skilled
of

retail

to

find.
labor

St.
in

Louis
several

and construction

Financial Markets
to vary considerably by region

The demand for loans continues
and type of loan.

Commercial and industrial loan growth has been good in

San Francisco.

and

Philadelphia,
Cleveland,

Overall loan volume is reported up in Philadelphia and

Richmond

however,

industrial loans.

notes

and
a

Kansas

continued

City

report

softening

in

steady

demand.

commercial

and

Consumer loan demand has fallen off since last year in

the New York District, but Philadelphia reports that consumer loan growth
has strengthened.

Auto loans appear to be a major factor in

consumer loan growth rates.
pace in

Philadelphia,

volume.
in

St.

determining

Real estate lending is growing at a strong

with San Francisco also reporting expanded

loan

Bank earnings are growing significantly in San Francisco, while
Louis

earnings

declined

in

the second quarter with particular

problems in real estate loans.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Agricultural conditions have

improved over much of the country.

Recent rains have helped crops and pastures in the Chicago, St. Louis,
Kansas City,
conditions,

Minneapolis

and Dallas districts.

weather-related

stress

has

Despite the improved

damaged

crops

in

the

Plains

States, Iowa, Oregon, Utah and Idaho.

Dallas reports that central and

southern

Dallas

Texas

agricultural

remains

prices

dry.

In

the

for most commodities

are

and

Richmond districts,

relatively

strong.

The

mining industry has showed increased activity in the Minneapolis, Dallas,
Atlanta and Kansas
contacts

in

the

City districts
Minneapolis

and

in

recent months.
San

difficulties in securing timber for mills.

Francisco

Lumber industry
districts

report

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity continues at a modest pace in the First District.
Manufacturing sales are flat to rising modestly, while retailers are
experiencing sales declines as well as increases compared with last year.
Capital spending plans are mixed.

The commercial real estate market has

softened, while residential realtors are seeing improvement.
Retail
Retail sales activity was generally soft through the month of
August, according to a panel of First District retailers.

Receipts were

sluggish at department stores, both up-scale and discount chains.

Building

materials did somewhat better, and sales at novelty and sundry outlets were
satisfactory and on plan.

With this general softness, inventories are

reported to be a bit high.
Retail prices were generally stable but rose as much as 6 percent
for novelty goods.

Margins slipped a bit in August.

Weak sales and

increased competitive pressures forced merchants to absorb some increases
in the cost of goods sold.

Rising expenses, especially health insurance

premiums, also cut into retail revenues.

Profits are thus down from last

year, and some firms are operating at or below break-even.
Despite the recent weakness, half of the retailers surveyed are
optimistic about the rest of 1989 and plan to enlarge their operations over
the next six to twelve months.

The remaining half are less sanguine and

are not planning significant expansion.

Manufacturing
Sales and orders exceed year-ago levels at most First District
manufacturers contacted.

Reported gains range from zero to 8 percent and

order backlogs are at record levels in a few cases.

Nevertheless, the pace

of growth is very modest at most firms, and almost half the respondents
experienced some slowdown in June and July.

Several contacts mentioned

that activity has picked up very recently, however.

Firms serving the

defense, construction and auto industries continue to experience weak
demand, while respondents producing specialty textiles, paper and consumer
Foreign markets are said to be

products found demand to be more robust.
stronger than their domestic counterparts.

Manufacturers continue to monitor inventories very carefully and are
generally satisfied with their current levels.
reportedly stable or declining slightly.

Employment levels are

Labor market conditions are

generally described as unchanged or softer, but some types of labor
continue to be hard to find in parts of Connecticut and New Hampshire.
All manufacturing contacts report that materials prices are
unchanged or falling.

Their own pricing behavior varied, however.

One

third said that their own sales prices are unchanged, but another third
mentioned recent or anticipated increases ranging from less than 1 percent
to 5 percent.

Prices for computer-related products remain under pressure,

and machine tool prices have become "negotiable."
Capital spending plans are also mixed.

Some firms expect 1989

expenditures to exceed their 1988 levels by as much as 25 percent while
others anticipate declines of a similar size.

One firm has reduced this

I-3

year's capital spending budget by 15 percent because of a weak first half.
One-third of all respondents plan new or expanded facilities in New England.

Manufacturing contacts describe their outlook as "cautious,"
"guarded" and "healthy."

They generally expect economic activity to

continue at its current pace with no further softening or real pick-up in
the current year.
Real Estate
According to local real estate consultants and brokers, commercial
real estate markets in Boston and its suburbs are softening.

While vacancy

rates remain lower than in the rest of the country, the absorption of
available space continues to slow.

Developers are finding financing harder

to get as lenders become less optimistic about the economy.

Furthermore,

as the amount of space available for subleasing has increased, prime real
estate rents have fallen.
By contrast, First District realtors sound more positive than in
recent weeks about the residential real estate market.

Realtors surveyed

all report that current sales are comparable to or higher than last month's
levels but remain sluggish compared with year-ago activity.

A majority of

realtors contacted said that small and large homes are moving quickly.
However, midsized homes (in the $150,000 to $200,000 range) are staying on
the market longer than last year.

Several respondents believe sales will

continue at about the same rate, while a few expect lower interest rates to
lead to a busy autumn despite large inventories.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

District activity continues to be basically mixed but with some recent
signs of strengthening.

Retail contacts reported over-the-year sales gains during

July ana August that, for the most part, were on or above targeted levels.
Unemployment rates in the District have bouncea around in recent months but remain
slightly below the national average.
business conditions.

Buffalo purchasing managers report improved

In contrast, demand for new housing continued mixed, with some

areas noting price declines, and otfice leasing activity slowed somewhat in its
usual summer pattern.

Most small- and medium-sized banks stated that they have not

lowered rates on consumer loans since the latest decrease in the prime rate.
Consumer Spending
District retail contacts reported a wide range of over-the-year sales gains
during July and August, but they were, for the most part, on or above targeted
levels.

July gains ranged between 2.5 percent and 13.0 percent while the August

range was even wider:

from 0.5 percent to 19.0 percent.

Most respondents described

their July results as on or above plan though a couple found them to be
disappointing.

Two chains characterized their August sales as "well above plan",

and a third posted higher-than-targeted results for the first time in several
months.

Women's apparel remained in strong demand at all stores during both July

and August, and in August back-to-school departments also farea well.

Reports on

the demand for items such as men's clothing, furniture, and home furnishings were
mixed, however.
Inventories at the end of August were generally described as satisfactory.
One retailer continued to have stocks above desired levels, but greatly reduced from

II-2

the previous two months, while another reported an actual shortage of fall
merchandise which he expected to be rectified in September.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Demand for new housing in the District remained mixed in recent weeks.

An

oversupply of homes in the resale market continues to be cited as a major deterrent

to new construction activity in downstate New York and New Jersey where price
cutting by both homeowners and developers has been noted lately.

Some developers on

Long Island, for example, have reportedly been reducing home prices by more than 10
percent in order to reduce swollen inventories and pare carrying costs.

However, in

several upstate communities where prices continue to rise, homebuilders are quite
busy and report an upturn in demand as a result of lower mortgage rates and an end
to exceptionally rainy weather.

Observers in these communities anticipate that

construction activity in 1989 will come close to the high level attained in 1988.
Office leasing activity slowed somewhat since the last report in its usual
summer pattern.

Several new buildings were completed in midtown Manhattan which had

tenant commitments for less than half their space, while in downtown Manhattan a
sizable amount of existing prime office space was also placed on the market.

As a

result, the vacancy rate for prime space has increased somewhat in both these areas,
though the rates remain below the national average.

Office vacancy rates in most

other District areas showed little change in recent weeks.
Other Reports on Business Activity
District unemployment rates have bounced around in recent months but remain
slightly below the national average with August readings of 5.0 percent in New York
and 4.5 percent in New Jersey.

In contrast to the national pattern of an

over-the-year decline, though, unemployment rates in both New York and New Jersey
have risen since last year.
The August survey of Buffalo purchasing managers reversed the July pattern,

showing a sharp rise in firms with improved orders and production and a decline in

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Overall economic activity in the Third District is advancing modestly in
September, although the manufacturing sector continues to soften, with area
industrial

firms

reporting

declining

business

activity

indicating improvement for the third month in a row.

edging

out

those

Retailers, however, report

moderate growth in line with expectations, and auto sales picked up in August
as manufacturers offered more

generous incentives.

Banks benefitted

from

improved auto sales in the consumer lending area, while the growth of business
lending has slackened.

Real estate lending remains on a strong upward trend.

Third District business contacts generally foresee a continuation of
current trends.

Manufacturers predict some further declines in business over

the next six months. Retailers expect sales to grow at about their current pace
but they are being cautious in their planning for the fall and winter.

Bankers

anticipate slower growth in lending of all kinds during the rest of the year as
a result of the slower economic activity they forecast, as well as the more
stringent credit standards they are implementing.
MANUFACTURING
Third District manufacturing activity continued to slow in August and early
September, according to firms contacted for this report, as the region's goodsproducing sector experienced a third consecutive month of slowing business.
Overall, while about half the companies surveyed indicated they were maintaining
steady operations, nearly one-third said they were experiencing a drop in
activity.
industries,

Durable goods producers, particularly those in heavy manufacturing
indicated

the

sharpest

drop

in

activity

while

nondurables

II-3
those experiencing a worsening.

August data for Rochester are not yet available but

in July, 90 percent of surveyed managers there anticipated stable to improved
conditions over the next three months after some deterioration from June to July.
Eastman KodaK recently announced that it will lay off an additional 4500
workers this year, but it did not specify how many would be affected at its
Rochester, New York headquarters.

On Long Island a final decision has not yet been

made public with regard to the Pentagon's plan to cancel Navy aircraft contracts at
the Grumman plant.

Among other recent developments which could have an adverse

impact on the District's economy, two of New York's oldest retail chains--B. Altman
ana Bonwit Teller--filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection as a result of their
parent company's financial difficulties, and a large furniture chain was unable to
meet its interest payments and began discussing debt restructuring with its lenders.
Financial Developments
Most senior officers contacted at small- and medium-sized banks in the
Second District stated that they have not lowered their rates on consumer loans
since the decrease in the prime rate on July 31 nor do they plan to although many
said other loan rates have been reduced.

The majority of respondents noted that

consumer loan demand has fallen off since this time last year.

Those who have not

experienced a decline in demand for consumer loans ascribed their success to
aggressive marketing campaigns.

Auto loan demand was perceived as very weak

compared to this time last year due to a slowing of auto sales and to increases in
dealer financing incentives.

Respondents also stated that delinquency rates on

consumer loans were slightly nigher than a year ago.

One banker said that their

collection department has been expending increasing effort in order to keep
delinquency rates from rising above acceptable levels.

Most respondents believed

that consumer loan demand will remain soft in the near future due to a weakening
economy and two bankers said that consumers were far too extended to incur more
debt.

Some respondents indicated that if demand falls further, they may be forced

to lower rates.

III-2

manufacturers generally reported steady or improving business conditions.
On balance, area firms were stepping up shipments in August and September,
but they were obtaining new orders at just a steady rate, leading to a drop in
order backlogs.

Employment

also showed some weakness,

area firms were

as

reducing both payrolls and working hours; many firms that had been running double
shifts have now pared second shift hours.

Industrial contacts noted continued

slackening in the pace of price increases for both inputs and outputs.
Looking ahead, managers at area plants generally expect a further decline
in business.

Among firms polled for this report, pessimistic forecasts for the

next six months edge out optimistic predictions.

On balance, area companies

expect a pickup in both orders and shipments while order backlogs continue to
fall.

With some further slippage on the horizon, local firms plan additional

cuts in payrolls and working hours between now and next spring.
RETAIL
Third District retailers

generally described sales as having run at a

satisfactory rate in August and into September.

Department store sales showed

a year-over-year increase of approximately 6 percent, in dollar terms, while
discount and specialty stores achieved somewhat better gains.

However, some

local specialty chains that have been expanding locations aggressively indicated
that results at new stores were not meeting expectations.
Nearly all retail contacts reported that inventories were under control.
Auto

dealers

trimmed

inventories

as

sales

picked

up

in

August

with

new

manufacturers' incentives to clear out 1989 models.
Area merchants said they are being cautious in their planning for the rest
of the year.
modest.

Orders to suppliers are conservative and promotional plans are

Store officials generally do not anticipate a consumer pullback in the

months ahead but they believe that some slackening in demand through next spring

III-3

is more likely than an acceleration in spending.
FINANCE
Outstanding loan volume at major Third District banks in late August was
approximately 12 percent above the level at the same time last year.
and

industrial

loan growth was

described as good

Commercial

by bank lending officers

contacted in early September, but several noted that growth has been easing over
the summer and they believe it is likely to slacken further as the year comes
to a close.

The slower growth is predicted by area bankers as a result of easing

demand as well as a tightening of credit standards.

Besides taking a more

restrictive stance with regard to new applicants for business loans, some banks
indicated they were winding down relationships with current borrowers who do not
meet more rigid credit standards.
Consumer loan growth picked up in August, primarily due to increased auto
loans as consumers took advantage of manufacturers' rebates.

Other categories

of consumer lending were showing only slight growth, according to local bankers.
As with business lending, personal loan credit standards are being tightened by
several banks in the region; lending officers said this move is being taken even
though they do not expect strong loan demand from consumers.
Real estate lending
District banks.

continued to grow at a strong pace at most Third

However, bankers noted that weakness is developing in office

leasing in some suburban areas and they plan to limit the expansion of commercial
real estate lending.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Retailers appear more optimistic about sales prospects for the

balance of this year, although sales patterns have been mixed.

Manufacturing

activity remains at high levels, but softening is apparent even in some
capital goods industries.

Steel operations have been reduced largely because

of inventory liquidation.

Commercial and industrial loans continue to soften.

Money market rates are expected to ease over the next few months, and the
thrift bailout has resulted in lower rates on CDs issued by thrifts.
Retail Sales.

Department store retailers have become more optimistic

about fall and holiday-season sales prospects apparently because of
better-than-expected sales so far this summer.

Apparel sales in particular

revived from the slump in 1988, and profits and profit margins improved last
quarter without more than usual sales promotions.

Retailers plan to hold

larger inventories than they did late last year.
A chain department store, however, believes that retailers are too
optimistic and that inventories will become a growing problem over the next
few months.
Another major chain retailer reports a spurt in July and August sales of
household furnishings and home improvement products, but large inventories
will require cutbacks in orders from some manufacturers.

This retailer also

expects a better fall and Christmas sales season this year than last.

It has

been attempting to hold the line on prices for imported goods by shifting
sources of supply, and, in the case of apparel, by increasing purchases from
domestic producers.

IV-2

A surge in car sales in late July and August helped to cut inventories,
but current levels of stocks of 1989 models are still slightly above normal
for this time of the year, according to auto dealers.

The latest round of

incentives and public awareness of excess stocks boosted sales, especially of
domestic luxury cars.

Dealers are concerned, though, that the high level of

sales will borrow from future markets.

Most dealers report that their initial

orders for 1990 models will be well below the level for 1989 models at a
comparable period.
Manufacturing.

District respondents report high levels of operations in

manufacturing, but slowing is apparent even in some capital goods industries
and in steel.

Purchasing agents in Cleveland report that industrial activity

continues to soften.

Production and new orders declined in August, but the

number of managers who reported price increases was half as large as those who
reported decreases.

Cincinnati purchasing agents, however, report that new

orders and production rose, but backlogs, vendor performance, and commodity
prices all suggest that industrial activity in that area is softening.
A machine tool builder reports that both its domestic and export orders
have been holding up better than for the industry.
have not shortened.

Lead times, therefore,

The builder is neither hiring nor adding capacity because

of the highly cyclical nature of the business.
Heavy-duty truck shipments will likely remain at peak levels through the
balance of this year, but new orders in recent months have not revived as much
as expected by some suppliers.

IV-3

The decline in steel production in the quarter is a little more than
seasonal, according to steel producers.

Lead times have shortened and

allocation of steel products has largely ended, except for some selected
products, such as galvanized sheets used especially by the automotive
industry. The steel industry will probably be operating at about 75% of
capacity through the balance of this year, which is well below the
near-capacity operations reported by most producers earlier this year.
Inventory liquidation is expected to curtail steel output over the next few
quarters. Spot prices for selected steel products have dropped considerably in
domestic markets and even more in export markets in the past few months.
Financial Developments.

Some large banks in the District report

continued softening in commercial and industrial loans, although mortgage loan
demand is strong apparently because of refinancing.

Bank economists generally

expect that short term interest rates will ease over the balance of this year,
aided by the thrift bailout, which will require long-term financing.

Lower

interest rates and narrowing of spreads between money market rates and deposit
components of M1 and M2 will revive growth of deposits and will support
somewhat larger growth in M2 this quarter and next than in the first half of
1989.
Thrift institutions report that since the bailout legislation, some
thrifts have been selling their mortgage-backed securities in order to meet
new capital standards.

Also, easing from premium rates paid on CDs by some

thrifts in the District should help them to absorb the higher cost of deposit
insurance.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity strengthened somewhat in August from its
sluggish pace in July, although a few sectors remained flat.
continued lackluster but tourism rose.
after declining the previous month.
mixed at District ports.

Retail sales

Manufacturing activity grew slightly

Export and import activity was again

Home sales increased in some areas and remained

steady in others, and nonresidential construction activity strengthened.
Loan demand was generally steady.

The District's agricultural sector looks

strong this year.
Consumer Spending and Tourism
Our regular mail survey indicated that retail activity in the District
was flat in August.

New car sales apparently increased somewhat after two

consecutive months of decline, but department store sales were unchanged
after two months of reported increases.

Sales of big ticket items at

department stores declined slightly in August.
reported strength in sales of fall apparel.

Some stores, however,

Most retailers expect sales to

rise in the next six months.
A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts in the District
indicated an increase in tourism this summer compared to last summer.

Most

respondents expect tourist activity to continue better than a year ago in
coming months.
Manufacturing
District manufacturers responding to our regular mail survey reported
increased activity in August following a decline in July.

Reports of

increases outnumbered decreases in shipments, new orders, and new export
orders.

Unfilled orders, employment, and the length of the workweek were

largely unchanged.
somewhat.

Inventories of materials and finished goods declined

Prices for finished goods continued to rise, but at a rate

slightly slower than reported in July.

Increases in the prices of raw

materials slowed sharply, however, as 30 percent of our respondents reported
increases in August compared with 41 percent in July.
District manufacturers were less optimistic than in July about prospects
for growth in their businesses in the next six months.

Respondents who

expect declines in sales, new orders, unfilled orders, employment, and the
length of the workweek slightly outnumbered those who expect increases.
Textile producers, for example, expect demand to decline soon because of a
recent increase in the volume of imports.

In all manufacturing, the number

of respondents who expect decreases in overall U.S. economic activity in the
next six months remained above the number who expect increases, while the
number who expect no change remained about the same.
Ports
Reports received from the three major District ports--Hampton Roads
(Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore--indicated that import and export levels
were mixed in August as in July.

Imports were reported to be higher at

Baltimore, slightly lower at Hampton Roads, and about the same at Charleston.
Exports were slightly higher at Hampton Roads, lower at Baltimore, and
unchanged at Charleston.

Both Charleston and Hampton Roads indicated that

export activity outpaced import activity, a trend they expect to continue in
coming months.

Baltimore reported exports were lower than last year and

expected them to decline further in coming months.

Hampton Roads noted that

coal exports were down about 35 percent from a year ago, evidently because of
the Pittston coal strike.
Housing
A telephone survey of District realtors and homebuilders' associations
suggested that housing activity in the District remained steady or increased
Some respondents credited lower interest rates for

slightly in recent weeks.
increases in home sales.

Most homebuilders observed, however, that

construction remained well below the levels of a year ago.

Looking ahead,

respondents expect activity in the housing market to increase soon.
Nonresidential Construction
Nonresidential construction activity apparently gained some strength in
recent weeks.

Industrial building was reported strong, and one respondent

sensed an end to the decline in commercial building activity.

Another noted

that public construction continued steady with good prospects for increases
in road building, but that power plant construction had slowed.
Architectural engineering firms were reported to be busy, which implies a
favorable outlook for activity in the months ahead.
Financial Institutions
A telephone survey of District financial institutions indicated that
demand for commercial and industrial loans remained steady in August.

Nearly

all respondents reported moderate increases in mortgage demand, especially
for fixed-rate loans.

The cost of funds to depository institutions was

apparently largely unchanged in August.
sluggish to moderate.

Deposit growth was generally

Agriculture
With the harvest approaching, crop prospects are excellent for the Fifth
District.

Yields of corn, soybeans, and small grains should be at or near

record levels, and tobacco yields should also be good.

Prices of most grain

and bean crops are likely to average well below last year's drought-boosted
levels but to be relatively strong nonetheless when compared to most other
recent years.

Tobacco prices also have been firm this year.

livestock producers are bright as fall approaches.

Prospects for

Firm prices for beef,

pork, and poultry are helping producers offset higher feed costs, and with
feed costs expected to decline faster than meat prices, margins may widen
somewhat in the fall.
Income prospects for District farmers are good, with cash receipts
possibly exceeding the relatively strong 1988 showing.
farmers' financial security are rising farmland values.

Further adding to
All District states

are experiencing rising values, but particularly Maryland and Virginia, where
increases in land values over the last year exceeded 10 percent.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

Contacts throughout the Southeast report that business activity in

general is no longer weakening and their expectations for the remainder of the year are
somewhat brighter than before. Several contacts in manufacturing have recently revised
upward their expectations of business activity for the near term and report their capital
spending plans will remain unchanged or increased as a result. These manufacturers are
primarily in chemicals, textiles, and primary metals industries. The few manufacturers
reporting a downward revision in their expectations tended to be associated with
residential and office construction.

The railway and trucking industries continue to

report a decreasing volume of shipments.

Contacts indicate that consumer spending is

stronger than they expected last month.

Oil and gas exploration is still showing some

renewed strength, although expectations are for only a slow improvement in activity.
Manufacturing:

Most manufacturers report generally good business activity and

their expectations for the next few months remain unchanged or have been revised
upward in August.

A producer of plastic containers noted that to begin a new product

line, capital spending plans had been recently increased.

He added that most of the

additional investment would be in their southeastern plants, where wage pressure and
labor shortages were lower than in the rest of the nation. He also reported that the price
of plastic resins has been falling, which he thought would eventually lead to a decline in
the prices of their final products.

Another producer of thermoplastics reported that

prices of raw materials like ethylene have been coming down all year, and he expects
them to fall further by year's end.

He anticipates business will remain good for the

remainder of the year with the only weakness occurring in construction related plastic
goods such as plastic pipe.
Producers of aluminum expect continuing good business after record business last
year. The sources of strength are large orders from aircraft producers and strong export

VI-2

demand.

From a year ago, exports of aluminum have been up by 50 percent.

Weaker

auto and appliance sales have not affected aluminum production so far, but producers
expect some inventory buildup by the end of the year.

A manufacturer of kitchen

appliances reports that although 1989 started out strong, production over the past few
months has been below last year's level by about 15 percent; he expects production to
remain weak for the rest of the year.
Contacts in the textile and apparel industry have reported concern about
competition from imports, although strong domestic demand has been able to absorb both
imported goods and domestic production. One producer notes that there has been a slight
easing in the costs of raw materials like cotton and chemicals recently.

Another,

describing his outlook as "guardedly optimistic," reports that capital spending will
continue at the same level for the next three years, a level he considers substantial.
Construction:

Reports on residential construction vary considerably.

Reporters

indicate that building permits in Orlando are up over 50 percent compared to year-ago
levels, while contacts in Miami describe their market as depressed. Some Miami lenders
note that they do not expect to encourage new borrowing until the real estate picture
clears up.

Uncertainty related to the potential impact of the new S&L legislation on the

real estate market was mentioned a number of times.

A major supplier of building

materials in Florida says that business is down substantially because of declining
residential construction, and while he sees signs of activity leveling off, he does not
expect any recovery this year.

On the other hand, a spokesman from the lumber and

wood industry reports that home remodeling has been steadily increasing in importance
and has taken up the slack from weak residential construction demand. His expectations
of future business activity have not changed recently.

Nonresidential construction is

reported to be holding up well in most areas of the Districts.
Consumer Spending:

Contacts continue to indicate that spending for home

appliances and furniture is soft.

A furniture retailer pointed out that sales so far in

VI-3

September have been about the same as last year and that they are expecting only slow
growth for the rest of the year. They have been postponing capital expenditures in case
business weakens further.

Purchases of nondurables like apparel and textiles are

generally described as strong.
Auto sales in August are reported to be up substantially over previous months as
a result of manufacturer rebates, although sales in the Sixth District were somewhat
weaker than the rest of the nation. It is feared, however, that the recent gains may be
at the expense of reduced sales in 1990.
Natural Resources and Energy: Reporters indicate that interest in drilling for oil
and natural gas in the Gulf of Mexico has picked up recently.

Contacts thought that

increased interest in exploration to replenish domestic reserves combined with some
consolidation in the industry might result in improved drilling activity later this year. A
couple of our contacts indicated that the increased interest in oil and gas exploration in
the Gulf is a consequence of the Alaskan oil spill and uncertainties concerning future
regulation of production.
Services: The trucking industry has been reporting declining volume of shipments
for the past several months.

Reduced shipments of building materials and lumber

products have been sources of weakness.

Representatives of several trucking firms said

that they have recently decided not to increase capacity, any capital spending would be
to maintain existing equipment.

Railway representatives report that carloadings have

been down for all products, including autos and other manufactured goods. One contact
noted that the Southeast is faring about the same as the rest of the nation.

Most have

attributed the reduced volume to overall economic conditions rather than seasonal
factors.
The health care industry has reported that the shortage of nurses has eased
recently. Efforts to increase enrollments in nursing programs seem to be paying off.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary.

Contacts in the District report slower growth in activity in

some industries and declines in others.

Total payroll employment in the five

states, through July, showed only a sluggish increase from year-end 1988
levels (seasonally adjusted), and manufacturing employment was lower
reflecting, in part, cutbacks at motor vehicle plants.

Chicago purchasing

managers in July and August reported lower production, orders, and backlogs,
faster deliveries, and continued easing of inflationary pressures.

However,

the July-August softness may have been partly seasonal, in contrast with a
year earlier when usual summer shutdowns in some industries were shortened.
Uncertainties over the extent of possible further cutbacks in motor vehicle
assemblies, particularly if stronger sales in July and August prove temporary
as some expect, overhang that industry and its suppliers.

The pattern in

machinery markets is mixed, with demand continuing strong in some industries
and slowing in others.

Lower mortgage interest rates, partly reversed since

August lows, have stimulated an upturn in nonresidential and residential sales
and lending activity.
slow.

Sales of consumer durables are expected to remain

Crop conditions have improved in much of the District, helped by

rainfall in August.
Manufacturing.

Recent reports from contacts with industrial firms show

business activity growing more slowly than earlier this year in some sectors
and declining in others.

This slowdown in the third quarter appears to

reflect in part a return to a more "normal" pattern of July-August shutdowns
in several industries in which such plant closings--for vacations,
maintenance, and model changeovers--had been shortened or largely foregone in
recent years.

Uncertainties regarding the extent of upcoming cutbacks in car

and truck production continue to overhang suppliers as well as motor vehicle
producers.

Industrial materials are more readily available than earlier, and

VII-2
pricing pressures have eased with price increases less widespread and
decreases more common.
Machinery markets have turned increasingly mixed over the course of this
year, after widespread improvement last year.

Sales of construction equipment

are below last year, except highway construction equipment which is higher.
Mining equipment sales are quite strong, partly to meet long-deferred
replacement demand, but a general decline in minerals prices is expected to
lead to lower sales next year.

Diesel engine demand, robust virtually across

the board earlier this year, is less vigorous with some markets softer
including heavy trucks, marine equipment, and generating equipment.

Machine

tool orders have slowed while shipments have picked up, eroding backlogs.
Farm equipment demand has strengthened substantially this year.
Though motor vehicle sales have picked up in the third quarter, this rise
is attributed by observers to enhanced incentives and concerns about higher
prices in the 1990 model year.

A contact with a supplier to the industry

thinks planned fourth quarter production cuts may be inadequate to bring
inventories back into line.

However, the sharp cuts in auto assemblies

scheduled by the "Big Three" are being partly offset by large increases at
plants partly or wholly owned by foreign companies, most of which are located
in or near this District and are supplied by components makers located here.
Shipments of medium duty trucks have slowed, and orders for heavy trucks,
strong early in the year, have softened.
Construction and Real Estate.

Lower interest rates on commercial and

residential mortgage loans, since the peak last March, stimulated an upturn in
inquiries and activity.

Interest rates on mortgage loans have since reversed

part of the earlier decline.

A number of Chicago-area lenders have raised

quotes on 30-year fixed-rate loans, to around 10 percent in early September.
Rates ranging 9.5-9.75 percent were typical in early August.

A large

VII-3
Chicago-area real estate broker reported an upturn in unit sales of homes,
after declines in the first half.

Nevertheless, homes in some formerly "hot"

suburbs remain harder to sell than a few years ago.

Year-over-year increases

in prices of homes sold, on average, are reported in single digits after
double-digit rates of rise earlier.

Construction activity on downtown Chicago

office buildings continues at a high rate, and industrial construction in the
metropolitan area is strong, as is activity on public works, especially
highways.
Consumer Spending.

A contact with a general merchandise retailer expects

further weakness in consumer spending on durables.
on the other hand, are doing better.

Sales of women's apparel,

Softness in durables was attributed to

slower employment and income growth; weaker home sales, compared with peaks a
few years ago; reduced consumer buying intentions; and heavy consumer debt
levels.
Agriculture.

Crop conditions continue to show strong improvement

throughout most of the District, with the August rains being particularly
beneficial for soybeans.

Corn crops in Indiana and Wisconsin are excellent,

with 90 percent of the crop rated good or better in early September.

Iowa,

although showing some improvement in early September, has only 35 percent of
its corn crop rated good or better.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
District

economic

growth

remains

sluggish

with

anticipating no major changes for the remainder of 1989.
however, report worsening shortages of skilled workers.
increased

in

August

summer activity.
year-ago levels.

and

early

September

following

most

contacts

Several sectors,
Consumer spending

generally

sluggish

Real residential construction activity remains below
Bank profits were reduced by rising loan losses.

Many

bankers anticipate additional commercial real estate loan problems.
Consumer Spending
District

retail

sales

of general

merchandise picked

up

slightly

August and early September after being flat for most of the summer.
of women's

apparel were

were

inventories
than

a

than

a

year

at satisfactory levels.

year

Louisville

lower

earlier

report

dealer incentives.
outlook for

in

most

increases
Auto

the remainder

including building materials

earlier.

Most

contacts

report

Car sales are either flat or lower

areas,
in

Sales

the region while back-to-school

Spending on durables,

sales were moderate.
and furniture,

strong throughout

in

though

August

inventories
of the year

and

contacts

early

remain above

in

Arkansas

September

and

spurred

desired levels.

for both general merchandise

by
The
and

autos is for flat or slightly higher real sales compared with last year.
Labor Markets
District employment has leveled off since the first quarter, with no
major

sector

showing

significant

growth.

Construction employment

has

VIII-2

rebounded in

some parts of the region in

the levels

of a year ago.

slightly in

recent months but remains below

Regional manufacturing employment declined

recent months,

except in

Arkansas,

where

it

has

expanded

moderately over the last year because of growth in nondurables production.
Producers

of

poultry products,

apparel,

paper

and boxes

have

either

expanded or announced major expansions.
The St. Louis unemployment rate declined 0.1 percentage points to
5.2 percent in July

despite temporary layoffs of 4,000 auto workers.

One

labor analyst expects the jobless rate to drop even lower in August,

then

remain near 5 percent for the rest of the year.
Although District job

growth has

generally been

sluggish,

shortages have become more severe over the last year.

labor

Little change in

the availability of unskilled workers was reported, but finding qualified
skilled

workers

wholesale/retail

is

increasingly

trades,

finance

difficult

and services

for

manufacturing,

firms.

For the rest of

1989, businesses surveyed in the District expect little change in overall
economic conditions

and most plan no substantial changes

their

inventories

workforce

District's

major

expected

to

be

or

metropolitan
most

limited

in

the

areas,
in

next

few

the size of

months.

employment

Louisville,

in

Among

opportunities

where

construction

the
were
job

reductions are expected.
Construction and Real Estate
The

value

moderately

in

of

contracts

recent months

for

in

nonresidential

Arkansas,

Kentucky

slightly above the level of a year earlier.
strong

construction

square-foot

growth,

the

recent

office building precipitated

building

increased

and Missouri

and is

Following several years of

completion
a rise in

of
St.

a

one

Louis

million
downtown

VIII-3

rates

vacancy

the highest rate

to 24 percent,

office construction of any magnitude is

of the decade.

No new

the downtown area for

expected in

several years.
Although
residential
residential
virtually

slight

gains

were

reported

this

construction growth remains sluggish.
contracts
identical

issued
to

that

in

the

of

a

summer,

District

The value of District

first

seven

months

year

earlier,

with

of

1989

is

building

of

multi-family dwellings particularly weak.
Agriculture
Most District crops are in fair-to-good condition.
in

Drier conditions

southern states have helped improve cotton and soybean crops that were

damaged by excess rain earlier in the season.
Missouri have helped drought-stressed

late

Continued rains in northern
soybeans

and pastures,

arrived too late to help the corn and sorghum crops.

but

Agricultural banks

servicing weather-stressed areas are not anticipating a substantial change
in the quality of their agricultural loan portfolios this year.
Banking
declined 4.6 percent

District bank earnings
Loan losses in

the commercial area and additions

hampered earnings.

in

the second quarter.

to loan loss reserves

Asset quality declined during

the second

quarter,

particularly at the largest banks where nonperforming loans represent 2.16
percent of total loans.
note.

District

adequacy

Problems with real estate loans are of particular

commercial

position

with

banks

only

continued

four

regulatory primary capital guideline.

banks

to

failing

improve
to

their

meet

the

capital
minimum

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
Ninth District economic conditions have been mixed.

The Minnesota labor

market has continued to display signs of weakness, while the employment situation in the
rest of the district has improved.

Consumer spending on general merchandise has been

strong, automobile sales have risen sharply from levels earlier in the year, and housing
activity has shown signs of improvement.

Conditions in resource-related industries have

been mixed.
Employment
The district employment situation has continued to be mixed, with signs of
increasing unemployment in Minnesota.

The unemployment rate in Minnesota in June

was 4.9 percent, 0.6 percentage points higher than in May and 0.8 percentage points
higher than in June 1988. The unemployment rate in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area was 4.4 percent in June, up from 3.9 percent in May and 3.0 percent in June
1988.

Manufacturing employment, in particular, has been stagnant since June 1988.

Analysts attribute the lack of growth in manufacturing employment to the problems
experienced by area firms in the computer and electronics industries.

The one bright

spot is the growth in employment by firms specializing in advanced medical technologies.
The unemployment rate in North Dakota declined to 3.8 percent in July from
4.6 percent in June and 4.4 percent in July 1988.

The unemployment rate in South

Dakota was 4.0 percent in July, 0.2 percentage points lower than in June and 0.5 percentage points higher than in July 1988.

In Montana, the unemployment rate fell to 5.2

percent in July, from 6.0 percent in June and 6.5 percent in July 1988. The unemployment rate in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan dropped to 6.0 percent in July from 7.5
percent in June.

IX-2

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general merchandise has continued to be strong. One
retailer reports that August sales were 19 percent higher than a year ago and 8 percent
higher on a year-to-date basis. This retailer said that sales were the best they had been
in a long time.

Another retailer reports that sales in August were 5.1 percent higher

than a year ago, and year-to-date sales were 5.7 percent higher than last year. Inventories were reported to be at acceptable levels. All of our contacts were optimistic about
fall and Christmas sales.
Automobile
quarter.

sales have continued to recover rapidly from a poor first

One domestic manufacturer reports that sales in the Minneapolis-St. Paul

metropolitan area in August were 25 percent higher than in August 1988 and were about
even on a year-to-date basis compared to last year.

Another domestic manufacturer

reports that sales in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area were 22 percent higher
in August than in August 1988 and 5 percent higher on a year-to-date basis. Automobile
dealers were generally optimistic about sales prospects for the new model year.
Housing activity has also rebounded from its depressed levels earlier in the
year.

In Minnesota, the number of new housing permits issued in June was roughly the

same as in June 1988. Earlier this year, the number of new housing permits issued was as
much as 30 percent below the levels of last year.

Housing sales in the Minneapolis-St.

Paul area were 6.3 percent higher in August than in August 1988 but 3.4 percent lower on
a year-to-date basis. Nonresidential construction has not fared as well. The dollar value
of contracts for future construction in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area was 25
percent lower in July than in July 1988 and about 15 percent lower on a year-to-date
basis.
Tourist spending has been fairly strong.

North Dakota, South Dakota, and

Montana have been celebrating their centennial year as states in the Union, and all three
states report very good tourist seasons.

One observer reports that in some areas of

IX-3

Montana it was nearly impossible to find lodging.

The city of Northfield, Minnesota,

anticipates that over 100,000 people will turnout for its annual "Defeat of Jesse James
Days," the reenactment of the shootout between the citizens of Northfield and the James
Gang in 1876.
Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in resource-related industries have been mixed.
conditions in Minnesota improved since our last report.

Agricultural

It was reported that in early

September 62 percent of Minnesota farmland had adequate or surplus moisture.

This

report was an improvement over earlier reports that over half the farmland was dry or
very dry. The spring wheat harvest in Minnesota was projected to be 91 percent higher
than the drought-affected levels of a year ago. An index of prices received by Minnesota
farmers was 6 percent lower in August than in August 1988.

In North Dakota, it was

estimated that 60 to 65 percent of the spring wheat harvest was lost this year due to
unseasonably hot weather and grasshopper infestation.
the district reports to be doing well.

The mining industry throughout

Gold mines in Montana are having a good year.

Manufacturers of heavy equipment used in mining also report an excellent year.

A

platinum mine in Montana plans to expand operations. The lumber industry in the district
continued to report difficulties in securing enough timber.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy is still growing moderately.

Retail sales are up over last year and over the last three months.
sales are down from last year, but up slightly from last month.
report moderate price increases for both inputs and products.
retailers are low and expected to stay low.

Manufacturers
Inventories at

Manufacturers, however, are

trimming inventories from relatively high levels.
increased slightly in recent months.

Automobile

Drilling activity has

Housing activity remains weak.

Loan

demand at commercial banks remains flat, while deposits have increased.
Recent rains have alleviated the drought situation, and agricultural credit
conditions continue to improve.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report sales increases over last year

and over the last three months, with additional improvement expected as the
holiday season approaches.
in the upcoming months.

Most respondents plan to keep inventory levels low

Recent higher costs have led some retailers to

increase prices slightly, but most expect stable prices in the future.
Automobile dealers report slightly higher sales over the last month, but sales
this year to date remain down from a year ago.

Most dealers continue to trim

inventory levels and expect sales to continue at about their current pace.
Manufacturing.

Most respondents report moderate input price increases

from a year earlier.

Prices have increased in the past three months but are

expected to stabilize soon.

Firms report no problems in acquiring materials,

although lead times have lengthened.

Most respondents continue trimming

inventories from relatively high levels.

Many plants are operating at full

Labor supply is not a

capacity, with some extending work days or shifts.

problem, although one aircraft manufacturer reported a shortage of experienced
labor.
Energy.

Although district drilling activity remains below year-ago

levels, more stable oil prices and increased exploration for natural gas have
brought some recent improvement to the district's energy industry.

After

increasing sharply in July to 249, the average number of active drilling rigs
in the district increased again to 259 in August.

Exploration and development

activity nonetheless stands about 5 percent below the level of one year ago.
Housing Activity and Finance.
starts down from a year ago.
across the district.

Most district homebuilders report housing

Compared with a month ago, housing starts vary

Most respondents report that construction materials are

available and that prices are generally stable.

New home sales are slow, and

most respondents expect only slight improvement for the rest of the year.
Deposit flows at district savings and loan institutions have mostly held
steady over the past month, although a few respondents have noticed a slight
outflow of funds.

Respondents expect steady deposit flows in coming months,

with slightly increased inflows expected only after press coverage of the new
savings and loan legislation dies down.

Mortgage demand has been down

modestly over the summer months, and respondents expect a further seasonal
decline during the winter.

Respondents report stable mortgage rates and

believe rates will remain steady or drop slightly in the coming months.
Banking.

District bankers report that total loan demand was stable

during the last month, with both consumer loans and commercial and industrial
loans reported as unchanged.

Home mortgages and home equity loans increased,

however, offsetting a decline in commercial real estate lending.
deposits brought declines in loan to deposit ratios.

Increased

Demand deposits declined

during this period, but NOW accounts, MMDAs, and small time and savings
deposits were all steady to slightly higher.

IRA accounts and large

certificates of deposit were largely unchanged.

About half of the respondents

report a reduction in prime rate during the last month, with the other half
reporting no change.

Most respondents expect no further change in bank

lending rates in the near future.
Agriculture.

Plentiful late summer rain is alleviating the severe

drought that affected much of the district during the past year.

In Nebraska

and northern Missouri, where the corn and soybean harvest will begin soon, the
recent rains will boost crop yields.
below average.

Still, yields may be a fourth to a third

In Kansas, the rainfall did not arrive in time to improve

drought-diminished milo yields, and the wet weather may delay the milo
harvest.

Cool, wet weather in southwest Oklahoma has delayed the development

of the cotton crop and left the crop vulnerable to an early frost.

Although

recent rainfall has temporarily halted winter wheat planting in Oklahoma and
could delay planting in Kansas, greater soil moisture will benefit the early
development of the new crop.
The rains have improved range and pasture conditions across most of the
district.

Adequate forage and strong cattle prices are encouraging district

cattle ranchers to expand herds.

The limited supply of young cattle available

is likely to maintain high feeder cattle prices that, in turn, will limit
profits for district cattle feeders.
In the parts of the district where the drought was most severe, bankers
expect a slight decline in farm loan repayment rates.

Well-targeted federal

drought relief, however, will be of greatest benefit to those farmers
suffering the greatest losses.

On balance, agricultural credit conditions in

the district continue to improve.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy is growing slowly.
appears to have ebbed.

Manufacturing expansion

Retail sales are increasing moderately, but more

slowly than earlier in the year.

Auto sales have dipped.

activity continues to show signs of a modest recovery.
drilling upturn is still in place.

Construction

The oil and gas

Prices paid to District agriculturalists

reached their highest August levels since 1980, but crop yields are down.
Orders to District manufacturers are showing slight growth, but
there is great variation across industries.

Although weakness in construction

and automobile manufacturing have made stone, clay and glass sales sluggish,
expansions in chemical plants are stimulating some demand increases along the
Gulf Coast.

Firms in the stone, clay and glass industry that supply

construction are optimistic about rising demand in the coming months.

Lumber

and wood products firms say that sagging homebuilding activity has lately
pushed down orders and they do not expect a recovery in the near future.
Producers of primary metals generally cite slowing sales, slipping prices and
increased foreign competition as recent problems.
variety of cast-metal products are picking up.
producers have been expanding moderately.
risen somewhat during 1989.

Nevertheless, orders for a

Sales by fabricated metals

Demand for oilfield equipment has

Further increases are anticipated and some firms

expect to increase their product prices later this year.

The very recent

patterns of demand for electronics varies widely among products but,
generally, orders have softened.

Past shortages of D-Ram chips have ended,

XI-2

and demand and prices have dipped.

In the computer industry, some upper-end

products remain in strong demand, but lower-end personal computers are said to
be selling poorly.

Chemical firms report some slippage in sales and product

prices, and they say that inventories are somewhat higher than desired.

Sales

at paper and allied products companies are stable but remain a little below a
year earlier.

For apparel firms, demand has remained fairly consistent in

1989, and sales remain above a year earlier.
Retail sales growth has slowed somewhat from earlier this year.
Stores specializing in apparel cite strong year-over-year increases in sales,
while some stores selling other merchandise had less positive reports.
Recent expansion in retail sales appears to be strong in south Texas and the
Houston area.

West Texas sales are soft.

Retailers are generally optimistic

about the future, but they are cautious.
Auto sales are generally weak in the District, but moderate
year-over-year expansion is reported for the Houston area.

Dealers are not

optimistic about sales growth for the next few months and some mentioned the
likelihood of substantial rebates for the 1990 models.
The construction industry is maintaining a mild, but persistent
recovery.

Nonresidential construction has generated nearly all of the gains,

and most nonresidential growth is in plant construction.

The value of

nonbuilding construction, which includes highways and water and sewer systems,
has been declining.

Residential building shows little change overall, but

some expansion has recently occurred in New Mexico.
declines have taken place in Louisiana.

At the same time,

Multifamily residential construction

activity continues to be very weak in much of the District.

Multifamily

XI-3

permits in New Mexico have been greater than those in Texas and Louisiana
combined.

The rate at which residential building permits are issued is

essentially unchanged across the District.
The oil and gas industry continues to recover at a modest rate.
After dipping in July, the District rig count increased again in August.
Drilling in Texas posted year-over-year growth for the first time since June
1988, but drilling in Louisiana and New Mexico is still below year-earlier
levels.

The seismic crew count, considered to be a leading indicator of

drilling activity, edged up slightly in July after four consecutive months of
decline.
strongly.

Also in July, District oil and gas extraction employment grew
The spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil increased in

the first half of August and has since remained at nearly $19 per barrel.
Employment in oil and gas extraction in the District grew strongly in July.
In August, District agricultural product prices rose to their
highest level for an August since 1980 -- largely as the result of rising
livestock prices.

Overall, farm product prices were up 5 percent from a year

earlier and 2 percent from July.

Rising livestock prices were dominated by

sharp increases in beef cattle prices.

Hog, sheep, and broiler prices fell.

Crop prices were 3 percent above a year earlier and were unchanged from July.
Harvesting is well underway throughout the District, but production estimates
for many crops are below last year's.

Estimates for cotton and winter wheat

are down particularly hard, but production of corn, hay, sorghum and soybeans
is expected to increase.

Moisture conditions have generally improved in the

District, but central and south Texas remain dry.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The economy in the West is expanding at a healthy pace. Twelfth District business
leaders' expectations of further growth have improved during the past month. Annual increases
in wages and in the prices of most products are running at or below 5 percent. Consumer
spending growth continues healthy. Apparel sales continue strong, and a pickup in car sales
during August buoyed the generally lackluster sales of durable goods. Manufacturing industries
report generally satisfactory conditions, with little change in exports in recent months. Crop
yields are good in most parts of the District, and exports of many products continue strong.
Lumber mills in the Pacific Northwest still face limited log supplies. Construction and real
estate activity are strong in most of the West, although Arizona remains weak. Western
bankers report increases in loan volume and earnings, and stiff competition for deposits.
Business Sentiment
The most recent information on the economic mood of Twelfth District business leaders
indicates improvement in all categories. Although almost three-quarters of respondents still
expect weak growth in GNP during the next four quarters, expectations for housing starts,
consumer spending, and the trade balance improved markedly during the past month.
Wages and Prices
Annual price increases at or below the 5 percent range are reported for automobiles
(both foreign and domestic), building materials, and natural gas. Respondents note larger price
increases for processed vegetables (up 20 percent), raw stumpage (up 64 percent), and Idaho
potatoes (up 30 percent). Grape and silver prices have fallen in recent months, and easing
capacity constraints for paper manufacturers are putting downward pressure on paper prices.

XII - 2

Recently negotiated union settlements generally call for annual wage increases of 4
percent or less. Exceptions to this trend are nurses and teachers in several western cities who
recently negotiated annual salary increases in the ten percent range. Businesses report difficulty
hiring sufficient qualified labor in many parts of the District, including Oregon, southern Idaho,
and agricultural regions of California.
Trade and Services
Retail sales continue to exhibit healthy growth, with particular strength in apparel sales.
One retailer notes that the primary constraint to expanding his operations is the difficulty of
finding adequate labor in many locations. Sales of durable goods have been less robust,
although a car dealer notes that 1989 models moved well in August as buyers tried to beat the
price increases scheduled for 1990 models. Summer tourist activity is reported to have
increased over last year's level in Idaho, Utah, and southern California.
Manufacturing
Conditions in manufacturing industries generally are satisfactory, with significant
variations by product line and company. One electronic component manufacturer reports that
the order rate is flat, while other high tech firms report strong growth and still others announce
cutbacks and layoffs. A heavy equipment dealer reports that construction machinery sales
throughout the West continue to do "very well." Defense contracting activity continues to slide.
A cable television company faces delays in receiving wiring and materials from manufacturers
because strong demand is creating bottlenecks in existing facilities.
Most Twelfth District manufacturers report little change in exports following the recent
appreciation of the dollar. For example, international demand for aircraft is so strong that
fluctuations in the exchange value of the dollar have little effect on aircraft exports. One

XII - 3
banker notes that current exports were contracted in early August when foreign prices of U.S.
products were more favorable. Nevertheless, an electronic component manufacturer reports
that the dollar value of his export sales has fallen.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Crop yields and product quality are reported to be good in most parts of the District,
although weather conditions have hurt crops in eastern Oregon, Utah, and pockets of
southeastern Idaho. Exports, buoyed by strong demand from Pacific Rim countries, are
reported to be strong for a wide range of agricultural products, including almonds and corn.
However, grain exporters report slow sales following the recent dollar appreciation. Exports of
beef continue to increase, with one Asian country currently negotiating a large order.
The environmental controversy regarding logging of old-growth forests, combined with
continued strong demand for exported logs, has reduced log supplies available to mill owners.
One large mill reports having a 10-month supply in the pipeline, compared with a 24-month
supply a year ago.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity are reported to be strong in most parts of the
West. The pace of activity in Utah, where activity had been weak for several years, appears to
be picking up. Sales and construction activity continue strong in California, Nevada,
Washington, Oregon, Hawaii, and in much of Idaho. Finding trained construction workers is
reported to be troublesome in most of the region. Bidding wars to purchase single-family
homes seen in California a few months ago seem to have moved north to the Puget Sound area
in Washington. However, a southern California developer notes that leasing activity is not
keeping up with the pace of new office building construction. Arizona remains weak, although

XII - 4

the virtual absence of building activity during the past two years has begun to yield net
absorption of commercial and industrial space.
Financial Sector
Twelfth District bankers report generally good conditions and significant earnings
growth. Loan volume is up, with particular strength reported in real estate and mortgage
lending. Deposits continue to shift away from savings and demand deposit accounts and toward
certificates of deposit and money market demand accounts, increasing the cost of funds to
banks. Several bankers note that competition for deposits is stiff, since customers are very
conscious of yields and account fees.

