For use at Noon,
Wednesday
November 1, 1989

Summary of Commentary on

Current

Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

November 1989

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

ON

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

November 1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

.

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1..
First District -- Boston

. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Second District -- New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Third District -- Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I-1
I -1

. II -1

Fourth District -- Cleveland
Fifth District -- Richmond

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IV -1

Sixth District -- Atlanta . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VI-1

Seventh District -- Chicago . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Eighth District -- St. Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII-I

Ninth District -- Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tenth District -- Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Eleventh District -- Dallas

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Twelfth District -- San Francisco .

. VII-1

.

IX -1

. X.

XI-1
XII-1

i

SUMMARY*

The pace of economic growth is reported as slow to moderate in most
Federal Reserve districts.

Consumer spending is mixed, with a number of

districts describing retail sales as steady to growing slowly.

Manufacturing

activity is also mixed, with some districts reporting weakness in orders and
shipments.

Weakness of construction in some markets contrasts with evidence

of some improvement elsewhere.

Resource industries, including the energy

sector, appear to be improving, as is agriculture generally.

Loan demand at

commercial banks continues to vary by region and type of loan.
Consumer Spending
District reports show that retail sales have been mixed across the
country.

Overall retail sales are described as steady to growing slowly in

several districts (Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, and
San Francisco).

Dallas reports a recent acceleration in retail sales

increases, Cleveland notes better-than-expected sales recently, and
Minneapolis says general merchandise spending is strong.
report mixed retail sales results.

Boston and New York

Where specific lines of goods are

mentioned, sales of apparel, basic housewares, and other nondurables are
described as relatively strong.

Sales are weaker for discretionary, big-

ticket items such as furniture, home appliances, and consumer electronics;
auto sales have also been weakening recently.

Retail sales expectations for

the upcoming holiday season are modest in the Boston district, average in the

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and based on information
obtained before October 20, 1989. This document summarizes comments received
from business and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a
commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

ii
Kansas City district, generally positive in the Philadelphia district, and
optimistic in the Cleveland and Dallas districts.

Most businesses in the San

Francisco area have resumed operations since the earthquake, but road closures
and property damage are delaying a complete return to business as usual.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing performance is mixed, both among districts and across
industries.

Philadelphia reports further declines in manufacturing activity,

especially for durable goods, as orders and backlogs fall.

Chicago reports

slower growth, and some declines in orders and sales, for most manufacturers.
Producers of both high-tech and traditional capital goods in the Cleveland
district report slower growth or outright declines in orders and production in
recent months.

Boston reports sales and orders up modestly for most

manufacturers, and Dallas notes a slight expansion overall in its
manufacturing sector.
the West.

San Francisco reports solid manufacturing activity in

Richmond and St. Louis report varied business conditions for their

district manufacturers.

Prices of materials inputs are reported as mostly

stable by four districts, while Richmond reports a slower rise in input
prices.
Significant variations in manufacturing performance also exist across
industries.

Minneapolis says "troubles have continued to mount in the

computer and electronics industries," citing recent employment reductions by
Minnesota computer manufacturers.

But Cleveland notes that orders for office

equipment may be levelling out, following a decline.

And Chicago says the

slowdown in communications equipment demand appears to have bottomed out.
Producers of construction machinery and heavy duty trucks in the Cleveland
district report further slowdowns in orders and sales.

Chicago reports steel

iii
shipments are down as "industrial procurement of steel has peaked," but that
order backlogs will continue to support steel production.

Auto industry

contacts are optimistic about maintaining current assembly schedules, and
shipments of large farm tractors and combines are well above those of a year
ago.

St. Louis reports declines in manufacturing employment in several

sectors, with recent layoffs by makers of autos and home appliances.

San

Francisco reports capacity constraints in commercial aircraft manufacturing
still exist but are no longer worsening.
Construction and Real Estate
Signs of weakness in housing markets in some districts contrast with
some evidence of improvement elsewhere.

Residential construction is showing

signs of weakness in the St. Louis district, with considerable weakening in
Louisville and St. Louis.

Kansas City reports soft housing activity with

starts down and sales stable to down slightly.

Atlanta says residential

construction continues to be slow across the Southeast.
change lately in residential building.

Dallas reports little

Chicago is receiving mixed reports on

residential sales, while Richmond reports stronger demand for mortgage loans
in most parts of its district.

Home sales have picked up somewhat in the

Boston district, due partly to lower prices and creative financing.

New York

reports strong demand for new housing in Buffalo and Syracuse, but an
abundance of resale homes weakens the market in the New York metropolitan
area.
Nonresidential construction activity also varies among districts.

Signs

of weakness in nonresidential building are present in the St. Louis district.
Office construction continues to be slow in the Atlanta district, but some
manufacturing plant expansions are underway.

Construction is holding up well

iv
in much of the Chicago district, as evidenced by strength in shipments of
construction materials.
high level.

Commercial building in downtown Chicago remains at a

Dallas reports a mild improvement in nonresidential building.

Office vacancy rates, though still high, are falling in most cities in the
Dallas district, and industrial vacancy rates are also falling.

Office

leasing activity has picked up recently in the New York district, especially
in midtown Manhattan.

Construction and real estate activity have been strong

in the San Francisco district, except in Arizona.
Resource Industries and Tourism
Conditions appear to be improving in some resource industries, including
the energy sector.

Minneapolis reports a good year for mining, especially

copper mining, and continued expansion for the lumber industry.

Both Dallas

and Kansas City report further gradual expansion in oil and gas drilling
activity.

Exploration and development activity are significantly above the

year-ago level in the Kansas City district.
increase in its drilling rig count.

Dallas reports a slow steady

All of the increase has been in Texas,

with declines elsewhere in the district.

A turnaround is expected in

Louisiana and New Mexico along with further growth in Texas.
Minneapolis reports moderately strong tourist activity.

Yellowstone

National Park received a large number of visitors this summer, but their
spending was lower than expected.

Tourist activity in the Richmond district

is up from a year ago in spite of Charleston's lost business due to Hurricane
Hugo.

With about 85 percent of the city's hotels reopened, however, bookings

for the fall are about the same as a year ago.
Agriculture
Conditions in the farm sector generally continue to improve.

The fall

v

harvest brought better than expected crop yields to the Chicago district,
especially in Iowa.

While cool, wet weather delayed the harvest of cotton and

soybeans in the St. Louis district, other fall crops were harvested on
schedule.

Fall crop yields were average to above average in the Kansas City

district, where good prices for wheat and feeder cattle are maintaining farm
incomes.

Minneapolis reports generally good agricultural conditions and notes
Soil moisture

that the Montana range recovered well from last year's drought.

conditions have improved for much of the Dallas district, but parts of
In the

southern and central Texas still have serious drought problems.

Richmond district, yields were excellent for most fall crops, farm income
prospects are bright, and land prices are steady to rising in most areas.
Hurricane Hugo severely affected the agricultural sectors of North and South
Carolina, bringing extensive damage to crops and structures as well as
considerable destruction of livestock and poultry.

Total damage to the farm

sector in both states has been estimated at nearly $1.2 billion.
Banking
Loan demand at commercial banks continues to vary by region and type of
loan.

Demand for business and real estate loans has been slow to moderate at

small and medium-sized banks in the New York district.

Philadelphia reports

strong growth in most types of lending at major banks, but growth in consumer
loans and real estate loans is expected to slow soon.

Slow-growing or steady

loan demand is noted by Cleveland, Richmond, and Kansas City.

Atlanta reports

slightly higher--but still slow--demand for most consumer and business loans;
real estate and auto loans are weak.
by large banks is growing.

In the St. Louis district, total lending

San Francisco reports strong growth in

construction loan activity during recent weeks.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District held steady in September.
Most retail respondents experienced little sales growth.

A majority of

manufacturers reported that sales and orders are up modestly from year-ago
levels.

Prices are generally stable, and firms are concentrating on

cutting costs through efficiency gains, in some cases by reducing their
work force.

A "conservative" outlook dominates.

Retail
First District retailers report mixed sales results through the
month of September.

They found demand essentially flat relative to

year-ago levels for discretionary items, such as autos, major appliances,
outdoor equipment, and upscale apparel and housewares.

The movement of

basic hardware and household goods improved, and discount store apparel
sales were reportedly brisk.
Wholesale prices are generally stable or up a few percent, with the
exception of a sharp increase for autos.

Because retail trade in upscale

and big-ticket items remains highly competitive, heavy promotions and
margin reductions have kept prices for such goods at or below last year's
levels.
Retailers report continuing reductions in their operating expenses.
Respondents have improved inventory management; thus, despite slow sales,
all are comfortable with their current stock levels.

At the larger

outlets, computerized labor scheduling has become commonplace in just one
year.

Major efforts are now underway to "quicken response" to consumer

demand, largely through sophisticated communications systems linking
stores, warehouses, buyers, and suppliers.

Layoffs of headquarters

personnel have also reduced costs at some retail chains.

Current capital

spending plans generally aim at improving efficiency rather than expanding
operations.
Most retailers surveyed have modest expectations for the upcoming
Christmas season, reflecting the pace of current operations.

One

respondent expects a "battle," while another sees a "bumpy road" ahead.
Two chains, currently doing quite well, are very optimistic about the
fourth quarter.
Manufacturing
Among First District manufacturing contacts, sales are 3 to 10
percent ahead of year-ago levels.

A majority of respondents report that

orders are also up by 4 to 10 percent, but a minority characterize new
orders as flat, down or disappointing.

Firms in or serving the computer,

auto, or financial services industries faced weakest markets.

Overseas

demand continues stronger than domestic according to several contacts.
Inventories are generally in satisfactory condition, and employment
is stable or declining at most firms contacted.

Several respondents plan

to reduce employment even further - to put their companies in "fighting
trim."

Most contacts report achieving productivity gains by consolidating

management and some manufacturing facilities.
Capital expenditures remain on target for most First District
respondents.

Among contacts discussing their plans for 1990, three expect

capital spending to remain flat or decline while one anticipates a big
increase.

Current spending emphasizes equipment rather than plant;

however, one machinery company is building R & D facilities in New England.
First District manufacturers report that input prices are rising
less than 5 percent and that materials prices, other than those for copper
and tungsten, have stabilized.

While a few respondents were able to raise

their selling prices by 3 to 5 percent, the rest report that their sales
prices were flat to down.

They cite competition and excess industry

capacity.
The outlook among First District manufacturers ranges from "sober"
to "cautiously optimistic."

A minority expects a recession in 1990.

Residential Real Estate
Among First District realtors surveyed, a majority report some
pick-up in sales activity compared with levels prevailing during the summer
or at this time last year.

They cite lower prices and creative financing

as the major explanations.

Condominium prices have softened most.

Realtors expect the current pace of sales activity to continue through the
winter in the "best buyers' market in twenty years," as one agent described
it.

Contacts at First District firms outside the real estate sector

expressed concern that public perceptions regarding the weakness of the
regional real estate market are overblown and may prove damaging for other
industries.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

A mixed pattern of developments continued in the Second District economy
during recent weeks.

Unemployment rates were at or below the national level, though

above levels recorded early this year, and the pace of office leasing picked up.
Sales at department stores and homebuilding activity varied across the District.
Demand for commercial business and real estate loans at small and medium-sized banks
was moderate to slow.
Consumer Spending
Sales results at District department stores were mixed during September.
Most respondents reported that sales fell below targeted levels, although a few
experienced demand that met or exceeded plan.

Some chain retailers noted a recent

slowdown in the northeast in general relative to the rest of the nation.

Over-the-

year sales changes in September ranged from -1.0 percent to +13.2 percent among
District retail contacts.

Children's back-to-school items were the biggest sellers

followed by women's and junior apparel.

However, sales of big ticket items like

furniture and rugs remained weak and women's and men's accessories also moved slowly.
With the exception of one chain that had stocks somewhat above desired
levels, department store contacts described their current inventories as being in
good shape.

Most said they would continue a close monitoring of stocks because

their outlook is not particularly optimistic.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
The pace of homebuilding activity continues to vary across the District.
Demand for new housing remains strong in upstate New York communities such as
Buffalo and Syracuse where current activity is comparable to the relatively high
levels of 1988.

A glut of homes for resale continues to plague much of the New York

II-2

metropolitan area, however, with price markdowns and other concessions increasingly
being offered.

One notable exception is a New Jersey developer that builds

relatively low-priced housing, primarily for first-time buyers:

in one of its

subdivisions 130 new homes recently sold over the course of a single weekend, ana
hundreds of phone calls were received at the company's main office regarding another
new 1200-unit development before the on-site sales office was actually opened.
Office leasing activity picked up recently in the District.

The vacancy

rate declined in midtown Manhattan as activity reached its highest level this year.
Leasing activity has also been strong in some other areas of the District as well.
Opinions are mixed concerning what lies ahead, however.

Several very large leases

are reportedly under negotiation by companies seeking new headquarters in midtown
Manhattan, but with 17 more office buildings scheduled for completion there over the
next two years, it is unclear what will happen to the vacancy rate in coming
months.

The opposite pattern holds in downtown Manhattan.

The vacancy rate has

risen in the past few months as further consolidations at brokerage firms have
occurred.

However, no new buildings are planned in that area after this year.

Other Reports on Business Activity
District unemployment rates are currently at or below the national level
with September readings of 5.4 percent in New York and 4.6 percent in New Jersey.
Nonetheless, rates in both states have risen in recent months.

Because of virtually

no increase in District employment over the last several months and its rising
unemployment rates, some recent articles have voiced concern that the region will
face a rerun of the stagnant employment picture of the 1970s without some
improvement in its business climate.
Some 40 percent of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester reported
improved business conditions in September, up from 33 percent in the previous
surveys.

Substantially more firms reported an improvement than reported a

II-3

deterioration, although the number of firms in both cities reporting worse conditions
increased.

With regard to the outlook, a recent survey of 550 chief executives of

medium-sized firms in the region found that 88 percent plan either to expand their
businesses or to maintain current employment levels during 1990.
Several new developments were announced or undertaken since the last report.
Ford Motor Company plans to spend $285 million retooling its Edison, New Jersey,
plant for producing pickup trucks instead of small cars.

Also in New Jersey, ground

was broken for a $250 million pharmaceutical research facility at the Schering-Plough
campus in Kenilworth.

In Yonkers, New York, a Japanese-owned rail car manufacturer

was awarded a $170 million contract to build the first 132 subway cars for a new mass
transit system under construction in Taiwan.

The three-year-old plant has already

done work for local transit companies and is currently working on contracts to build
rail coaches for Massachussetts and "people-mover" cars for the Las Vegas airport.
Financial Developments
Demand for commercial business and real estate loans at small- and mediumsized banks in the Second District has been moderate to slow in recent weeks.

Half

of the respondents surveyed reported slow demand, citing concern about the economy
and a weak local real estate market.

None reported strong demand for commercial

loans and all stated that the recent leveling off of interest rates had had no
appreciable effect on demand.

Most respondents anticipate that the demand for these

loans will continue to be slow to moderate through the first half of 1990.
No bankers reported a change in the short-term to long-term loan mix. Most
stated that the majority of their loans were short to intermediate-term (less than 5
years), with commercial real estate loans comprising the bulk of long-term loan
portfolios. of all the banks surveyed, only one purchased merger and acquisition
loans on the secondary market.

A representative from this bank said that each deal

is examined separately because of the risk with highly leveraged transactions.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District vary among sectors, with overall
activity apparently flattening out from growth earlier this year. Manufacturers
indicate continued declines in business, with new orders and backlogs edging
down, leading area firms to trim employment.

Retailers report just steady sales

in recent weeks, overall, with gains in apparel sales being offset by weakness
in hard goods. Automobile dealers are experiencing a drop-off in sales following
strong results during the model-year closeout period.

Bankers report that

lending has advanced in all categories.
Expectations in the Third District business community, on balance, are that
activity will be relatively flat well into next year.

Manufacturers generally

anticipate a bottoming out of the industrial downturn during the next six months,
but they do not foresee a significant rebound. Retailers express some optimism
that sales will be good during the holiday shopping season but they expect dollar
sales in 1990 to run just even with this year's pace, at least through spring.
Automobile dealers expect a lower sales rate for the rest of this year and all
of next year.

Bankers expect personal lending to slow as consumption spending,

especially

for automobiles

anticipate

a significant

and other

slowdown in

durables,

flattens

real estate

lending

out.

They also

as

they reduce

commitments to commercial developers and as long-term, nonbank financing becomes
more difficult to obtain, as well.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity

in

the Third District

continues

to

decline,

according to local firms contacted in late September and early October.

This

marks the fourth consecutive month in which manufacturing contacts report slowing

III-2

business, on balance.

The slowdown is predominantly affecting durable goods

producers while nondurable goods makers generally indicate they are operating
at a steady rate.

Overall, half of the local manufacturers contacted recently

said business was stable while nearly 3 in 10 said business was falling off and
only 2 in 10 noted improvement.
In the region's manufacturing sector as a whole, shipments were running
at a steady rate; however, new orders were falling slightly, leading to a drop
in order backlogs.

In line with the slackening order situation, delivery times

were being reduced, continuing a trend that began in January.
front, two-thirds
steady.

of the firms polled for this

On the employment

report were holding payrolls

On balance, however, both workers and hours were being cut in October.

Industrial prices in the region are moving up but at a slackening pace,
according to local manufacturers. While increases are still noted, three-fourths
of the firms responding to recent inquiries said prices of both the goods they
purchase and the products they make were stable.

In general, indications of

price increases in the region's goods-producing sector have been fading since
January.
Looking ahead, managers at plants in the region say the current business
downturn could end within the next six months.

Nearly 4 in 10 of those contacted

for this report said business should stabilize over the winter, and the rest were
about evenly divided between those expecting activity to turn up and those
anticipating further deterioration.

On balance, Third District manufacturing

executives foresee a level rate of new orders and marginal gains in shipments.
Nevertheless, area firms plan further cuts both in employment and in working
hours and they foresee no changes in the rate of capital spending.

III-3

RETAIL
Retail sales in the Third District were running at just a steady pace

overall in early October, according to local merchants, with results varying
among types of stores and goods.

Discount stores were making better year-over-

year gains than department stores and apparel sales were described as good, but
other specialty merchants said sales results were falling below expectations.

In particular, electronics and consumer durables were weak.
Third District merchants have generally positive expectations for sales
during the holiday season. They anticipate a fairly healthy improvement in sales
for the period, compared to last year, despite lackluster current performance.
For next year, however, they are not so optimistic.

Most expect little or no

gain over 1988 sales, in dollar terms.
Automobile dealers in the Third District report that sales in September
and October slumped after a strong summer.

Both domestic and import dealers

indicate that buyers took advantage of model-year-end incentives and that 1990
models have not been selling well.

The consensus among area dealers is that

sales in the last quarter of this year and all of 1990 will run below the rate
of the last two years.

Dealers, whose profit margins have been squeezed all

year, are stepping up cost-cutting efforts, and some have started laying off
employees.

Inventories are described as under control as a result of the

clearing out of 1989 models and restrained ordering of 1990 models.
FINANCE
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks in September
stood around 14 percent above the year-ago level as a result of strong growth
in most types of lending.

According to lending officers at commercial banks,

business lending gained in September from loans to management buyouts of units

III-4

of

large corporations and from mergers and acquisitions among middle market

companies.

Bankers said this type of financing was still active in October,

despite the uncertainties in financial markets.
Lending to consumers has advanced strongly at area banks since July, fueled
by indirect auto lending and home equity loans, according to bankers.

Other

kinds of personal lending, such as credit card and installment loans, have not
been gaining as vigorously.

Consequently, bankers expect growth in personal

loans to ease if the recent drop in auto sales becomes a trend.
Real estate lending continued on a strong upward trend in September but
bankers contacted in October said they do not expect this growth to continue.
Some said they have cut down sharply on commitments for construction loans
recently and others noted that real estate developers are starting to experience
difficulty

in obtaining

the nonbank

financing that

complete the funding for development projects.

is usually

required to

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Economists who attended this Banks' outlook meeting on October

20 expect that growth of output will be sustained at least through the end of
1990, accompanied by very little moderation in inflation.

Retailers are

cautiously optimistic over sales for the balance of this year.

They note

consumers are highly responsive to sales promotions, which supported apparel
and new car sales in recent months.

Reports from capital goods firms suggest

easing from peak rates of activity early this year.

Growth of bank loans

continues to be relatively slow, and some respondents view the latest easing
in the federal funds rate as being too accommodative, but probably not enough
to result in a reduction in bank lending rates.
Economic Prospects.

Economists who met at this bank recently to discuss

the economic outlook for 1990 still expect that the economy will continue to
grow at below its potential growth rate through most of next year, but the
rate of inflation will hardly improve from this year.

The 25 forecasters

expect real GNP growth this quarter at about a 1.4% annual rate (a.r.), at a
1.7% a.r. in the first half of 1990, and at 2.5% in the second half.

The GNP

implicit price deflator is expected to increase at a 4.5% a.r. this quarter,
4.2% in the first half of 1990, and 4.0% in the second half.

Several of

the group asserted that it is difficult to achieve a lower inflation rate
because of regulations that contributed to rapid increases in services
prices.

The output and price outlooks were virtually unchanged from June,

except that there appeared to be more uncertainty over the outlook now than
last June.

Only two forecasters still expect a mild contraction in 1990,

IV-2

while the few who previously expected a contraction now expect mild growth in
output through 1990.

The latest drop in stock prices was judged to have

little, if any, negative effect on consumer or business spending.
Consumer Spending.

Most retailers appear cautiously optimistic about

sales prospects for the balance of this year.

They pointed out that the

better-than-expected retail sales in recent months were not across-the-board.
Retailers noted the sensitivity of consumer spending to sales promotions,
A national

which stimulated sales of apparel and new cars in recent months.

retailer reported year-to-year sales increases in consumer appliances, but
only because of aggressive pricing that apparently weakened sales of a
regional chain of appliance stores. A national retail chain plans much larger
inventories for this holiday season than last year.
Retailers of domestic and imported new cars reported mixed consumer
behavior in August and September.

A few dealers of domestic cars reported

their sales in September were "very good," which greatly improved their
inventory position.

A few other dealers, however, reported flat sales and

price incentives were insufficient to reduce their inventories.

October sales

so far have been lackluster, and most auto dealers appear reluctant to carry
large inventories of 1990 models.
Capital Goods.

Producers of both high-tech and traditional capital goods

producers reported either a slower growth or outright declines in orders and
production in recent months.

Orders for office machinery have fallen from

both export and domestic customers, according to a major producer.

A

materials supplier to the electronics and office equipment industries
reported that the decline in orders appears to have leveled out, although

IV-3

Their operating rate has been reduced by about

orders have not turned up yet.

5 percentage points from last year.

A high-tech producer of industrial

controls reports that orders and shipments last quarter were the best so far
this year, partly because of new products and also because of a catch-up in
deliveries from earlier this year, when shortages of computer chips caused
shipment delays.

Declines in orders for communication equipment since

mid-1988 apparently ended, but further declines for electronic components are
expected into 1990, according to another producer.
Some traditional capital goods producers report a more-than-expected
slowdown in business.

Construction machinery sales have been slackening in

response to weakening in residential and nonresidential construction.
Heavy-duty truck orders, which were at peak levels late last year and early
this year because of anticipated price increases, slumped during the summer
months and did not revive in September as much as expected, suggesting a
relatively soft first quarter production schedule.
Financial Conditions.

Bank directors and economists generally report

slow demand for loans, although loans at a moderate-size bank rose 9% last
quarter from a year earlier.

Bank profits last quarter ranged from

satisfactory to very good, according to bank respondents.

A bank economist

commented that the Federal Reserve has been very accommodative in response to
the latest stock market decline.

The easing in the federal funds rate was

interpreted by one economist as inconsistent with bringing the inflation rate
down.

In his view, interest rates are unlikely to come down much until the

inflation rate is reduced.

Some bank economists expect that bank lending

rates not be adjusted downward until the fed funds rate eases to about 8.5%.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
The performance of the District economy in late September and early
October showed little change from a month earlier, although the impact of
Hurricane Hugo was clearly evident.

Retail sales, which rose somewhat

overall, were strong in some categories and weak in others.

Manufacturing

activity was also mixed and about unchanged on balance following a small
increase in August.
loan demand.

Most District financial institutions reported steady

The tourist industry expects a good fall season, with hotel and

motel bookings above those of last year, although hurricane damage and the
publicity surrounding it may have a negative impact in some local areas in
South Carolina.

The District agricultural sector as a whole should finish

the year strong, despite considerable damage in the Carolinas.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that retail sales in the District rose
in the first part of October.

Department store sales were up after being

flat in September, but sales of big ticket items were unchanged.
increasing in September, car sales fell in early October.

After

Most retailers

expect their sales to rise in the next six months.
Manufacturing
Respondents to our regular manufacturing survey reported mixed activity
in September following a small increase in August.

(Many of our usual

respondents from South Carolina did not respond to this survey.)

Shipments

and new orders were up slightly, unfilled orders and employment were down,
and the length of the workweek and new export orders were flat.

Prices for

finished goods and raw materials continued to rise, but at a slower rate than

V-2
in August.

Inventories of materials and finished goods were largely

unchanged.
District manufacturers were somewhat more optimistic than in August
about prospects for growth in their businesses in the next six months.
Respondents who expect increases in sales, new orders, and employment
outnumbered those who expect declines.

However, more manufacturers

anticipate decreases than increases in unfilled orders and the length of the
workweek.
The effects of Hurricane Hugo on the industrial base of South Carolina
and North Carolina appear to be small.

Most textile plants were not located

in the path of the storm, and we have no reports of damage to furniture
plants, although Hugo traveled directly through some of the major furniture
production areas of the Carolinas and Virginia.
Power outages did reduce industrial production somewhat.

For example,

furniture production in North Carolina, where about 25 percent of U.S.
furniture is manufactured, declined about 1 to 2 percent during September.
Pulp and paper production was also reduced somewhat by power outages and,
apparently, because some logging roads were temporarily impassable.
Ports
Reports received from the three major District ports--Hampton Roads
(Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore--showed imports were higher in September
than in August at Hampton Roads and Baltimore, but were lower at Charleston
where the port was closed for five days because of the hurricane.

The export

picture was mixed with shipments slightly higher at Baltimore, lower at
Charleston and about the same at Hampton Roads.
Tourism
A telephone survey of hotels, motels, resorts, and divisions of tourism
indicated that tourist activity was above that of last fall.

About half of

V-3
the respondents indicated increased activity while about one-fourth
experienced declines.

About two-fifths of the hotels and motels reported an

increase in fall bookings when compared to last year, and the remaining
three-fifths saw little change.

Approximately two-thirds of the respondents

expect tourist activity in the coming months to be better than usual and none
of the respondents expect declines.
According to South Carolina's Division of Travel and Tourism
Development, 85 percent of the hotels in the Charleston area have reopened.
About one-third of the hotel business for the month was lost because of the
hurricane.

Fall bookings are about the same as last year.

Financial
A telephone survey of financial institutions indicated that demand for
commercial and industrial loans remained steady over the last thirty days.
Most lenders reported no change in the rate of loan growth from a month ago,
though a few reported slight increases or decreases.
The demand for home mortgage loans appeared to strengthen in most parts
of the District in the last thirty days, although reports from the
Washington, D.C. area were mixed.

Elsewhere in the District, a few lenders

reported a slight downturn in mortgage loan activity, but the majority said
that the demand for mortgage loans was at or above the levels of the previous
month.
Agriculture
With the fall harvest nearly complete, yields for most crops appear
excellent.

Recent rainfall across the District has not hampered harvest

activity substantially, but has caused delays in the fall planting of small
grains.

Prospects for 1989 farm income generally appear bright, though the

impact of hurricane damage in the Carolinas is not yet fully known.

Farmland

prices are reported to be steady or rising in most areas of the District.

Hurricane Hugo did extensive damage to the agricultural sectors in both
South Carolina and North Carolina.

In South Carolina, USDA estimates total

crop losses at roughly $80 million, with cotton, corn, and soybeans all hard
hit.

Structural damage totaled about $270 million.

Estimates of livestock

damage were incomplete, but thousands of head of cattle and hogs were
reportedly destroyed, along with 2.7 million chickens and turkeys.

Overall

losses to the South Carolina farm sector are believed to be close to
$1 billion.
In North Carolina, USDA estimates total crop losses were near $40
million,

with corn accounting for about half of the total.

losses were also approximately $40 million.
in the vicinity of $175 million.

Poultry industry

Total damage is estimated to be

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

Although economic activity in the Southeast has moderated in the

past few months, there are few indications of any further slowing and most contacts
expressed optimism for the remainder of the year. Manufacturing is continuing to show
signs of strength in textiles and apparel, petrochemicals, and paper, while transportation
equipment, construction and construction materials remain weak.

Consumer spending

remains relatively stable with most contacts indicating increases smaller than earlier
this year and smaller than for the same period last year. Sales of household durables,
especially furniture, continue to be soft with no improvement expected.

While our

contacts continue to mention substantial increases in the cost of health care benefits,
most reported only modest wage or price pressures.

Exporters, importers and port

representatives agree that the recent rise in the value of the dollar has had and is likely
to have little impact on economic activity.
Prices and Wages:

Contacts indicate no generalized wage pressures although a

few cases of upward pressure for entry-level workers were mentioned.

A survey of

Nashville manufacturers revealed that some labor supply problems are beginning to
appear for quality skilled workers, but they do not appear to be serious and have not
resulted in wage pressures.

A few manufacturers, however, indicated that the key to

obtaining new workers seems to lie in the fringe benefits offered.

Several contacts

report trouble in finding skilled workers in trucking and engineering.

In settling recent

labor contracts, several firms reported that the cost of health care benefits remains high
and is still increasing rapidly. They do not expect any slowing soon.
Several manufacturers are reporting falling prices for inputs such as freight
charges and raw materials.

The price of resins used in plastic goods has fallen steadily

this year and continues to decline.

Other producers, specifically producers of paper

products, are indicating stable input prices and note no change in the price of their final

VI-2
product in the past six months, with none expected for the rest of the year. In contrast,
several land and air freight firms report a recent rise in fuel costs. An air freight firm
revealed that jet fuel prices have risen unexpectedly recently, and several trucking firms
noted increased fuel costs.

Even so, major carriers and independents alike still feel

compelled to offer discounts on freight rates of 30 to 40 percent.

Price competition

among freight carriers is reported to be fierce.
Financial Services:

Several bankers have reported that both consumer and

business loan demand remain slow but slightly up from last month. Real estate and auto
loans remain weak throughout the Sixth District. One banker in Atlanta pointed out that
the slow commercial loan demand reflects caution on the part of business given the
uncertain economic outlook.

Loan quality seems to be improving as banks establish

tighter loan standards, particularly for real estate development.
Consumer Spending:

Retail sales in Alabama and Tennessee are holding up well,

and Florida retailers report that sales are quite strong. Strength is apparent for apparel
and nondurable goods; demand for big ticket items is slow.

A furniture retailer reports

that sales have fallen recently and are down seven percent from a year ago.
unusual because October is normally a strong month.

This is

Smaller retailers in Miami,

however, say that sales were slow all summer and remain so. Auto sales have been weak
for the past several months across the Southeast, and while some dealers said that sales
recently were unexpectedly strong because of rebates and other incentives, they added
that these additional sales had probably come at the expense of sales next year.

A few

dealers noted that sales of domestic autos had been stronger than of foreign autos.
Construction:

Office and residential construction has been slow across the

Southeast for most of this year, and builders expect no pickup soon. Bankers report that
real estate loans have been growing slowly.

Builders in Nashville report a five year

supply of houses, although they say that vacant office space is being absorbed and the
supply is now below two years.

Although the housing market is also slow in Florida,

VI-3
demand for homes above $500,000 is still very strong. A builder in Birmingham pointed
out that most industrial buildings are full and that he is planning to build several on
speculation.
Manufacturers still are willing to expand capacity in the Sixth District. A large
paper firm in Louisiana has announced a substantial modernization program to begin next
year, while a new textile plant will be opening on the site of a plant abandoned in 1986.
Several chemical firms in Louisiana and Florida have recently announced plans to expand
existing plants next year. Although the oil and gas industry has started to turn around,
firms supplying drilling equipment are still delaying plans to expand capacity until the
strength of the industry's recovery becomes clear.
Exports, Imports, and the Dollar:

Few contacts have reported that the recent

fluctuations in the value of the dollar have affected their businesses much. A shipper of
grains and soybeans noted that foreign subsidy programs had more impact on trade than
did changes in the value of the dollar. A dealer in chemicals and fertilizers added that
foreign restrictions on trade were more important in determining his volume of exports
than were exchange rate fluctuations.

An exporter of sugar said that the dollar's

appreciation has had no effect on his volume of trade. A producer of plastic containers
does not expect the higher dollar to affect his business.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Indicators of economic activity in the District remain more subdued than last
year. Growth of employment in District states since late 1988 has trailed the nation.
Manufacturing employment declined from early 1989 levels, but rose in August. Reports from
contacts with manufacturers generally show slower gains in business volume or declines, in
some cases from high levels. Farm equipment sales, in contrast, are registering large gains.
Many large industrial investment projects reportedly remain on the agenda. But slower growth
in various industries raises concern that increases may continue to taper off, leading to
downturns in these industries and at suppliers. Construction activity continues relatively strong
in the region. General merchandise sales are rising, albeit slowly, and credit delinquencies do
not signal deterioration, overall, in ability to pay. The District's fall harvest, aided by ideal
weather conditions, is generating "better than expected" crop yields.
Manufacturing. The trend for most manufacturers contacted was toward slower growth
in orders and sales, with some noting declines. A producer of electrical controls and power
supplies sold to machinery markets has seen a small further rise in orders this year following
strong increases last year. Orders for electrical equipment from metals producers have been
slightly lower following very large orders last year. Electrical equipment prices were little
changed. A manufacturer of capital goods noted slower orders for some types, including defense
equipment, petroleum equipment, food packaging machinery, and material handling equipment.
A diversified producer of consumer products and of supplies widely used in industry reported a
further tapering off of growth in its sales. A slowdown in communications equipment demand
appears to have bottomed. Shipments of corrugated containers are estimated to have continued
to expand slowly through September; investments, mostly incremental enhancements of existing
facilities, are bringing capacity on-line more rapidly than growth of sales, exerting downward
pressures on prices. Sales of large farm tractors and combines continue well above year-ago
levels.

VII-2
Shipments of steel were expected to be below a year earlier in the second half, after being
higher in the first half of 1989. Industrial procurement of steel has peaked, as a large number of
large projects moved off of drawing boards to the procurement stage in 1988 and early 1989.
There are now fewer big projects being started, but numerous smaller ones. This has resulted in
a peaking and subsequent easing of pressures on available capacity, but many projects remain
underway, and this backlog will tend to support activity in the months ahead.
The outlook for steel also reflects an expectation that automakers will produce close to
announced schedules for the rest of this year. Contacts in the auto industry were optimistic
about maintaining reduced assembly schedules. These production cuts are being reflected at
parts plants in the District.
Construction and Real Estate. Construction activity is holding up well in much of the
District. Shipments of portland cement to the Midwest have been relatively strong, with
metropolitan areas where building picked up earlier, such as Chicago, remaining at high levels
but not growing as before, while less heavily populated areas have been catching up. Michigan,
however, is slowing. Shipments of gypsum board to District states have registered larger gains
from a year ago than nationwide. Strength in gypsum board shipments reflects not only finishing
work on new construction projects but also the continued high level of renovation activity.
Construction activity on downtown Chicago commercial buildings is still at a high level and is
expected to remain vigorous, based on building plans and demolition activity. Building of light
industrial structures continues at a good pace in Chicago suburbs. Highway work has been
strong in the metro area this year.
Reports on residential sales are mixed. Some realtors indicate relatively good volumes of
business following declines in mortgage interest rates from peaks last spring, but others view
sales as sluggish. There are indications of weakening in housing prices. Some realtors regard
property sales as soft partly because sellers have exaggerated views of what their properties are
worth. Affordability is a problem for many would-be buyers. On the other hand, houses that are
selling include numerous larger and more expensive properties.

VII-3
Consumer Spending. General merchandise retail sales in early October, on a
comparable-selling-days basis, were showing modest gains from a year earlier, according to a
contact with a large chain. Some durable goods were selling well, including washers and dryers,
refrigerators, home electronics, and computers. Sales of other product lines, including home
improvements and home fashions, were weak. Children's apparel was selling well. Credit sales
continued strong, with no deterioration in delinquencies.
Agriculture. Ideal weather conditions the past three weeks have helped to dry crops and
speed up both the fall harvest and the planting of winter wheat. The corn and soybean harvest,
as of October 15, ranged from two-thirds complete in Illinois and Iowa to one-third complete in
Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin. Despite frost damage in some areas, numerous reports note
"better-than-expected" yields, especially in Iowa.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy continues to grow slowly.
unemployment

levels

has fallen in

in

several District states, manufacturing

several sectors,

construction are

showing

and both residential

signs

of weakness.

the

commercial

harvest
banks,

of

some

District

especially

for real

crops.

of manufactured

Cool, wet weather has

Total

estate,

employment

and nonresidential

Exports

goods, however, have been strong in recent months.
slowed

Despite record low

lending

increased

in

by

large

the

third

quarter.
Employment
Unemployment

rates

in

Arkansas,

their lowest levels of the decade.
result of its

Kentucky and Missouri dropped
While

the drop in

to

Missouri was the

labor force falling more rapidly than total employment,

the

declines in Arkansas and Kentucky reflected moderate employment growth.
Largely

because

of

the

recall

unemployment rate also hit
however,

that the

of 4,000

auto workers,

a 10-year low of 5 percent.

Louisville

economy has

the

St.

Louis

Contacts report,

been weakening

for

several

months.
Manufacturing
District manufacturers

report varied business conditions, with most

expecting flat to slow growth through year-end 1989.
apparel

manufacturers

contacted

Christmas-related production.

reported

unusually

None of the District
large

increases

in

In fact, many apparel manufacturers are

VIII-2

experiencing declines
early 1990.

in

orders,

but most expect business to increase

A fleecewear manufacturer plans to open a plant in

in

Arkansas

that will hire 600 workers immediately and 1,400 more in the future.
In

the

durables

inventory levels.
in new orders.
make additions

sector,

most

manufacturers

Most manufacturers have no plans to hire new workers or
to physical capacity over the next three months.
recent

Louis will

beginning

October

lay

off approximately

20

to

reduce

Several

months to reduce inventories,

and more layoffs are scheduled through year-end.
St.

satisfactory

Many are experiencing declining backlogs and slowdowns

industries have laid off workers in

in

report

One auto assembly plant

3,000 workers

inventories

of

for

four weeks

slow-selling

models.

Several analysts expect total District employment in the automobile sector
to hold steady or decline through the rest of 1989 as higher prices for
1990 model cars

depress

report declining sales

sales.

District home

and layoffs,

citing higher 1989

lagging home sales and economic uncertainty
postponing major purchases.

appliance manufacturers
interest rates,

as the reasons consumers are

Most manufacturers who export indicated that

exports were up over last year and that sales have not been affected by
recent exchange rate changes.
Construction
Considerable weakening in single-family homebuilding was noted by
contacts

in August and September in

the Louisville and St.

Louis markets,

with further weakening expected through the end of the year and into 1990.
Industry contacts report that some home builders in St. Louis are cutting
sales prices by as much as 15 percent.

The construction of multi-family

dwellings in St. Louis and Louisville also continues to be weak.
comparable

periods,

1989

construction has been less

Using

than half of 1988

VIII-3

Consequently,

construction.

vacancy rates

incentives for renters are available.

are

and

declining

fewer

No further decline is expected in

multi-family building in the St. Louis area next year.

Despite a recent

surge, the growth of District nonresidential building contracts was weaker
than at the national level compared with last year.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
The harvest of the District's corn, tobacco and sorghum crops

is

keeping pace with the average rate of harvest over the past five years,
but cotton and
District.
states
states.

and

soybean harvesting are behind normal over most of the

Cool, wet weather has slowed soybean maturity in most District
caused harvest delays

in

some

of

the District's

southern

Industry contacts expect that low water levels on the Mississippi

River will cause

only a slight slowdown

in grain movement

this

fall.

District coal production is down slightly compared with a year ago, while
U.S. coal production continues to run slightly ahead of last year's pace.
Banking
Total loans at the 12 largest District banks increased more rapidly
in the third quarter than for the same period one year ago.

Spurred by

exceptionally strong real estate growth in August and September,

real

estate loans passed commercial loans as the largest component of total
loans at these banks.

For the third quarter, real estate lending grew at

almost twice the rate registered during the same period last year, while
commercial lending declined over the period.

Finally, consumer lending

increased during the three months ending in September, showing continued
recovery from the declines of one year ago.

IX - 1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth

District

economic

conditions

have

been

employment situation in the district was fairly good.

fairly

good.

The

Despite layoffs caused

by the restructuring and size reduction of the computer industry in Minnesota,
the unemployment rate in Minnesota has declined. Consumer spending on general
merchandise has been strong, automobile sales have continued their recovery
from low levels earlier in the year, and housing activity has shown signs of
Conditions in resource-related industries have been fairly good.

improvement.

Employment
The district employment situation has been fairly good.

The unem-

ployment rate in Minnesota in August was 3.9 percent, 0.1 percentage points
lower than

in July and 0.7 percentage points

lower than in August

1988.

A

supercomputer manufacturer based in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area
reduced its employment by 18 percent, with most of the reductions in Minnesota
and Western Wisconsin.

A manufacturer of mainframe computers announced plans

to reduce employment in Minnesota by 4 percent.

This reduction is part of the

firm's plans to reduce its worldwide employment by 10 percent.

The unemploy-

ment rate in the rest of the district was lower than last year. The August
unemployment rate in Montana, in particular, was the lowest in ten years at
4.9 percent.

Consumer Spending
Consumer
strong.

spending

on

general

merchandise

has

to

continued

be

One retailer reports that sales in September were 10 percent higher

than a year ago and were 8.3 percent higher on a year-to-date basis.

This

retailer also expects sales this Christmas season to be better than a year
ago.

Another

retailer reports

that sales at

its discount stores

were

10

IX - 2

percent higher on a year-to-date basis.

A direct-mail marketing

opened a 600,000 square foot warehouse in St. Cloud, Minnesota.

company

Inventories

were reported to be at acceptable levels.
Automobile sales have strongly rebounded from a poor first quarter.

One domestic manufacturer reports that September car sales in the Minne-

apolis-St. Paul metropolitan area were 6 percent higher than last year.

Car

and truck inventories were reported to be very low.
Housing activity has also rebounded from depressed levels earlier in
the year.

The number of new housing permits issued in Minnesota in August

rose by 17 percent from July, although it was 3 percent lower than in August
1988.

The number of new housing permits issued in the Minneapolis-St. Paul

metropolitan area in August was 30 percent higher than in July and 7 percent
higher than in August
luster.

1988.

Construction activity in Minnesota was lack-

The dollar value of contracts for future construction in August in

Minnesota was roughly unchanged from a year ago.
Tourist spending has been moderately strong.

The Upper Peninsula of

Michigan reports a 1 percent increase in tourism through September over a
banner 1988 season.

An unexpectedly large number of tourists visited Yellow-

stone Park in Montana.

However, concessionaires report lower-than-expected

spending because of a relatively large number of one-day visits.

As part of

Montana's centennial year celebrations, about 5,000 horse riders and 2,700
cattle participated in the Great Centennial Cattle Ride, a 60 mile drive from
Roundup to Billings.
Manufacturing
There have been some bright spots in district manufacturing, although troubles have continued to mount in the computer and electronics industries.

Suppliers to the aircraft industry report an excellent year and great

IX - 3

prospects for 1990.

A director forecasts that sales of aircraft parts will be

18 percent higher in 1990 than in 1989.
the

capital

goods

and machine

tools

Sources of strength were also seen in
industries.

However,

some observers

anticipate some slowing in 1990 because of a decline in new orders.

Ordnance

and small arms suppliers also report a decline in orders because arsenals are
full.

A director's survey of several manufacturing firms shows that most of

these firms anticipate only slight to moderate increases in sales.

Prices of

in manufacturing were reported to

be rising

costs

raw materials and labor
moderately.

Resource-Related Industries
Resource-related
agriculture

varied

industries have been doing well.

adequate or fair.

Land prices and rents

from moderate to good.

Dakota increased from last year.

Conditions

in

in North

Soil moisture conditions were reported to be

A director reports that range conditions in Montana reAn agricultural implements dealer

covered very well from last year's drought.

in Montana reports that 1989 sales were the best in the 50 years the dealer
has been
year.

in business.

The mining industry continued

to have an excellent

District copper mines, in particular, were doing well partly due to

strikes and other problems in copper mines

in the rest of the world.

The

lumber industry in Minnesota continued its expansion, although one major construction

project was affected

announced plans

to expand

by labor

its paper mill

problems.

A major paper producer

in Northern Minnesota, and

anticipated that 120 permanent jobs will be created.

it is

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The Tenth District economy appears to be growing moderately.

Retail sales have been steady over the past three months.

Retail prices and

prices of manufacturers' inputs have changed little in recent months.

Most

retailers are satisfied with their inventory levels, but manufacturers
continue to trim their materials inventories.
increase.

Housing activity is soft.

increased slightly.

Drilling activity continues to

Loan demand at commercial banks has

Fall crop yields are average to slightly above average,

and agricultural credit conditions remain stable.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report sales increases over last year

and steady sales over the past three months.

Demand is strong for fall

merchandise and women's apparel, but sales of housewares and furniture are
somewhat weak.

Respondents expect normal seasonal increases in sales as

Christmas approaches.

Retailers typically have no plans for special sales

other than the usual holiday promotions.

Prices have changed little over the

past three months and are expected to remain generally stable in coming
months.

Most retailers are satisfied with their inventory levels.

sales have picked up in some district states.

New car

Sales outlooks are mixed, but

dealers generally expect little change from last year's sales levels.
Manufacturing.

Most respondents report little change in input prices

from a year ago or from three months ago.
the next three months.
times have shortened.

Few price changes are expected over

Materials inputs are readily available, and some lead
Most firms continue trimming inventories, and plan to

maintain lower levels in upcoming months.

Although most plants are operating

near full capacity, reports of bottlenecks or labor shortages are rare.
Energy.

Recent gains have propelled district drilling activity above

X-2
year-ago levels.

More stable oil prices and increased exploration for natural

gas have been credited for much of the improvement in the district's energy
industry.

The average number of active drilling rigs in the district

increased from 259 in August to 289 in September, the third consecutive month
of increase.

Thus, exploration and development activity stands about 11

percent above the level of one year ago.
Most area homebuilders contacted report

Housing Activity and Finance.

housing starts at or below the levels of last month and last year.

New home

sales are stable to down slightly, while new home prices are stable to up
slightly.

Most homebuilders report rising materials prices.

A wholesale

distributor of lumber reports sales below those of a year earlier and well
below the level of three months ago.

Most respondents expect housing activity

to remain steady or to decline slightly.
Most savings and loan respondents experienced net inflows of deposits
over the past month.

Mortgage demand has softened.

While mortgage rates have

recently been relatively steady, most respondents expect a slight decline
through the remainder of the year.
Banking.

District bankers report a slight increase in total loan demand

during the past month.

All loan categories except residential construction

and commercial real estate contributed to the increase; those two types of
loans did not change.

The level of investments also rose.

Two-thirds of the

respondents reported that loan to deposit ratios were higher than a year ago
but constant over the past month.
in the prime rate last month.

All but one respondent reported no change

About half of the respondents expect the prime

rate to fall in the near term, with the other half expecting no change.

Most

respondents did not change consumer lending rates last month and do not expect

a change in the near term.
Agriculture.

The harvest of row crops and seeding of winter wheat are

nearing completion in the Tenth District.
to progress rapidly.

Dry weather has allowed the harvest

Dryland corn and soybean yields are expected to be about

average in most parts of the district, but irrigated crop yields are expected
to be above-average in some states.

In Kansas, however, an early frost has

reduced the yield and quality of the late milo crop.

The cotton harvest will

begin soon in southwest Oklahoma, and good yields are expected.

Warm weather

and sufficient early rainfall have promoted the development of excellent
winter wheat stands.

Topsoil moisture levels have declined recently, however,

and more rain is needed to ensure further development of the crop and to
provide adequate winter wheat pasture for cattle.
District cattle ranchers continue to benefit from strong feeder cattle
prices.

Despite strong cattle prices, however, expansion of district cattle

herds was restricted by drought-reduced feed supplies earlier in the year.

A

limited supply of young cattle available for herd expansion and placement in
feedlots has maintained the high cost of feeder cattle and, in turn, has
limited profits for district cattle feeders.
Agricultural credit conditions in the district remain stable.

Strong

wheat and feeder cattle prices continue to support farm incomes across most of
the district.

Crop insurance benefits, federal drought relief payments, and

financial reserves built up in recent years will help farmers in some parts of
the district to withstand the 1989 drought.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

District economic expansion is slow.

Manufacturing activity is

expanding slightly, but rates of growth have declined.

Although retail sales

increases have very recently accelerated, auto sales are softening.
service industry continues to add to its workforce.
pattern of very mild improvement.
expansion.

The

Construction maintains a

Oil and gas drilling is showing gradual

Prices paid to District farmers are unchanged from a year earlier.
District manufacturing activity is showing slight expansion overall.

Oilfield equipment firms cite moderate growth and they say that recent
expansions in sales have been higher than expected.

Orders to primary metals

manufacturers are expanding slightly overall, with some firms noting marked
increases and others mentioning marked declines.
said for fabricated metals manufacturers.

Essentially the same can be

Lumber and wood firms say demand

for their products is growing at rapid rates and that sales are far higher
than a year earlier.

Electronics and computer-related firms generally cite

soft sales and declining prices for some products.
to continue through the next two quarters.

They expect this softness

Most manufacturers of food

products say that sales have changed little in recent months, after seasonal
adjustment.

Paper industry demand has softened, but mills continue to run at

full capacity and prices of some products are accordingly declining.

Sales

patterns among apparel manufacturers vary widely but, on average, some growth
is occurring.

Chemical firms note some slippage in demand at the same time

that new plants are coming on line.

As a result, product prices are falling.

XI-2

Petroleum refineries sales and production have changed little recently and
firms note that oil product prices have changed little.
Retail sales growth has been uneven across the District, but it is
generally strong and respondents are optimistic about continued expansion
through Christmas.

Warm weather is said to have discouraged consumer spending

for Fall items in some areas, but several national chains report that their
sales in the District are expanding faster than in the nation.
Automobile sales patterns vary considerably among District cities,
but the market has been softening very lately.
1990 models have been slow.

Respondents say that sales of

At the end of the 1989 model year, consumers are

said to have purchased 1989 models in anticipation of higher prices for the
1990 models.

Dealers expect sales for the rest of 1989 will be below year-

earlier levels.
Growth in the service industry is widely perceived as an important
factor in the District employment recovery.
expansion has been business services.

A significant contributor to this

This expansion is due both to

increasing sales to purchasers outside the District and to a shift in the
practices of District nonservice firms toward the purchase of services that
were formerly produced in-house.

Contract labor services have shown marked

expansion in the District, for example.

Some respondents in the contract

labor industry say that rising demand is motivating them to increase prices,
even though their costs of operation are not going up.
District construction activity has been very erratic in recent
months, but generally shows mild improvement -- the result of gains in
nonresidential building.

Office vacancy rates remain high, but they are

XI-3

declining in most District cities, and industrial vacancy rates are also
falling.

Residential building has shown little change lately, but recent

increases in permits for residential building suggest some growth in the
months ahead.

Nevertheless, builders of single-family homes are concerned

over the increasing restrictiveness of financial institutions' policies on
interim financing.

This restrictiveness, some of which is said to be tied to

new thrift industry regulations, has particularly affected smaller speculative
homebuilders.

Nonbuilding construction continues to decline.

oil and gas extraction industry continues to expand gradually.

The District
The rig count

has been increasing slowly but steadily in recent months -- the result of
growth in Texas.

Most of the gains are said to be in natural gas.

are declining in Louisiana and New Mexico.

Rig counts

Leading indicators of drilling,

including well permits and the seismic crew count, suggest a turnaround in
Louisiana and New Mexico and further growth in Texas.

Respondents generally

expect mild growth during the rest of the year, with some slippage in the
first quarter of 1990.
Increased soil moisture levels in much of the District have improved
conditions for agriculture, but portions of south and central Texas continue
to face serious drought problems.

In September, District agricultural product

prices were down slightly from August, but unchanged from a year earlier.
September crop prices were up 2 percent from August and 5 percent from a year
earlier.

Livestock prices slipped 2 percent from a year earlier and 4 percent

from August.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
The economy in the West continues to grow at a healthy pace. Respondents continue
to expect relatively slow growth during the next year. Wage and price increases remain modest.
Consumer spending growth has stabilized at a healthy rate, with inventories reported to be in
line with desired levels. Most reports of manufacturing activity indicate strength, with several
manufacturers planning expansions. Agriculture and resource-related industries continue to
perform well. Construction and real estate activity continue strong throughout the District, with
Arizona the major exception. Western banks continue to report healthy conditions. Most
businesses in the San Francisco area have resumed operations since the earthquake, but road
closures and property damage are delaying a complete return to business as usual.
Business Sentiment
Expectations regarding GNP growth are holding steady, with 73 percent of respondents
continuing to anticipate somewhat slower growth during the next twelve months. Expectations
regarding most components of GNP are essentially unchanged, although expectations about
business investment improved and expectations regarding housing starts and the trade balance
deteriorated somewhat.
Wages and Prices
Little change is reported in wage and price conditions. For the most part, upward
pressures on wages and prices remain modest. A West Coast retailer notes that his prices seem
to be moderating after a surge early this year. Labor shortages in many parts of the District
are putting upward pressure on entry-level wages. Respondents in some states report that

XII-2
recent increases in the minimum wage have had little effect on labor costs, since employers
must pay even more than the new, higher minimum wage to attract entry-level workers.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending continues to grow modestly. Retailers report that inventories are
close to desired levels. While many Bay Area retailers survived the earthquake with relatively
little damage, a few experienced inventory or structural losses that are hurting profits for their
stores. Some auto dealers report inventory shortfalls due to the recent sales strength combined
with delays in receiving 1990 models.
Manufacturing
Many manufacturers in the West continue to report solid manufacturing activity.
Capacity constraints in commercial aircraft manufacturing still exist, but no longer are getting
worse. Capacity at Boeing was underutilized through most of October because mechanics are
on strike. Investment spending in commercial aerospace is expected to be lower during the
next year than it was during the past year.
A paint and coatings manufacturer reports that demand for his company's products has
been higher in 1989 than it has been since 1979. This company does not plan to increase
investment spending in 1990, but it has purchased property that would facilitate expansion
should it be called for in the future.
A newspaper publisher reports plans to expand press facilities, in order to increase both
capacity and efficiency. These plans include an increase in investment spending for 1990 over
its 1989 level.

XII - 3
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agriculture and resource-related industries continue to perform well. Prices for
agricultural products are reported to be strong, and agricultural producers continue to seek
expansion of their export markets. A food processor reports that inventories have increased
significantly during the past year. He notes that this increase could cause a drop in prices
unless export sales rise significantly.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity continue strong throughout the District, with
Arizona the major exception. One respondent reports that strong demand for commercial
properties from investors in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore is exerting
upward pressure on the prices of commercial properties. Prior to the earthquake, several
respondents in California noted that appreciation of residential properties seemed to have
slowed considerably. It is not clear whether the earthquake will significantly affect property
values outside the hardest-hit areas. Although many roads and buildings remain fundamentally
sound, work crews are busy demolishing unsafe buildings and repairing those structures that can
be fixed. Repair and rebuilding activity is expected to continue for at least two years.
Financial Sector
Western banks continue to report healthy conditions. Several banks report robust
growth in construction loan activity during recent weeks. Competition for deposits and for
quality loans continues to be stiff.

