SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

January 1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

First District - Boston. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
Second District - New York. .
Third District - Philadelphia

.

.

. . . . . . . . . . ..

i
I-1

.

..

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I.

III-

Fourth District - Cleveland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

...

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Eighth District - St. Louis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Ninth District - Minneapolis

VII-1
VIII-1

.

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Tenth District - Kansas City. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Eleventh District - Dallas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Twelfth District - San Francisco. . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . .. .

IX-1
X-1
XI-1
XII-1

SUMMARY

Most District reports indicate somewhat stronger regional economic
activity on balance in December and early January than at the time of the last
reports in November, with much of the growth centered in the retail and
industrial sectors.

It would appear, on the basis of these reports, that the

national economy gained momentum in recent weeks as consumer spending
strengthened, manufacturing activity continued to rise, and producers
scheduled more investment in plant and equipment.
Reports on activity outside of the retail and industrial sectors were
mixed and showed little change from the levels of recent months.
loan demand was generally flat.

In banking,

In construction, commercial and residential

activity evidently remained subdued in most of the country, although some
areas of strength were reported.

In agriculture, the continuing dry weather

in some areas threatened the winter wheat crop.
Although the overall tone of the District reports was upbeat, one
District (Philadelphia) cited indications that the pace of activity may be
slowing.

Another (St. Louis) reported that growth was still sluggish even

though conditions had improved in recent months.
Consumer Spending
Eleven of twelve Districts reported on consumer activity.

All eleven

indicated that retail sales in December met or exceeded retailers'
expectations.

Three Districts also observed that the moderate-to-strong pace

Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond using information gathered
prior to January 13, 1989.

of sales in December continued through early January.
this period, and truck sales were even stronger.

New cars sold well over

Cleveland indicated that

luxury goods such as electronic equipment and fine jewelry had sold especially
well, which might indicate higher consumer confidence.
Increases in retail prices were reported as moderate by Boston and
Minneapolis, and Kansas City found prices to be generally steady to slightly
higher.

San Francisco observed that apparel prices were still rising faster

than the prices of most other items.

Boston reported that wages for retail

clerks were still rising briskly.
Manufacturing and Mining
All Districts reported on manufacturing activity, and most of the
reports suggested that production levels were currently at or above November
levels.

San Francisco indicated expansion in the aerospace and electronics

industries, and Boston noted strong demand for manufactured items used by the
commercial aircraft and automobile industries and most capital goods
industries.

Dallas and Chicago noted increased demand for steel products, but

Cleveland indicated a sharp slowdown in steel production, and reports from a
few Districts stated that activity was down in some construction-related
industries such as lumber.
Several industries were reported to be operating at high capacity
utilization rates, but only a few, such as chemicals, claimed capacity limits
had constrained production.

A majority of Districts indicated that

manufacturers plan to increase capital expenditures in 1989 over 1988 levels.
Most of this spending will be for new equipment rather than plant expansion.
Labor market conditions in the manufacturing sector appear to be about
the same as in November in most Districts.
scarce in some areas.

Factory labor was reported to be

Boston indicated that producers expect wages to rise

this year at about the same rate as last year.
increases in wages.

Cleveland noted moderate

Cleveland and Atlanta mentioned significant increases in

employee benefit costs.

About 60 percent of the respondents to both the

Philadelphia and Richmond surveys reported rising input prices.

Boston

indicated that the prices of some raw materials such as paper, wood, and most
metals appeared to be stabilizing but that the prices of semi-finished goods
such as petrochemicals were still rising.
Reports on mining were mixed.

Minneapolis and San Francisco indicated

strong activity in silver and copper mining, and San Francisco also noted
strength in gold and phosphate mining.

But oil drilling activity in the

Dallas, Kansas City, and San Francisco Districts was apparently restrained
because of uncertainty about future prices.
Construction
Reports on current nonresidential building activity varied widely across
Districts, ranging from strong in Chicago and San Francisco to weak in St.
Louis.

Construction of industrial facilities was reported to be robust in

some areas.

Chicago indicated work on industrial buildings was very strong in

the Midwest, and San Francisco mentioned new plants and continued expansion of
manufacturing facilities in the West.

Philadelphia, however, stated that

despite a high demand for industrial space, "...construction of new industrial
buildings may decline this year due to a pullback in lending to builders by
financial institutions."

Prospects for nonresidential building overall in

1989 appear to be relatively weak as new contracts declined in Chicago,
Dallas, and St. Louis.
In the residential sector, housing contracts and starts declined in the
Chicago and Kansas City Districts, which suggested a future slowing of

homebuilding activity in those regions.

Dallas, however, indicated some

growth in permits for single-family homes, and San Francisco reported healthy
homebuilding activity in some parts of its District.
Agriculture and Forestry
Six Districts commented on conditions in the agricultural sector and
four of these--Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas--reported concern
about the impact of continued dry weather.

Dallas noted that the winter wheat

crop had already been damaged by drought, and Kansas City and St. Louis said
that dry conditions threatened the wheat crop in their Districts.
Several Districts noted higher grain and livestock prices.

While crop

farmers have benefited, livestock farmers have been adversely affected to some
extent because of higher feed costs.

Kansas City noted that cattle operators

in its District had not expanded herds, despite strong beef prices, because
low moisture had reduced the use of winter wheat pastures for grazing.
Reports of a slowdown in lumber production were recorded by Atlanta,
Dallas, and San Francisco, but Minneapolis characterized lumber output in its
District as strong.

The softening in domestic demand for lumber, which was

attributed to sluggish homebuilding, was reportedly offset somewhat by
increased foreign demand.
Banking
Loan demand varied among the Districts that reported on banking
conditions.

The demand for commercial and industrial loans was said to be

weaker in the St. Louis District, largely unchanged in the Richmond and Kansas
City Districts, and growing slowly in the Cleveland District.

Philadelphia

reported a strong increase in commercial and industrial loans so far in

v

January, but a reduction in inquiries and applications.

Both Philadelphia and

Richmond indicated continued healthy demand for consumer credit, but Cleveland
and St. Louis noted slower growth.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District continues at a moderate
but healthy pace for manufacturers and retailers contacted in early
January.

Most manufacturers report that shipments and orders are above

year-earlier levels, with exports contributing to their growth.

Retail

results were generally less robust than those in manufacturing, with sales
flat to slightly higher.

Price increases are modest.

Capital

expenditures planned for the region's stores and factories exceed 1988
levels.
Retail
First District retail contacts generally report sales during
December and early January to be flat to moderately higher compared with
year-ago levels.

Most respondents are satisfied with these results, as

retail business in the region stands at a very high level.

A mild and

snowless winter has dampened the movement of seasonal merchandise, but
apparel retailers are heartened by good sales of spring fashions.
Several large chains report making significant and
capital-intensive changes in the way they do business.

These retailers

are undertaking major refurbishments and opening additional outlets.

They

are also expanding their warehouse operations, further computerizing their
business systems, and streamlining their administrative structures.

Some

I-2

firms plan major initiatives in 1989 while others intend to digest
investments made in 1988.

All retailers already embarked on these

programs report significant gains in operating efficiency.
Prices are rising moderately according to most retailers in our
survey.

One firm reports the cost of sundries increasing 5 to 6 percent

in 1988; another retailer indicates that previously declining prices are
now flat.

Wages for retail clerks continue rising briskly.

Manufacturing
All First District manufacturing contacts, except those in
computer-related areas or serving the construction industry, report that
shipments exceed year-earlier levels by at least 5 percent.

New orders

were generally even stronger - in some cases 30 percent above year-ago
levels.

The commercial aircraft, auto and most capital goods industries

provided particularly good markets for First District manufactures.

By

contrast, most firms in or selling to the computer industry and firms
supplying the construction industry report shipments and orders to be flat
or down slightly from year-ago levels.

Export orders generally continue

to grow although the rate of increase has slowed in a few cases.
First District manufacturers report that prices for many raw
materials, such as paper, wood, and most metals, may be stabilizing.

But

they see little slowing in price increases for semi-finished goods such as
petrochemicals, specialty steel, motors and bearings.

Contacts mentioned

that the weak dollar had promoted exports of petrochemicals.
capacity limited, these exports contributed to rising prices.

With U.S.
Most First

District manufacturers have recently increased their own prices enough to
cover part but not all of their rising materials costs.

Exceptions are

firms serving the auto, computer, and aircraft industries; these firms
have not been able to increase prices.
Employment levels at most First District manufacturers are flat to
down slightly.

Only two firms mentioned a lack of skilled labor as a

production constraint.

Contacts expect wages to rise 4 to 5 percent in

1989 as they did in 1988.
First District manufacturers generally plan to increase capital
expenditures from 1988 levels.

Most will emphasize equipment rather than

plant in 1989;

only one-third of the respondents intend to build or

expand plants.

The emphasis on equipment is attributed to recently

completed expansion programs and the fact that just-in-time inventory
systems and simplified production procedures (leading to shorter assembly
lines) have freed significant space.

Only one firm suggested that

uncertainty about foreign exchange rates is discouraging U.S. firms from
building plants to serve the export market.

Most respondents plan to

include computers in their equipment purchases; however, two firms suggest
their total spending on computers may slow as upgrading replaces expanded
use.

All manufacturers contacted claim that they have adequate capacity
overall, but one-third mentioned a product for which capacity has recently
been a constraint.

In general, respondents do not feel that U.S. capacity

limits are curbing exports or supporting imports to any significant
extent;
cases.

a few mentioned imports of chips, bearings and VCRs as special
Most contacts believe that price and quality of product and

support service are sustaining current imports.

I-4

All First District manufacturers express modest optimism about the
coming year.

While they all expect growth to slow (with real GNP forecast

to rise 2.5 percent), they generally view this slowdown as a healthy
development with favorable implications for inflation and interest rates.
They remain concerned about the impact of take-over activity and the
overall debt level on investment.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District economy in recent weeks have varied
among sectors, in part reflecting seasonal influences.

Most retailers described

Christmas holiday sales as on or above plan and a pickup in office leasing has
occurred.

Homebuilding is seasonally slow and in some overbuilt areas, developers

are offering concessions.

While the percentage of purchasing managers reporting

improved business conditions showed about a normal seasonal decline, the proportion
indicating worsened conditions was somewhat higher than usual.

Small- and

medium-sized banks have recently increased interest rates charged on their loans.
Consumer Spending
Most retailers contacted in the District described sales during the 1988
Christmas season as on or above plan.

A major exception was a chain whose sales had

been below year-earlier levels for several consecutive months.

While sales results

generally were as targeted, most stores reported relatively moderate over-the-year
gains, given the extra shopping days this year.

Increases mainly ranged from

2-10 percent.
Items in strong demand among holiday shoppers were electronic games, video
cameras and recorders, appliances and men's clothing.

Interest in women's apparel

also improved, though the extent of the improvement varied.
end of December also were mixed.

Inventory levels at the

One chain with lower than targeted inventories

reported lost sales because of its having understocked several popular items.

At

the other extreme were two retailers with inventories well above plan, who expect to
discount heavily throughout January in order to clear the remaining seasonal goods
from their shelves.

II-2

Business Activity
The percentage of purchasing managers in western New York reporting
improved business conditions showed roughly its usual decline for this time of year,
but the proportion with worsened conditions was somewhat higher than usual.

Among

recent developments in the District, Grumman announced that it will eliminate 2500
jobs beginning in January as a result of the Pentagon's cancellation of a bomber
project.

Elsewhere, a recent groundbreaking gives further evidence of a turnaround

in the South Bronx.

A $100 million retail and office project is now underway on a

long-vacant tract; it is to include a full service supermarket, the first new movie
theater in the area in 15 years, a shopping mall and a new office building.
1500

Some

permanent jobs are expected to be created.
With regard to the impact on the District of certain national developments,

the newly proposed changes and closings at U. S. military bases are not expected to
have an adverse effect on the District.

Personnel from the Brooklyn Naval Station,

which is slated for closing, will be moved to a new Staten Island facility.

In

addition, a New York State official recently stated that the newly signed
U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement should be of benefit to much of western and
northern New York.

Finally, governors in each of the three District states reported

substantial shortfalls in revenues and New York and New Jersey have imposed hiring
freezes.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity in the District is seasonally slow, and in those
parts of the New York metropolitan area where a buyer's market exists, developers
are offering concessions.

In Manhattan, however, where a rush of new apartment

construction had begun prior to a November 1985 deadline to receive certain
subsidies, most units have reportedly been sold without a glut developing as many
had feared.

Moderate-priced housing remains in demand in much of the District.

II-3

A pickup in office leasing has occurred in recent weeks.

In downtown

Manhattan a major brokerage firm leased 1.1 million square feet of space in a
building at the World Trade Center which had been mostly vacant for a long time.
Buildings going up on the west side of midtown Manhattan continue eliciting interest
with the result that leasing there in 1988 was second only to 1987's record amount.
Marine Midland Bank unveiled plans for a new office building in downtown Buffalo to
house its backoffice operations, and work is also to begin soon on the second phase
of New York City's conversion of the Brooklyn Army Terminal into industrial space
for small manufacturers.

The first phase, opened in late 1987, is 80 percent leased

and negotiations for the remainder are underway.
Financial Developments
In response to the rise in the prime and other market rates, small- and
medium-sized banks in the Second District survey have recently increased interest
rates charged on their loans.

Some increases were automatic as most commercial

loans and many mortgage and consumer installment loans have floating rates tied to
the prime.

However, rates on fixed-rate loans have been raised as well.

Most

officers said their banks had not felt competitive pressures to resist the recent
round of interest rate hikes because other local banks also raised their rates.
Bankers reported that competition to offer depositors the most attractive rates on
3- and 6-month CDs has been keen.

However, none of the surveyed banks have

increased rates offered on savings accounts.

Regarding the outlook, nearly all

respondents expected additional modest increases in interest rates for the first
half of 1989, though several thought rates may ease slightly by mid-year.

When

asked to judge the strength of their local economy, bankers' responses were mixed.
About half described their local economy as moderately strong but with some weak
sectors, such as real estate.
healthy.

The rest characterized their local economy as quite

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy continues to expand as 1989 begins but there
Manufacturers

are indications that the pace of the advance may be slackening.

polled for the January Business Outlook Survey report moderate improvement again
this month, marking a full year of expansion according to the survey.

Most

retailers report meeting their Christmas sales goals of modest real growth from
the previous year.

Bankers indicate that loan growth was good as 1988 closed,

with business, personal, and real estate lending all on the rise.

Realtors

describe the commercial real estate market as healthy but note a decline

in

residential sales since the summer.
While current conditions indicate continuing growth in most sectors of the
Third District economy, slower progress may be ahead.
activity to ease

from its current

Manufacturers expect

pace during the first half

of the year.

Retailers are generally cautious in their sales planning for the new year and
most are keeping inventories under tight control.

Bankers note a falloff in

business loan and mortgage applications in recent weeks, and they expect slower
growth in all types of lending this year compared to last.

Realtors expect

commercial leasing activity in 1989 to run at around the same rate as in 1988.
Although they are looking for a pickup in residential sales by spring, they say
the prospect is uncertain.
MANUFACTURING
Local manufacturers are starting 1989 on a positive note,

according to the

January Business Outlook Survey, although they believe business might dip later
in the year.

Among firms participating in the survey, 36 percent report business

is moving up while only 8 percent say it is slowing.

In both the durable and

III-2
nondurable goods sectors most measures of industrial activity reflect moderate
expansion.
and

New orders, shipments, and order backlogs were rising in January,

inventories

were

edging

down.

On

balance,

survey

participants were

increasing working hours and adding marginally to payrolls.
Industrial prices in the region remain on an upward trend.

Sixty-one

percent of the January survey participants said they were paying more for inputs
compared

to December

and

38

percent were

raising

the

prices of

their own

products.
In contrast to current reports of generally healthy business conditions,
local manufacturers predict some decline in activity by midyear.

Looking out

six months, 27 percent of the January survey participants expect the pace of
business to slow while only 18 percent expect further improvement.

On balance,

survey respondents foresee the rate of orders holding steady during the first
half of the year while shipments rise slightly, leading to a decline in order
backlogs

as

manufacturing

activity

slows.

Despite

this

forecast,

survey

respondents are planning to add workers and boost capital spending between now
and summer.
RETAIL
Third District merchants generally reported meeting sales goals for the
Christmas

season,

Christmas.
year gains,

helped

by

stronger

than

usual

in

the

week

after

Department stores in the region averaged around 6 percent year-overin

current dollar terms.

Specialty store results were mixed:

Discount stores did somewhat

better.

some posted strong increases while others

only matched or fell below their 1987 performance.
their

sales

inventories were lean as Christmas

significant unplanned price reductions.

Most store officials said

approached, and

they did not make

III-3
Most merchants contacted in early January described their sales plans for
1989 as very cautious.

Their impression of consumer confidence is that it is

high but fragile; and many retailers believe that sales could drop off sharply
in the wake of any negative economic news.
Third District auto sales in early January were up from the same period

last year for domestic makes, but off for imports.

Dealers say demand for most

U.S. models is running above expectations although a few are not proving popular

and incentives are being offered to reduce inventories of these cars.

Area

dealers say total unit sales in 1988 were around 3 percent higher than in 1987,
in contrast with forecasts of a slow year. Few dealers expect growth to continue
in 1989, but most think sales will not fall substantially below the 1988 level.
FINANCE
Loan volume at major Third District banks in December was approximately
13 percent above the December 1987 level, reflecting a year-over-year growth rate
that has been steady since mid-1988.

Bankers contacted in January said the

volume of commercial and industrial loans being booked was moving up strongly,
but inquiries

and applications from potential borrowers were dropping off.

Consumer credit lending was increasing at a pace that bankers described as
healthy but not exceptionally strong after accounting for seasonal variation.
Real estate lending continues on a trend of strong but slackening growth.
Most area bankers expect that the pace of growth for all types of lending
will ease as the year progresses.

They base this forecast on estimates of slower

economic growth nationwide.
REAL ESTATE
The commercial real estate market in the Third District is characterized
as generally healthy by area real estate firms.

The office vacancy rate in the

central business district of Philadelphia is estimated at 14 percent currently,

III-4
up only slightly from a year ago.

The vacancy rate is projected to be stable

in 1989 and then move up slightly as new buildings are completed in the next few
years.

Suburban office vacancy rates range from 16 to 25 percent, essentially

unchanged from a year ago.

Effective rent charges (rates minus the value of

concessions and services provided by landlords) throughout the Third District
are described as stable for older office buildings but rising somewhat for new
buildings.
Demand for industrial buildings has been strong, coming mainly from area
manufacturers who are expanding.

Realtors say the supply of new space is tight;

and they believe construction of new industrial buildings may decline this year
due to a pullback in lending to builders by financial institutions.
Residential realtors say sales of existing homes have declined in many
parts of the Third District since the summer, and price appreciation has slowed,
as potential buyers are increasingly reluctant to pay current asking prices.
Realtors expect sales activity to pick up gradually this spring as sellers begin
to accept lesser gains than they had been anticipating on sales of their homes.
Realtors do not view current mortgage rates as a deterrent to sales.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary
The Fourth District economy continued to post gains in most sectors.
Increases were reported in production and new orders, while manufacturing
employment has remained generally flat.

Retail sales over the holiday season

were better than expected, marked by brisk sales of luxury items and
automotive products.

Service jobs led recent employment gains, and

unemployment rates hovered around the national average.

Loan demand continued

to increase at a moderate rate.
Retail Sales
Retailers in the District reported larger-than-expected sales gains in
December.

Many reported that sales were up by 8 to 10 percent from a year

Price markdowns were smaller and less widespread than usual, both

ago.

because demand was strong and because merchants had kept their inventories
quite lean. Luxury items, particularly electronic goods and fine jewelry, sold
especially well, suggesting higher consumer confidence.

Sales of small

appliances were strong, and apparel sales seem to have recovered from their
slump.
Local auto dealers reported that December sales were very good,
particularly for light trucks and minivans.

Sales were slow during the first

week of January, after which they rose moderately.

Inventories are considered

to be sufficient, but there are shortages of the most popular models.
Although manufacturers' buyer incentive plans are widely available, dealers
say they are not an important contributor to sales.

Financing is readily

IV-2

available, and rising interest rates have not yet increased monthly payments
enough to deter buyers.
Labor Markets
The latest unemployment figures continue to show Pennsylvania at slightly
below the national rate and Ohio at slightly above the national rate.

Despite

the relatively low unemployment rates, the average length of the workweek has
remained constant and wage increases have been modest.

However, many

employers reported that benefit costs have risen significantly, driving up
total compensation.
Since last year at this time, Ohio added 90,000 jobs, raising employment
by about 2 percent while the number of workers unemployed fell by 12 percent.
The picture is similar in Pennsylvania, where jobs rose by 60,000, increasing
employment by 1 percent while decreasing unemployed workers by 17 percent.
Although the labor market in these areas is generally strong, employers
reported ample supplies of qualified workers.
Eastern Kentucky, on the other hand, continues to experience a weak labor
market.

For example, a recent automobile plant opening there drew fifteen

times as many applicants as there were job slots.
Most of the new jobs in the District have come from the service sector,
with business services continuing to show the largest increases.
Manufacturing employment has been flat throughout most of Ohio, while
Pittsburgh experienced its first annual increase in manufacturing employment
in almost a decade.
Manufacturing
The Fourth District's manufacturing sector continues to expand.
Purchasing managers reported increases in output and new orders.

However,

IV-3

their production index dropped well below the survey average over the last two
years, even when seasonal factors are considered.

The slowdown in steel

production contributed to the slower production rate.

Steel production in the

Youngstown, Pittsburgh, and Lake Erie steel districts fell 10.4 percent in the
last four weeks over the previous four-week period.

This decline is greater

than the 2.3 percent decrease for the U.S. steel industry as a whole.
Price increases continue to be moderate.

Only 41 percent of the

respondents to the purchasing managers survey reported higher prices, which is
the lowest percentage in over a year.
Commercial Banking
District loan demand has continued to be modest.

Total loans outstanding

at large banks grew at an annual rate of 4 percent from the beginning of
November to the end of December.

Lending to financial institutions and other

businesses accounted for most of the credit growth.

Commercial and industrial

loans rose at an annual pace of 2 percent, about the same pace as in September
and October. Loan rates have increased, and consumer installment and real
estate loans outstanding have contracted somewhat in the last two months.
Also, the pace of home equity lending has tapered off considerably with growth
falling to the single-digit range.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
The District economy generally continued to grow at a moderate pace in
December and early January, and in some regions--such as the Washington
metropolitan area--growth was still very strong.

Retail sales were stronger

than in November, and department stores experienced a somewhat better
Christmas season than a year ago.

Manufacturing shipments rose again; other

measures of producer activity were mixed.

The demand for commercial and

industrial loans stayed flat, while the demand for consumer credit remained
relatively strong.

Export activity increased at District ports, while import

volume was largely unchanged.

In the agricultural sector, below normal

precipitation continued to be a concern.

Most business, financial, and

agricultural respondents were optimistic about prospects for their businesses
and for the economy in general in 1989.
Consumer Spending
Responses to our regular survey of District retailers indicated that
seasonally adjusted retail sales during the first half of January were above
those of the last half of December and those reported in November.

Almost

half of the respondents to this month's survey reported increased sales while
about 40 percent reported declines.

In contrast, November reports of declines

were about equal to reports of increases.

Most automobile dealers reported

increased sales during the first three weeks after Christmas, and almost half
of the department stores reported increases.

Three-fourths of the retailers

expect sales to increase in the next six months.

Christmas sales were reported to be somewhat stronger than last year by
department stores in the District.

Over half of the respondents said their

sales were higher than a year ago, while 15 percent said their sales were
lower.

Most respondents said merchandise markdowns during the Christmas

season were about the same as usual.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity was mixed in mid-January compared to a
month earlier according to our regular mail survey.
respondents indicated no change in their activity.

About half of the survey
Among those reporting

changes, reports of increases in shipments and new orders outnumbered reports
of declines, but reports of declines in backlogs of orders exceeded reports of
increases.

The length of the workweek and the level of employment were

generally unchanged; labor was reported to be scarce in some areas.

As

compared with our previous survey of manufacturers in mid-November, our most
recent survey indicated a slightly slower expansion in producer activity.
Reports of higher prices of materials were made by about 60 percent of the
respondents--slightly above the percentage reporting increases in our November
survey.
Among manufacturers who export, about half said their export volume was
flat in 1988, while about 45 percent reported increases.

Only two

respondents, both textile producers, indicated declines in their exports.
Looking ahead, about three out of every five respondents expect increases in
their exports in 1989 over 1988.

Only one respondent expects his firm's

exports to decline.
In this latest survey, more District manufacturers were optimistic than
in our previous survey.

Forty-nine percent of the January survey respondents

expect their shipments to rise in the next six months and 15 percent expect
declines, compared to 34 and 26 percent, respectively, in November.

In the

January survey, respondents expecting increases in each category of
manufacturing activity--new orders, shipments, backlogs of orders, employment,
and the workweek--outnumbered those expecting declines.
Ports
Representatives from the three major District ports--Baltimore,
Charleston, and Hampton Roads(Norfolk)--noted increases in exports in December
compared to November.

Imports were apparently steady, with shipments reported

to be only slightly higher at Hampton Roads and unchanged at Charleston and
Baltimore.

Strong increases in export activity are expected at the two

largest District ports over the next six months; the port of Charleston
expects export activity to remain about the same.

When asked to compare their

current activity to that of a year ago, all port representatives indicated
that their export activity was growing faster than their import activity.
Financial
The majority of Fifth District bankers responding to our telephone survey
reported that demand for commercial and industrial loans, particularly
commercial construction loans, had been relatively flat in recent weeks.
However, roughly two-thirds of the respondents characterized the demand for
consumer credit as relatively strong.

The bankers contacted held divergent

expectations of loan activity in 1989, but several indicated that they
expected reduced lending activity.

Their assessments of the national economic

outlook were also mixed, and several respondents emphasized that the economy's
course will depend on future fiscal policy.
recession in 1989.

Only one respondent expects a

A large majority expect a further rise in interest rates

V-4

through mid-year, followed by a leveling off and then a decline in rates
during the second half of 1989.
Agriculture
Although rainfall in most of the District was about normal from September
through November, a relatively dry December left pond and stream levels lower
than normal.
in 1989.

Our contacts were optimistic that grain prices would strengthen

One large poultry producer expressed concern that low stocks of corn

and the resumption of exports to the U.S.S.R. could drive feed costs even
higher in the coming months.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The southeastern economy (especially the manufacturing sector) continues to
perform well, in part due to expanding exports.

Most respondents are optimistic about

prospects for 1989 and project capital spending to be at or above the 1988 pace.
Although

a majority

of producers

polled do not

anticipate

serious shortages

or

particularly large price increases this year, it promises to be a close call in some regional
industries, for example primary metals and paper.

Overall, added capacity in the region

is expected to reduce supply bottlenecks that emerged last year.
Announcements

of

price

increases

were

fairly

widespread

in

December.

However, that is normally the time when suppliers post higher prices for the year ahead.
At this point, respondents expect that some of these will be trimmed or deferred because
of buyer resistance.

With modest additions to capacity during the latter half of 1988,

expectations of product price increases in 1989 are below the pace seen in 1988 and
range between 3 and 5 percent.

Despite import quotas on many products and higher

import prices, foreign competition is still reported to be an important limitation on price
increases.

Several contacts remarked that some important labor contracts are up for

renewal; they expect wage increases in 1989 to turn out between 4 and 6 percent. Many
report that double digit increases in employee medical insurance are adding significantly
to labor costs.
By and large, growth in exports of regional industries does not appear to have
been affected by capacity constraints and there are few reports of delivery lags in
meeting export orders. In many instances strong global markets have served to offset a
slackening in domestic demand.

At the same time, import levels have been unusually

high in a few industries facing bottlenecks in production.

New capacity coming on

stream in 1989 is expected to increase domestic supplies and lower the general level of
imports.

VI-2
Some southeastern industries such as home appliance and lumber manufacturers
are projecting slower growth in 1989 as a result of the flatness in homebuilding.
Inventory adjustments at the retail level caused some Tennessee sawmills and furniture
plants to schedule two weeks of shutdown in December.

Lumber company salesmen

commented that volume lumber purchasers have become more conservative.

Weak

domestic demand for lumber is being partially offset by strong foreign demand as
rebuilding efforts in Iraq and in the Caribbean are using significant amounts of lumber.
There are reports of higher input prices for selected items such as steel and plastic in the
appliance industry. Because of weakness in domestic purchases and competitive pricing,
they have not been able to pass along the full increase in raw material prices.
The aluminum industry is running at high capacity levels and producers report
increases in input (aluminum ingot) prices of about 60 percent since a year ago.

New

orders are tapering off slightly as higher input prices have been passed through to
finished products.

Thus, no further price increases are planned in the near future.

Delays in deliveries have been limited to scrap aluminum, which was diverted to export
markets as world prices rose. Producers remain optimistic about prospects for 1989 and
the industry is expanding.

A new plant is coming on line in Georgia and an Alabama

manufacturer is undergoing major capacity expansion.
Paper mills have experienced especially strong demand, although there are signs
of easing compared with the first half of 1988. Orders are higher in selected grades such
as coated paper and some types of paperboard.

Capacity constraints on domestic

shipments of these grades have kept imports higher than they otherwise would have
been.

Several producers of linerboard announced price increases of up to 10 percent.

Capital spending in 1989 is projected to be slightly above the 1988 level, which was up a
sharp 25 percent.

Additions to capacity are primarily in the form of new machinery or

extra shifts of workers to make heavier use of existing equipment.

VI-3
Production capacity poses an important constraint on growth in chemicals. New
orders for basic chemicals continue to be strong and tight supplies of ethylene have
meant higher imports (despite sharply higher prices).

The global market for specialty

chemicals going into plastics and paper is experiencing robust growth.

When questioned

about marketing efforts, one source remarked "its been more a game of getting the
pounds out rather than worrying about product differentiation".

Polyethylene sales are

being eroded by cheaper, competing polymers.
Although

demand

for agricultural chemicals is said to be seasonally low,

increased 1989 planting expectations and strong export markets have strengthened the
outlook.

A previously idle agricultural chemicals plant in Louisiana was opened in

December.
Trucking transportation should experience increased activity this year.

Frozen

foods and dry goods carriers appear to be doing best. Some carriers are facing a shortage
of drivers.

While labor costs or wage gains are reported as moderate, high and rapidly

escalating insurance premiums are placing pressures on costs. These cost pressures are
expected to lead to increases in freight rates in 1989.
Apparel and textile companies are taking a cautious outlook for the new year. A
large

apparel

manufacturer

plans

to keep inventories lean and reduce

production by outsourcing to low-wage countries.

domestic

Textile firms report solid orders for

bed and bath products but apparel producers are reluctant to create a new fashion
direction because of the industry's uncertainty as to the direction of the economy. One
spokesman warns that imports could surge during 1989 as a result of 1988's market
weakness which left importers with unused quotas that can be carried forward to the new
year.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

in the Seventh District.

Business activity continues to expand

Summary.

The Christmas shopping season was stronger than expected for many retailers.
Paperboard

shipments have picked up, after growing more slowly in the second

and

quarters.

third

Demand

for

steel

continues

strong.

Motor

vehicle

production plans are at high levels, but some contacts expect slower sales in
1989 to require cutbacks.

Demand

for equipment

is robust across a range of

industries, but one contact notes increased hesitancy about further additions
to

capacity,

Construction

out

of

activity

concern
has

that

been

the

above

suggest that declines are likely.

economy

may

expectations,

turn

but

down

advance

in 1990.
indicators

Some labor markets have tightened in recent

years, but conditions vary widely among locations and occupations.

Farm debt

owed to banks rose last year, after declines in previous years.
Retail
Christmas

Sales.

Merchants

selling season.

An

report
Illinois

generally

favorable

retailers'

results

for

the

group estimates

that

its

members' sales during the period were 6% or more above a year earlier.
engaged

in less

mixed,

however;

Chicago-area
country.

promotional

activity than
sales

year-to-year

stores

were

gains

relatively weak

in recent years.

Many

The picture

is

at a large general merchandiser's
compared with other

parts

of

the

Where sales were up, strength was in both durables and nondurables,

including women's apparel.
Credit sales are high.

The pickup in apparel

is expected to

continue.

Contacts have indicated that delinquencies have risen

but not alarmingly.
Labor Markets.

Markets for labor have tightened in the District over the

past few years, but conditions differ substantially among geographic areas and
occupations.

A manufacturer planning additions to employment foresaw problems

finding qualified factory workers at a plant in a "booming" Chicago suburb,
but

not

at

other plants.

Stores

in large

shopping centers around Chicago

reported difficulty finding clerical staff, particularly through the Christmas

VII-2
season.

Fast

employees.
other
to

food

restaurants

advertise

continuously

Some skills are in short supply.

and

prominently

On the other hand, openings for

skilled and experienced workers appear quite limited, attributed

corporate

downsizing

and

mergers.

for

An outplacement

firm reports

partly
a

sharp

rise, during the past 2 years, in the proportion of people willing to relocate
out of state.
Steel.
than

at

Orders for steel are strong but "orderly," with lead times shorter

seasonal

continues

at

peaks

high

last

levels.

spring.

Sales

to

Demand

from auto and appliance makers

industrial

equipment makers

remain well

above levels of a few years ago.

Adequate capacity for these types of steel

is in place for further expansion.

Construction steel markets are strong, and

the

keep

largest

backlog

first half of 1989.
Motor

in years

Industry

relative to

enhanced sales

shipments

brisk at least through the

Steel service centers' sales continue vigorous.

Vehicles.

excessive

will

likely

observers
sales.

think

auto

Inventory

accumulation

1989.

would

may be
lead

to

One source forecast a 2%

incentives, production cuts, or both.

decline in unit auto sales in

plans

production

Another expected

a drop of

5% or more.

Truck sales in 1989 were expected to be near all-time highs, but down a little
from

1988's

record

pace.

demand for large trucks

A

heavy

truck

maker

predicted

continued

strong

in early 1989, but thought a weaker economy and higher

interest rates may subsequently cut into sales.
Equipment.

Reports on the outlook for business equipment are mixed.

producers'

durable goods

according

to one source.

1988

to

keep

sector

investment

Another

industries.

include

manufacturers

of

in

1989.

industries
glass,

to

"roll

expects capital

vigorous

Other

process

continues

on with

appliances,

great momentum,"

spending programs begun in

Strongest

reported

to
tires,

be

have

been

adding
and

to

some

chemical
capacity
types

electrical equipment, as well as

food processors, printers and airlines.

equipment

20%

sales may

rise 15%

to

this

year,

The

according

to

one

of
Farm

producer.

VII-3

Buying of construction and mining equipment was up strongly last year, but an
industry source thinks the
over.

replacement cycle in these sectors may be nearly

Another contact reports increasing concerns about the risk of economic

weakness in 1990 may result in smaller spending increases than indicated by
recent national surveys.
sees

components

A maker of communications equipment and electronic

indications

of

in both

slowing

sectors,

and

expects

the

downtrend to continue.
Construction.

Declines

in contracts

building construction in the

5 District

for

residential

states

point

and nonresidential

to a slowdown ahead.

However, suppliers indicate that the current pace of building activity remains
fairly

high.

Midwest.

industrial

Work on

in the

Gypsum board shipments to District states rose somewhat

in 1988 (based on 11 months

of data) and are expected to be about even in

(In view of the strength of construction material shipments to building

sites and
Dept.

strong

is particularly

Work on hospitals, convention centers, and office buildings is also

described as strong.

1989.

buildings

of construction

industry employment, two contacts

regard Commerce

figures on nonresidential construction activity nationwide in 1988 as

too low, particularly for industrial buildings.)
Farm

Agriculture.
following a 16%
nationwide.

debt

owed

to

slide over three years

Call

banks

turned

up

in 1988,

modestly

in District states and a 13% decline

Report data as of the end of the third quarter show that

farm debt owed to banks was up 3.4% from a year ago in District states, and up
3.0% nationwide.

The gains stem from continued strong growth

estate loans and,

for the first time in 15 quarters, a nominal

production

loans.

Farm

debt

owed

to

other

lenders

in farm real

continued

rise in farm
to

decline

through the third quarter, but at a much slower pace than in recent years.
About a year ago, banks moved ahead of the Farm Credit System as the largest
institutional lender serving farmers.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Economic conditions in the Eighth District improved in recent
months, but growth remains sluggish.
several months of stagnation.

Employment rose slightly, following

Despite high capacity utilization rates

that are expected to limit sales, capital spending plans of District
manufacturers were mixed.
was moderately strong.

Consumer spending during November and December

Overall loan activity was weak in the fourth

quarter of 1988, particularly in the commercial area.
Employment
District payroll employment rose at a 1.3 percent annual rate in the
three months through November, following six months of flat employment
growth.

A majority of the new jobs were in the services, trades and

manufacturing sectors.

District manufacturing employment also rose at a

1.3 percent annual rate during the September-November period, with the
strongest growth in the printing and publishing and transportation
Compared with a year earlier, District payroll

equipment sectors.

employment rose 1.5 percent, a substantially smaller gain than the
nation's 3.6 percent increase.
November employment in the St. Louis area was 1.3 percent higher
than a year earlier.
additional jobs.

Manufacturing jobs constituted almost half of the

An auto assembly plant and a military aircraft producer

each added approximately 2,000 workers over the year.

Most new

nonmanufacturing jobs were in services, wholesale and retail trade and
transportation.

The number of construction jobs fell substantially.

VIII-2

Capital Spending
Approximately one-quarter of the 24 District manufacturers recently
surveyed indicated that sales in 1989 will be constrained by a lack of
production capacity.

The manufacturers were divided equally among those

planning an increase in capital spending in 1989, those planning a
decrease and those planning no change.

Industries planning to increase

spending included those producing food products, paper, rubber and glass
products, metals and metal products.

Industries producing textiles,

clothing, chemicals, and transportation equipment anticipated reduced
capital expenditures.

Among all respondents, modernization and upgrading

of existing plant and equipment were the most frequently cited forms of
investment.

Few indicated that capital spending would take the form of

new plant construction.

Only a few respondents felt that imports were

increasing because of limited domestic capacity.
Construction
District construction activity declined sharply in recent months and
was substantially weaker than a year earlier.

The real value of District

building contracts awarded in the three months through November was down
11.4 percent from the previous three-month period and down 10.9 percent
from a year earlier.

Both residential and nonresidential building have

declined.
Consumer Spending
Before adjusting for inflation, District sales of general
merchandise during the holiday season were approximately 6 to 7 percent
higher than a year earlier.

Most retailers from St. Louis, Louisville and

Memphis reported moderate to strong sales gains.

Reports from Little Rock

were mixed, with several respondents reporting declines.

VIII-3

Almost all respondents were satisfied with their inventory levels,
which were generally leaner than those of a year ago.

Consequently, they

engaged in less unplanned price-cutting and anticipate higher profits than
last year.

Women's apparel and consumer electronics were among the

strongest selling products.
Most St. Louis respondents expressed more difficulty finding
temporary Christmas help than in past years, but few raised wages.

The

availability of temporary help was also a problem facing some respondents
in Memphis and Louisville but not those in Little Rock.
Banking
Total loans at large weekly reporting District banks grew at a 0.2
percent annual rate for the fourth quarter of 1988 compared with an 8.7
percent rate for the same period in 1987.

Commercial loans, in

particular, contributed to the overall slow growth, declining at a 5.8
percent rate; for the same quarter in 1987, commercial loan growth
increased at a 12.4 percent rate.

Consumer loans also decreased during

the fourth quarter of last year, declining at a 2.7 percent rate.

Real

estate loans, which grew at an 18.6 percent rate, were the only loans
reporting growth during the period.
Agriculture
Low water has repeatedly closed the Mississippi River to barge
traffic this winter.

Recent rains, however, have allowed the seasonally

light traffic to resume.

Despite recent moisture, soils in northern

Missouri remain critically dry, making water for livestock scarce and
harming the winter wheat crop.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic conditions have been fairly good.

Unemploy-

ment rates increased over previous months but were generally lower than a year
ago.

Consumer

spending,

Christmas

particularly

purchases,

was

excellent.

Price increases in consumer goods were moderate but some agricultural and raw
material prices rose sharply.

Conditions in resource-related industries were

excellent.

Labor Markets
situation has been fairly good throughout

The employment
trict.

Between

October

and

November,

eight-tenths of a percentage point to
that for

.5 percent.

the other states reported here,

substantially
1987.

4

Minnesota's

lower

rate

rate

rose

However this figure, like

is not seasonally adjusted and is

than the unemployment

The unemployment

unemployment

the dis-

rate

of 5.2

in the Minneapolis-St.

percent

in November

Paul metropolitan area

rose by six-tenths of a percentage point from October to a rate of 4.0 percent
in November.
A

Analysts attributed this increase largely to seasonal factors.

director notes

that

high

technology

firms

markets of professionals, such as engineers.

are

experiencing

tight

labor

South Dakota's unemployment rate

in November was 4.3 percent; eight-tenths of a percentage point lower than a
year ago.

North Dakota's unemployment rate was 5.2 percent in November, com-

pared to 4.0 percent in October and 4.5 percent in November 1987.

Montana's

unemployment rate in October was 5.0 percent, up two-tenths of a percent from
September.

In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, the unemployment rate was 6.7

percent in October, down five-tenths of a percentage point from October 1987.

IX-2

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general merchandise has continued to increase
and retailers report good to excellent Christmas sales.

One retailer reports

that sales in December were up 18 percent in comparable stores from December
1987 and that sales for all of 1988 were up 18 to 20 percent from the previous
year.

Inventories have stayed at acceptable levels.
Motor vehicles have been selling fairly well.

Dealers for a domes-

tic manufacturer estimate that their car sales for the entire year were up 5
to 7 percent from the previous year; however, dealers for another manufacturer
report a decline of 3 percent in car sales in 1988 compared to 1987.

Trucks

have been selling extremely well, with dealers for one manufacturer reporting
a 16.4 percent increase in sales in 1988 from the previous year.
another manufacturer

report backlogs

in truck orders of 8 to

Dealers for

10 weeks with

even longer delays for trucks equipped with automatic transmissions.
Housing

activity

has

been generally

lower

than a year ago.

The

number of new housing permits issued in Minnesota in November was 11.6 percent
lower than in October and 15.1 percent lower than a year ago.

Home sales in

the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area for the year through November were
8.79 percent
homes

lower than a year ago.

listed for sale

in

A director reports that the number of

Montana for the year through October was 7 percent

lower than in the same period a year ago.
Tourist spending has continued to be strong.

The number of hotel

reservations in Montana for December was reported to be 10 percent higher than
a year ago and motels in Montana reported that their reservations for the year
through October were 12 percent higher than the same period a year earlier.
Ski resorts throughout the district also reported strong business.

IX-3

Prices
Prices

in the district have been increasing moderately in consumer

goods and sharply in agriculture and raw materials.
doubling of hay prices from a year ago.

A director notes a near

The value of farmland was reported to

have stabilized.

Resource-Related Industries
Conditions have been excellent in the resource-related industries.
New silver and copper mines are opening up in Montana.
plant

in

Montana

through 1995.

reports

that

all

its

production

is

An aluminum reduction
guaranteed

for

sale

Several mining and processing firms in the same state have paid

substantial year-end bonuses to their employees;

in one case the bonuses are

reported to be 106 percent of the employees' annual salary.
industry in Montana reports having its best year ever.
on the drawing boards or in construction.

The wood products

Several new mills are

The Upper Peninsula of Michigan

also reports an excellent year in the lumber industry.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Retail

The Tenth District economy continues to grow slowly.

sales have strengthened, as have new car sales.
capacity use rates and some labor shortages.
still increasing.

Manufacturers report high

Demand for capital goods is

Farm incomes are at a high level, and that sector's

financial recovery continues.

Housing activity is weak, however, and the

energy sector shows little change.

Loan demand at commercial banks has

changed little, while deposits have grown slightly.
Retail Sales.

All respondents note that retail sales have improved from

a year earlier, and most report that Christmas sales expectations were met or
exceeded.
levels.

Promotional activities have now returned to normal post-holiday
Sales of sportswear and accessories are relatively strong;

home furnishings are relatively weak.

sales of

Prices are generally steady to slightly

higher with some retailers reporting adjustments to wholesale price increases.
Retailers' expectations are optimistic and inventory levels are generally
satisfactory.
Automobile Sales.

Most respondents report steady to slightly higher

automobile sales over the last month.
is generally available.

Adequate dealer and consumer financing

Most dealers report that they have sold most of the

1988 model cars, but some report higher than desired inventory levels.

In

general, dealers are optimistic about the outlook for automobile sales during
1989.
Manufacturing.

Respondents are reporting moderate increases in major

input prices compared with last year.

Input prices are expected to level off

in the months ahead, with some materials prices expected to fall somewhat.
Firms are not experiencing difficulty getting materials, with some lead times
shortening and availability a little better than a year ago.

Most respondents

are satisfied with inventory levels, but a few plan to trim inventories.
Firms are operating at high levels of capacity use, with some shortages of
labor, both skilled and unskilled.
Demand for capital goods is still increasing, on balance, among Tenth
District manufacturers, although a sizable minority of respondents report some
slowing.

Nearly all respondents directed their 1988 capital spending toward

equipment purchases rather than new plant construction, a mix that is expected
to continue in 1989.

Capital spending in 1988 did increase capacity slightly,

however, through replacing obsolete equipment with more productive equipment,
acquiring additional equipment, and adding shifts.
The majority of respondents export some of their output, and they report
stable to increasing exports, which are unhampered by capacity constraints.
Firms generally believe they can easily switch from producing for domestic
customers to producing for foreign customers.

Most respondents import some of

their capital goods, but few have been increasing those imports.

Uncertainty

about changes in the value of the dollar is not an important consideration in
capital spending decisions.
Energy.

The district's energy industry remains stable following OPEC's

recent agreement to restrict output.

Although oil prices have firmed

recently, uncertainty about the agreement's longer term effect on oil prices
has held down drilling activity.

December drilling activity was down over a

fourth from a year ago, but the average number of active drilling rigs in the
district rose slightly from 263 in November to 270 in December.
Housing Activity and Finance.
weak.

Housing activity in the district remains

Homebuilders report that housing starts were down in December 1988

compared to December 1987 and were generally unchanged from November 1988.
Single-family construction continues to be the strongest component, while

X-3

multi-family construction remains weak.

New home prices are reported somewhat

higher, and the recent high level of home inventories is returning to normal.
Respondents from district savings and loan institutions report mixed
savings inflow performance relative both to a year ago and to a month ago.
Expectations of future savings inflows are also mixed.

Promotional activity

and a "flight to quality" from troubled institutions are largely credited for
improvements in savings inflows at some institutions.
been constant or down slightly in recent months.

Mortgage demand has

Mortgage interest rates have

generally increased and are expected to increase further in the coming months.
Banking.

District commercial banks report little change in loan demand

over the past month.

Demand for commercial and industrial loans and consumer

loans was up slightly at a few institutions, while demand for most other types
of loans was either constant or down slightly.

About half of the respondents

increased their prime rates by fifty basis points; most of the others had
raised their rates earlier.
in the near term.

Most of the respondents expect further increases

Consumer loan rates increased at most of the banks

surveyed, and, again, most banks expect additional increases.

Deposits

increased somewhat at district banks, with the greatest strength in demand
deposits, NOW accounts, and small time deposits.
Agriculture.

Although the 1988 drought was generally not as severe in

the Tenth District as in other parts of the nation, the moisture situation and
crop conditions remain a concern in 1989.

Several district areas have

experienced very dry conditions through fall and early winter, and moisture is
needed soon to ensure a healthy winter wheat crop in 1989.

Soil moisture

reserves are being further depleted by dry weather, which will make 1989 crops
especially dependent on timely rains during the growing season.

X-4

Strong crop and livestock prices produced relatively high farm income in
the Tenth District in 1988.

As a result, year-end loan repayment rates were

generally high, continuing the financial recovery begun in 1987.

Most bankers

in the region expect fewer credit renewals in the coming spring credit season
as some farmers pay off operating loans and reduce carryover debt.
Changes in federal farm programs may have only a small effect on the
financial situation of district farmers.

Reduced acreage idling requirements

may boost loan demand as farmers put land back into crop production.

Fewer

acres may be farmed in some areas of the district, however, as more acres are
placed in the Conservation Reserve Program, trimming operating credit needs.
While strong livestock prices have contributed significantly to high farm
income, little expansion has taken place in district livestock operations.
Cow/calf operators appear to be just maintaining herds, holding back
replacement heifers while selling cows.

Inadequate wheat pastures have forced

some stocker operations to reduce herds or purchase additional feed.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District is growing moderately, chiefly as a result of expansion
in manufacturing and in services.

December retail sales were up at a healthy

pace and auto sales have also shown some strengthening.

Construction activity

has changed little in recent months, but oil and gas drilling has entered
another period of protracted decline.

Continuing District drought problems, in

contrast to improving moisture conditions nationally, suggest diminished net
farm income prospects for 1989.
Manufacturing expansion is moderate overall, but variation among
industries is great.

Chemical producers say orders have been rising steadily

this year, but there has been some seasonal slackening of late.

Although some

respondents in this industry express concerns over possible demand slippage in
late 1989 or early 1990, reports of capacity constraints and of investments in
plant and equipment are widespread.

While a number of petroleum refiners are

also running at full capacity, investments in plant and equipment beyond normal
maintenance are not generally under consideration.

Paper producers are

undergoing a seasonal decline in demand, but most expect to operate at full
capacity in 1989, as they have during 1988.
expansions this year.

Several said they plan capacity

Steel manufacturers report increasing demand, except for

construction-related products, and firms are optimistic about sales growth in
1989.

Orders to fabricated metals manufacturers have been expanding

throughout this year.

Complaints about rising prices for steel inputs were

common in this industry.

Respondents in the construction-linked industries of

lumber and wood products and stone, clay, and glass generally report continued

XI-2

weak sales and some say they are laying off workers.

Electronics

manufacturers note that demand has changed little overall in recent months.
Most manufacturers say there are few, if any, upward wage pressures.
December retail sales growth varied across the District, but
expansion was widespread.

Houston's sales for the period were reported as up 6

to 7 percent from a year earlier, and Dallas' increases were said to be in the
7 percent range.

A combination of a pegged peso, rising consumer prices in

Mexico, and concerns over a possible devaluation was said to have pushed up
sales by as much as 30 percent from a year earlier at some border retail
establishments.

Elsewhere, however, growth was said to be somewhat slower,

with particular sluggishness in Austin.
New automobile sales in December rose above a year earlier and they
were up markedly from the levels of November 1988.

For the year, unit sales

were up by 8 percent in Houston but up by only 2 to 3 percent in Dallas.

Auto

dealers expect significant increases in unit sales in the coming year but
stress that volume is still below levels prior to the 1986 District economic
downturn.
After growing moderately from April to August, the overall value of
District construction contracts has changed little in recent months.

Recent

values remain at about half the levels of the third quarter of 1983.

Despite

the stability in overall contract values, there has been much change in the
three principal components of spending.

Nonresidential building contract

values have turned down recently, while nonbuilding contracts have risen.
Residential contract values have shown little recent change, but residential

XI-3

building permits have begun to grow, mainly through an upturn in single-family
permits.
District oil and gas drilling has been declining lately and, in
December, fell to its lowest level in more than two years.

The principal

leading indicators of drilling activity, including the seismic crew count and
well permits issued, have also fallen.

These reductions have occurred in the

face of rising oil prices, which in December reached their highest levels since
last April.

Concerns are widespread that recent oil prices will not persist.

West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices are generally believed likely to
average about $15 per barrel this year.

The current price of over $17 per

barrel is not felt to be sustainable.
District agriculture continues to suffer from drought.

According to

early reports, moisture shortages have already damaged the District's winter
wheat crop, most of which is in north and northwestern Texas.

South Texas

farmers are expressing renewed concern about the impact of dry conditions upon
crops they will plant this winter.

Over the last year, increased grain prices

have squeezed profit margins of feeder cattle operations, whose product prices
have risen less than the cost of feed.

In December, however, beef cattle

prices rose while prices of traditional feed grains fell slightly or remained
unchanged from November.

On average, prices received by Texas farmers and

ranchers in December were unchanged from November but were 4 percent above a
year earlier.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary

The economy of the Twelfth Federal Reserve District continues to exhibit
strength. Most respondents to the survey expect robust growth in their industries and
regions, although they have become more pessimistic about the national economy.
Resource industries remain healthy, with strong growth reported in mining.
Construction is healthy in areas other than Alaska, Arizona, and Utah where real estate
remains in oversupply.

Manufacturing is expanding in most areas, led by aerospace,

forest products, and electronics. Retail sales posted healthy year-over-year gains.
Business Sentiment
Respondents to the survey are more pessimistic about future national growth,
investment, foreign trade, and inflation than they have been at any time during the past
year. Nearly 64 percent of the respondents expect growth to slow, and 6 percent of the
respondents anticipate a recession during the next four quarters.
These sentiments about national trends contrast sharply with the respondents' own
industry and area outlooks.

Despite the negative outlook for the national economy,

respondents generally report very strong conditions in their regions.
Resource Industries
Respondents to the survey are optimistic about the District's agriculture. Recent
rainfall has been near normal, raising hopes that the drought is ending in the West. High
cattle prices are expected to keep profits high in cattle production despite rising
production costs.

Agricultural exports from the District are expected to climb this year.

One

respondent in the Northwest reports very strong export activity for processed food to
the Pacific Rim countries. Foreign demand is growing for agricultural products as tariff

XII-2

barriers are reduced.

Some concern is registered in California, where a threatened

tariff war with the European Community could reduce California's exports of walnuts
and dried fruits.
Mining is very strong in the District. Respondents report substantial new investment to open new gold, silver, copper, and phosphate mines and to refurbish existing
mines. Exports of copper are being eliminated by rising domestic consumption. Energy
industries are being bouyed by rising oil prices, although most new expenditures on plant
and equipment are designed to refurbish existing fields, rather than to discover new
reserves.
Respondents in forest products industries report some easing of capacity
constraints as demand growth slows and new capacity comes on stream.

Production of

plywood and lumber has fallen by 3 percent, but pulp and paper production remains near
capacity. One respondent reports that log inventories have been rebuilt, but another
respondent reports that small mills are unable to compete with Asian customers for logs
and may be forced to close.
Construction and Real Estate
Real estate and construction are reported strong in the District, except in Alaska,
Arizona, and Utah. Respondents in California report continued year-over-year increases
in property values and sales activities.

Nonresidential and residential construction

remain at high levels in Southern California, and commercial rents are rising.
volume of residential sales is reported to be very strong in Oregon.

A respondent in

Seattle notes that housing prices are increasing at a 10 percent annual rate.
remains over-built.

The

Arizona

Although home prices have not changed significantly, one respon-

dent reports that the price of undeveloped land purchased in earlier speculative buying
has fallen by as much as a 40 percent.

XII-3

Manufacturing
Manufacturing industries continue to expand in the West.

Boeing is building new

plants in the Seattle and Spokane areas and is seeking to boost production by one plane
per month at existing facilities.

Capital equipment producers have become increasingly

competitive in world markets.

Several respondents reported that domestic equipment

has been displacing foreign equipment.

Caterpillar is said to be near capacity, with one

dealer in Utah reporting a 30 percent increase in Caterpillar sales this year.

Small

electric power producers in the Northwest plan significant additions to capacity this
next year.

One respondent noted that the drought and increased consumption forced

utilities to draw on reserve capacity this past year, signaling a need for new power
production.

One retailer reports a shift of apparel manufacturing to west coast cities

from Asia because of higher imported apparel costs.
Electronics firms also are expanding.

Several major electronics firms are building

new plants in Idaho and other parts of the West.

In California, however, sluggish sales

of some electronic components have caused scattered layoffs.
Retail Sales
Retailers in the District report strong sales. Sales over the Christmas holidays ran
7 to 15 percent above year-earlier levels in most areas.
show no slackening in consumer spending.

Early indications for January

Apparel prices have been rising faster than

the general rate of inflation, and this trend is expected to continue through the first
half of 1989.

