SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

December 1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

.............

First District -- Boston

..................

i

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

. .

Second District -- New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .
Third District -- Philadelphia
Fourth District -- Cleveland
Fifth District -- Richmond

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

IIIII-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
.

IV-1

..V-I

Sixth District -- Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ...

VI-1

Seventh District -- Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
.
Eighth District -- St. Louis

-1

..VII-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .VIII-I

Ninth District -- Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

..

IX-1

Tenth District -- Kansas City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .X-I
Eleventh District -- Dallas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....

.

XI-

Twelfth District -- San Francisco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .XII-1

i
SUMMARY*
Most Federal Reserve districts describe economic activity as
stable to modestly expanding, though two note some recent softening.
Consumer spending has varied among districts.

Strength has been

mostly confined to nondurable items, while sales of autos and other
durables have generally been weak.

The majority of districts report

some softening in manufacturing activity but there are pockets of
strength.

Construction is strong or improving in the West and Midwest

but somewhat sluggish in other areas.

Agriculture has improved in

much of the country and several resource industries have been
expanding.

Those districts that reported on price developments

generally noted flat to modestly increased input prices, with several
mentioning the continuing escalation of medical insurance costs.

Loan

demand at commercial banks varied by type and region.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales have been mixed among the districts.

Sales were

described as on target or healthy in the New York, St. Louis,
Minneapolis and San Francisco districts.

Boston, Cleveland and

Philadelphia reported that sales were about even with year-earlier
levels while Richmond and Dallas noted some slowing.

Most districts

that commented on Thanksgiving weekend sales reported virtually no
change in the pace of sales relative to a year ago, but Atlanta

Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and based on
information obtained before November 28, 1989. This document
summarizes comments received from business and other contacts outside
the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal
Reserve officials.

ii
experienced double-digit gains at that time.

Among items mentioned as

selling well in several districts were apparel, jewelry, cosmetics and
toys.

Unseasonably warm weather hampered sales of winter apparel in

several areas, however, and most districts noted a weakness in sales
of autos and other big-ticket items.
Retail inventories were reported at satisfactory levels in
Atlanta, Minneapolis, New York and Philadelphia, but are higher than
desired in Boston and Chicago.

Retailers in Boston, Minneapolis,

Philadelphia and Richmond expect this holiday season to equal last
year's while those in Kansas City and St. Louis appear to be somewhat
more optimistic.
Manufacturing
Some slowing in manufacturing activity has occurred in most
areas.

While conditions in Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco

were mixed, shipments and orders in Boston were flat or down compared
with a year earlier.

Philadelphia notes a continuation of the

downtrend that began during the summer and Richmond and St. Louis also
report a decline in manufacturing activity.

In Cleveland, where the

pace of industrial activity had been strong during the first nine
months of the year, some easing has recently occurred and Kansas City
notes a slowing of sales, though most plants are operating near full
capacity.
Weakness in the auto industry and among its suppliers was
most commonly cited as a major factor in the manufacturing slowdown.
Softness was also reported in the computer, electronics and defense

iii
industries in Minneapolis and in the furniture, textiles and apparel
industries in Richmond.
In the nonauto sectors of the transportation equipment
industry some gains occurred.

Cleveland noted an upturn in orders for

heavy-duty trucks and several districts reported strength at
aerospace-related firms.

Cleveland and Chicago report expansion in

the industrial machinery industry, while firms producing oilfield
equipment and chemicals in Dallas increased their sales.

Several food

processing plants in the San Francisco district plan to expand and
Atlanta reports that capital spending continues in the chemicals,
metals, wood and pulp, and industrial equipment industries.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction is reported to be strong or improving in the
West and Midwest but somewhat sluggish in most other areas.

Housing

starts in Kansas City have increased over last year and sales in
Minneapolis were slightly higher.

San Francisco reports that

construction and real estate activity are strong or improving in most
of the district, while in Chicago residential building is still good
though the pace has slowed somewhat.

Atlanta and Richmond note some

weakness in residential construction activity, however, and Dallas
reports that activity remains far below the levels of the mid-80's,
though there are now tentative signs of expansion.

Home sales in

Boston were the same or slightly lower than in 1988 with homes
remaining on the market longer and prices declining.
Nonresidential construction and real estate activity also is
mixed.

Boston, Atlanta and Minneapolis report some weakness in the

iv
commercial market and New York and St. Louis note some recent
increases in vacancy rates.

However, office leasing has been

relatively strong in New York, and Atlanta and Chicago both mention
continuing strength in industrial construction.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Agricultural conditions have improved in much of the nation.
Minneapolis reports that both wheat and barley production were double
last year's level and Kansas City reports that corn and soybean yields
were generally normal.

Most of the winter wheat crop in Kansas City

is in good condition though dry weather could present some problems.
San Francisco, Chicago and St. Louis report an increase in
agricultural exports, and farmland values continue to rise in Chicago
Dallas reports that drought persists in south Texas

and Minneapolis.

and along the Gulf coast and that cattlemen have reduced herds.
However, in the northern part of the Dallas district, winter wheat
planting and the corn harvest are both on schedule.
Among natural resources industries, exploration for natural
gas is boosting drilling activity in Kansas City, and Dallas reports
that the oil and gas industry is optimistic about expanding next
year.

Richmond notes that coal prices are strong and coal production

in West Virginia has been at a record level.

Minneapolis and Richmond

report robust activity in the lumber industry, and the mining and
metals industries are strong in San Francisco and Minneapolis.
Financial Markets
Demand for commercial bank loans remains varied by type and
among regions.

San Francisco reports strong loan demand in most areas

v

though the rate of growth seems to have slowed from its earlier robust
pace.

Bankers in both Kansas City and Philadelphia note a recent

increase in total loan demand, with business, consumer and mortgage
loans up in Kansas City but only business loans up in Philadelphia.
Some types of consumer lending are still strong in Atlanta but
commercial lending is down.

Richmond reports an overall softness in

demand affecting both business and consumer loans.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity is generally flat and below the expectations of
retail, manufacturing, and real estate contacts in the First District.
While inventories have edged up at some firms, other cost pressures have
eased.

The New Year is expected to yield more of the same.

A recently

released forecast of economic activity in the District predicts employment
declining in 1990 and then picking up in 1991-92.
Retail
First District retailers report that sales from October through
mid-November are about even with year-ago levels and well below their
earlier plans.

Although unseasonably warm weather has contributed to

weakness in winter apparel, a variety of respondents see soft demand.
Retailers have stepped up promotions, but consumers are proving
unresponsive.

Because inventories have edged up, retail contacts are

reducing orders and delaying deliveries of new merchandise.
Cost pressures on regional retailers have abated.

Respondents

report increased availability and generally flat to slightly lower prices
for goods, labor, and capital.

As exceptions, medical insurance costs

continue to escalate, and credit for small firms and riskier projects is
more difficult to obtain.
Most retailers contacted expect promotions to continue into 1990.
However, several respondents foresee a revival of consumer buying and a

-2-

normal, if not stellar, Christmas season.

While firms are decidedly

cautious and are not making new capital commitments, they are holding to
existing schedules of store refurbishment and expansion.
Manufacturing
Almost all First District manufacturing contacts report that
shipments and orders are flat or down from year-ago levels.
range from slight to 15 percent.

The declines

Although two firms mention a recent

pick-up in orders, others describe demand as weakening and below plan.
Orders from the auto and computer industries are said to be off most
sharply.

Products related to the aircraft, telecommunications and medical

equipment industries and most exports remain relatively strong.

One-third

of manufacturing contacts say their inventories are higher than desired.
Employment is below 1988 levels at two-thirds of the manufacturers
contacted.

Some are cutting management layers; another is not hiring

seasonal help.

One "cautious" firm, which is giving overtime, has

instituted a hiring freeze.

Labor markets are described as "favorable" in

Vermont and "loosening but still tight" for professionals in Massachusetts
and for low-skilled workers in Connecticut.
Capital expenditures are expected to remain at 1988-89 levels or to
decline in 1990.

Next year's spending will be directed toward maintenance

and productivity improvements.
First District contacts indicate that input prices are generally
stable or down slightly from recent peaks in what is now a "buyers'
market."

Manufacturers' sales prices are mixed.

Half the respondents

report that sales prices are flat or down, with some discounting occurring
in the United States and the United Kingdom.

Others have raised prices 3

-3-

to 5 percent from year-ago levels.
early next year.

Two firms hope for similar increases

Among firms discussing profit margins, most report

improvements.
First District manufacturers foresee little or no sales growth in
Although no contact expects a recession, several expect that 1990

1990.

will prove to be a "difficult" year.
Real Estate
First District realtors report that residential real estate sales
are slightly lower than or even with last year's level.

Contacts say that

they are working harder to attain comparable results, with homes staying on
the market longer and prices declining.

The most prevalent reason cited

for the slowdown is buyer caution based on general uneasiness about the
economy.

Most of the realtors contacted expect level residential sales in

the New Year.

According to the Spaulding and Slye Quarterly Review, the

commercial real estate market is also softer, with landlords in Greater
Boston adopting aggressive strategies to retain tenants.
Outlook
The New England Economic Project (NEEP), a nonprofit organization of
businesses, government agencies and educational institutions, held its
semi-annual outlook conference in mid-November.

The NEEP forecasts call

for nonagricultural employment in the region to continue declining in 1990
as it has since early this year.

Regional employment will recover in 1991

and grow more strongly in 1992, equalling the projected national growth
rate of 1.5 percent in the latter year.

The region's unemployment rate

will remain below the U.S. average over the forecast period.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments have varied among sectors of the Second District economy since
the last report with no clear sign of overall deterioration or improvement.
Department store sales were generally on plan and the pace of office leasing was
good. Demand for new homes remained mixed, however, and purchasing managers in Buffalo
and Rochester noted some flattening of new orders and overall business conditions.
Senior officers at small and midsized banks reported demand for home mortgages slowed

over the year.
Consumer Spending
District retailers reported over-the-year sales gains during October which
ranged from 1.4 percent to 11.6 percent.

These results were on or slightly above plan

though a couple of respondents described their sales as somewhat disappointing.

Sales

during the first half of November were generally on target and retailers were
cautiously optimistic about the month as a whole.

Women's apparel and junior sports-

wear continued to be the strongest selling items though unseasonably warm weather was
blamed for slower-than-usual sales of winter apparel.

Jewelry and cosmetics also

sold well but sales of furniture and home furnishings remained sluggish.
The current level of inventories was characterized as manageable by most
department store contacts though one retailer reported stocks above desired levels.
In addition, some District stores that are subsidiaries of financially-strapped
companies are reportedly somewhat understocked because of suppliers' concerns about
being paid.

Regarding the near-term outlook, liquidation of the 124-year old

B. Altman's chain is producing uncertainty among some District retailers because of
the possibility of substantial price-cutting during the current holiday season.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Demand for new homes in the District remains mixed.

In some upstate New

II-2
York areas where activity was already strong, further recent gains are attributed to
lower mortgage rates and more realistic pricing of homes for resale.

Much of the New

York metropolitan area continues to report little or no improvement in buyer interest,
however; despite the general slack, a few developers have undertaken projects they
consider sufficiently attractive to elicit a favorable response.

For example, a 24-

story condominium apartment house is going up on New York City's Central Park West
where sites for new buildings are virtually nonexistent.

Offering many highly sought

after features of pre-war structures and unobstructed views of the park and the city's
skyline, 21 of 38 units have been sold for September 1990 occupancy in the last three
months although prices reportedly range from $900,000 to $6 million.
The pace of office leasing has been good in much of the District but with
the recent completion of substantial amounts of new space, vacancy rates have
generally held steady or edged higher.

Moreover, some New York City brokerage firms

recently announced further staff reductions in their continuing cost-cutting efforts.
These moves could throw additional office space on the downtown Manhattan market,
where vacancy rates have already risen due to earlier restructuring by financial
firms, even though no new buildings are currently planned there.
Other Reports on Business Activity
October surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester indicate some
flattening out in general business conditions, orders and production with an increased
number of firms noting "no change" in these categories.

In addition, in both surveys,

deteriorating conditions were reported by at least as many firms as reported an
improvement.
October.

Substantially fewer purchasing managers reported higher input prices in

Concerning the outlook, the Rochester survey showed a large increase in the

percentage of respondents expecting a deterioration in business conditions over the
next three months.
October unemployment rates of 4.7 percent and 5.1 percent in New York and New
Jersey, respectively, were again below the national average.

However, October was

II-3
the first month in three years that New Jersey's rate was above 5 percent and the
unemployment outlook for the District is uncertain.

In the wake of relatively weak

investor volume and a slowdown in new issues and merger and acquisition activity,
several brokerage firms recently announced plans for additional cutbacks totaling
some 1200 employees.

Some observers expect this number to climb even higher as more

restructuring occurs in the securities industry.

Further layoffs are also occurring

at some auto parts manufacturers as a result of sluggish demand for cars.

On the

other hand, while demand for autos is slow, interest in new minivans is reportedly
strong enough to be boosting employment at minivan parts and assembly plants in the
District.

Moreover, the House of Representatives voted for the production of 18 more

F-14 fighter planes which could maintain employment levels on Long Island.
Financial Developments
Most senior officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second
District report that demand for home mortgages has declined somewhat over the past
year.

The reported depth of the decline varied considerably, however, ranging from

virtually no change to decidedly lower.

All respondents stated that their mortgage

activity is heavily concentrated in either fixed or adjustable rate loans; a few banks
offer only one or the other type of financing.

A majority of the banks reported

greater demand for fixed rather than adjustable rate mortgages which may be due to
declines on average in fixed rates

while adjustable rates have increased.

Responses

were mixed regarding the current strength of the bankers' local residential real
estate market.

One officer noted that while overall demand was slow, certain pockets

in highly desirable areas were still doing well. Several respondents cited a seasonal
slowdown and recessionary fears as causes of the current downturn.

Most bankers

stated that that they are aggressively marketing mortgages at the present time but
only one-quarter are currently offering concessionary first-year rates on adjustable
rate mortgages.

Despite a slight increase in national delinquency rates, fewer than

half of the respondents expressed any concern about delinquencies.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District appears to be just steady
overall, according to businesses surveyed in November, although conditions
vary among sectors.

Manufacturing remains on the downward trend that set in

during the summer, although the extent of the decline among area firms may be
diminishing.

Retailers report that sales are running just level with the

year-ago pace, in dollar terms, as the holiday shopping season begins.
Bankers note that consumer lending is nearly stagnant; financing of auto
purchases has fallen off with the drop in sales, and other categories of
personal lending remain sluggish.

Business lending is advancing moderately

and real estate loan growth is being restrained.
Expectations among Third District businesses are that conditions may
improve, but just slightly in the first half of 1990.

Managers at area

manufacturing plants anticipate an end to the current decline but foresee only
marginal gains in the next six months.

Retailers expect sales for their

fourth quarter (November-January) to run just modestly above the year-ago
period.

Bankers expect some further gains in commercial and industrial

lending but they generally are planning to be very cautious in extending their
exposure to commercial real estate.

Bankers do not anticipate renewed vigor

in consumer loan growth until overall economic growth accelerates.
MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing activity in the Third District continues to edge down,
according to firms surveyed in early November, as the region's industrial
sector remains on a downward trend that began in July.

However, negative

reports from local manufacturers are less prevalent now than they have been
since mid-summer.

Most of the firms reporting slower business are durable

goods producers, while makers of nondurables generally report steady

III-2

conditions.
Specific measures of industrial activity, while mixed, generally reflect
an overall picture of softening business.

Although shipments are increasing,

new orders are virtually flat; the resulting drop in unfilled orders continues
a downward trend that started in June.

And while employment is being held

steady, on balance, area firms apparently are trimming production in response
to the weak orders situation by cutting working hours slightly.

Although one-

third of the firms contacted recently report that the costs of the goods they
purchase continue to rise, most indicate that prices of both inputs and
outputs are stable.
As for the future, sentiment among area manufacturers is divided nearly
equally among those expecting further slowing, those anticipating steady
business, and those predicting some improvement over the next six months; a
slight plurality favors the optimistic scenario.

On balance, while firms

contacted this month expect an upturn in orders and shipments by the spring of
next year, they expect order backlogs to continue edging down, and they
anticipate some cuts in payrolls, as well.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in late November described current
dollar sales for the month up to Thanksgiving as flat compared to the same
period last year.

Stores specializing in women's apparel were posting good

year-over-year gains, but much of the apparent improvement is attributed to
depressed sales in this line last year.

Although some discount and off-price

retailers achieved what were described as healthy advances over last year's
results for the Thanksgiving weekend, most stores ran just even with or
marginally above their 1988 performance.
widespread.

Retailers said markdowns were fairly

III-3

Area merchants generally expect modest year-to-year gains in dollar
sales for the holiday period and for the fiscal fourth quarter (NovemberJanuary) as a whole.

Although most of the store officials contacted for this

report said inventories were in line with sales, many said they were planning
promotional efforts to give Christmas sales an early boost rather than waiting
for a possible last-minute rush.
FINANCE
Bankers contacted in November report modest loan growth overall, with
business lending on the rise and consumer lending virtually flat.

Lending

officers indicate that commercial and industrial loans outstanding have been
rising moderately and they expect a step-up in the rate of growth as the year
comes to an end.

Some banks have boosted loan commitments recently, and they

expect these credit lines to be drawn down soon.
Consumer lending in the Third District is moving up only sluggishly
despite some banks' promotional efforts.

Bankers believe the fall-off in auto

sales has diminished the demand for credit from individuals in recent weeks;
furthermore, some expect overall consumer spending to remain lackluster,
holding down growth of personal loan volume.
Area bankers generally indicate that they are continuing to restrict
expansion of lending for development and construction.

Lending for

construction of offices and stores is expected to flatten or even decline as
banks grow more cautious, and demand for funds to finance industrial
development is expected to diminish in response to the slackness in the
manufacturing sector.

While some bankers note increased demand for credit

from firms involved in infrastructure construction, especially highways,
bankers' expectations are that total real estate and construction lending will
ease from its recent rapid growth.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

District respondents are guardedly optimistic that aggressive sales
promotions during this holiday season will boost sales about 5% to 6% from a
year ago.

Manufacturing output in Ohio has begun to ease recently, following

stronger than national growth in production through most of this year.

Some

financial market participants believe the run-up in the federal funds rate to
8 1/2% will delay a prime rate reduction, and that relatively small interest
rate reductions would not do much to stimulate demand.
Consumer Spending.

Both producers and retailers of consumer goods believe

that the slowdown in consumer spending is largely in new car sales.

They

believe that weak auto sales are not a symptom of a contraction in consumer
spending, and that consumers will respond to price incentives that should
boost sales of both automotive and nonautomotive goods.
Post-Thanksgiving Day sales were generally reported as "good" as last
year. although a national chain reported their sales rose less than last year.
A retailer reported that promotions so far have been larger than usual.
Retailers expect about a 5% to 6% increase in sales this holiday season from
last.

Generally good sales have cut inventories to levels still higher than

last year.

Excess dealer inventories of major household appliances were

apparently corrected during the summer months, and orders from dealers
improved in both September and October, although at levels below last spring.

IV-2

Economists with the auto industry report somewhat weaker-than-expected new
car sales, and that the "payback" period following high incentives of recent
months may be longer than they expected.

Price increases of 1990 domestic

models, partly reflecting added safety features, have made some imports less
expensive than domestic models, and incentives on 1990 models are considerably
smaller than recent incentives for 1989 models.

Another large buildup of new

car inventories in November has led most analysts to expect a wave of price
incentives beginning in the next few weeks.
New car dealers report that overall sales have slowed especially in
November, but foreign makes have fared better than Big Three lines.
Toyota dealers have experienced shortages of their more popular models,
primarily the Toyota Camry this fall.

Sales of 1990 models have been

comparatively slow also, and buyers still exhibit a preference for foreign
cars.
Dealers report that consumers continue to perceive foreign models as
superior in quality to Big Three cars, although that perception may be waning.
They report fewer trade-ins of domestic cars for their dealerships' foreign
models, and an increase in the number of foreign-to-domestic trade-ins.
Most dealers do not expect sales for 1990 models to improve until broader
and/or more generous buyer incentives are offered by the manufacturers.

They

report that, to date, incentives on 1990 models have trended more toward
dealers' incentives, which apparently lack the advertising value of buyer
incentives and are usually less generous.
Manufacturing.

The pace of industrial activity in Ohio held up stronger

than for the nation through the first three quarters of this year, but has

IV-3

apparently receded in recent months, according to this Bank's estimates of
production.

The decline has centered in the automotive industry and its key

suppliers, especially primary metals and rubber and plastics industries.

In

contrast, output in both electrical and industrial machinery industries has
continued to expand through the fall months.
Manufacturing employment in Ohio has also been receding slightly from its
latest high last January, but employment in the machinery industries has
remained steady over the past three quarters.

Employment declines have

centered in the automotive, primary metals, and fabricated metals industries.
Two auto producers recently announced plans for plant shutdowns of one to two
weeks involving a total of 7600 workers.
The summer slump in orders and production of heavy-duty trucks appears to
have run its course, according to some suppliers.

One supplier had a

temporary lay-off of a few hundred workers and another plans a 5% reduction in
its work force through attrition.

The revival in truck orders in October

leads one analyst to believe that a recovery is now under way.

He also

expects a slightly stronger increase in overall manufacturing output next
quarter compared with this quarter, especially if the auto industry steps up
an incentive program over the next few weeks.
Cutting tool orders have fallen between 20% to 40% from a year earlier
practically each month since last spring, mostly because of declines in orders
from the automotive and defense industries.
order decline to continue into 1990.
reducing the order backlog.

A major tool builder expects the

Shipments have been sustained by

IV-4

Financial Developments.

Market participants were apparently prepared for

a 1/2 point reduction in the prime rate, but some now believe prospects for an
imminent reduction have lessened if the federal funds rate holds at 8 1/2%.
They also believe that it will take more than a 1/2 point cut in interest
rates to stimulate demand for credit, which has generally softened since
mid-year.

Fixed rate mortgages at about 10% are commonly available from banks

and thrift institutions, but demand is reported to be less than expected.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity softened further in November from a sluggish
pace earlier this fall.

Retail sales and manufacturing activity declined, and

the housing market weakened.

District financial institutions reported reduced

demand for consumer loans and for commercial and industrial loans.
activity was again mixed.
were strong.

Port

On the brighter side, coal and timber production

Financial conditions improved further in the District

agricultural sector, and farmland values continued to rise.
Consumer Spending
Reports from various sources including our regular survey of retailers
suggested that department stores in the District experienced declines in retail
sales from October to mid-November.

Some lines such as cosmetics were reported

strong, but others such as apparel were weak.
as furniture were mixed, but weaker on balance.

Sales of big ticket items such
Most department store

executives, however, expect this Christmas season to be as good as or better
than last year, and most do not plan to mark down merchandise as much as they
did a year ago.
Manufacturing and Mining
Responses to our regular mail survey indicated a decrease in District
manufacturing activity from mid-October to mid-November.

Reports of declines

outnumbered reports of increases in shipments, new orders, unfilled orders,
employment, inventories, and the workweek.
in new and unfilled orders.

The largest declines were recorded

New export orders were largely unchanged.

The

prices of finished goods and raw materials rose moderately.
Our November survey showed that most manufacturers remained optimistic
about prospects for the U.S. economy and their own businesses, although they

V-2
were somewhat less optimistic about the near-term outlook than in our previous
survey.

Most producers expect the nation's economy to grow at a slow to

moderate rate during the next 18 months.

Almost half of the respondents,

however, up from one-third in September, expect a decrease in the nation's rate
of economic expansion over the next six months.

The percentage of respondents

who expect a decrease in their own shipments in the next six months rose to 40
percent in November from 25 percent in September.

The percentage planning to

maintain or increase capital spending in the next six months declined slightly
but remained high.
Reports from sources other than those surveyed by mail provided some
specifics on District activity in particular industries in recent weeks.

In

the Carolinas, the furniture, textile, and apparel industries reduced their
workweeks because of slow sales.

In West Virginia, however, coal production

was at a record pace and coal prices were strong.

Timber production also

maintained a robust pace in West Virginia and other District states.
Ports
Reports from the three major District ports--Hampton Roads (Norfolk),
Charleston, and Baltimore--indicated that overall activity was mixed in
October.

Imports rose from September levels at Hampton Roads and Charleston,

but declined at Baltimore.

Exports increased at Charleston, decreased at

Baltimore, and remained about the same at Hampton Roads.
Residential Real Estate
A telephone survey of home builders pointed to a weakening in residential
construction activity in the first three weeks of November.
builders reported declines in their housing starts.

Nearly all home

Most said that they were

not building speculatively because inventories of unsold homes were high and
home purchases were expected to remain weak.

Comments by realtors and others confirmed the builders' reports of
softness in the District housing market in November.

Sales of both new and

existing homes were reported to be down in all but a few metropolitan areas.
Some realtors reported an increase in open house traffic, which they attributed
to good weather and lower mortgage rates.
Financial
District bankers reported softness in loan demand in early November.
Almost all indicated declines in the demand for commercial and industrial
loans, and some said that these declines were large.
reported that the demand for consumer loans was down.

Most bankers also
They attributed weakness

in car loans to depressed automobile sales and to greater use of dealer
financing.
A number of bankers commented on the high level of consumer debt and noted
an increase in their consumer loan losses and delinquencies.

Others saw

problems ahead in particular sectors, such as commercial real estate and
automobile dealerships.
Agriculture
A recent survey of agricultural bankers indicated that the health of
District agriculture has improved further.

The bankers said that farm loan

repayment rates were better than average at their institutions, and almost
two-thirds were actively seeking new farm loans.

The demand for farm loans was

normal across the District, but bankers expect weaker loan volume during the
next several months because they look for their nonbank competitors to become
more aggressive.

Farmland prices continued to rise in recent months, but only

a few of the bankers surveyed expect further increases in the months ahead.
With respect to crop conditions, wet weather has delayed the sowing of winter
wheat in parts of the District, though the planting of other small grains is on
schedule.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

The southeastern economy continues to grow modestly.

reports of weakness were received.

A few new

They were mostly related to the construction

industry, which, with the exception of the industrial building sector, has been sluggish for
much of the year.

Capital spending and capacity expansion continues in industries

related to chemicals, metals, paper and lumber, and industrial equipment.

Retailers

expect good sales of consumer nondurables in the weeks ahead, and inventories are
reported to be leaner this year than last.

Weakness in purchases of consumer durables

like appliances, autos, and furniture continues.

Commercial lending is down, although

there are still signs of strength in some types of consumer lending.

Our contacts

continue to report only mild wage and price increases and a few scattered shortages of
skilled workers.
Prices and Wages:

Most contacts report subdued wage increases and softness in

input prices. No signs of new wage pressures were reported. Employers continue to note
steeply rising costs of benefits, most notably employee health insurance.

Few contacts

thought that their labor market had changed much from last year, although some reports
of difficulty in finding skilled workers surfaced.

Several industrial contacts commented
and software engineers

has

been

that finding

skilled employees like mechanical

troublesome.

Increasing demand for such employees was cited as contributing to the

difficulty. A banker in Atlanta noted that positions like accountant and account analyst
have been difficult to fill recently, although finding clerks and tellers has been relatively
easy.
Input prices have been reported to be mostly stable or falling in some instances.
Construction materials prices do not appear to be under pressure.

Building materials

prices are expected to remain stable or decline until construction picks up. A producer
of wood building materials says that the price pressures usually seen this time of year are

VI-2

absent.

Prices of metals like aluminum and copper are expected to remain stable into

next year.

Prices for communications equipment are also stable or declining.

Several

trucking firms have reported that freight rates have been falling owing to excess
capacity in the industry.

Even though volume is as good as in 1988, total revenue is

down.
Retail Sales: Sales of automobiles continue to be weak, and most dealers do not
anticipate much improvement soon. Several furniture retailers have reported that sales
continue to decline, as have several retailers of home appliances.

Sales of carpet have

also slowed recently as replacement and home remodeling demand has weakened.

A

number of Atlanta retailers have stated that sales in the last few weeks have been at
least equal to last year's levels. They noted that consumer nondurables have been selling
particularly well. However, retail sales in New Orleans and Baton Rouge have generally
been reported to be slower than last year.

Retailers in various parts of the region added

that sales after Thanksgiving posted double-digit increases over the same weekend a year
ago.

Most contacts report satisfaction with retail inventories that are flat to up

moderately this year. They anticipate more price promotions to move their inventories
during the Christmas season.
Construction and Capital Spending:
Southeast remain sluggish.

Residential and office construction in the

Sales of existing homes have shown some strength recently,

particularly in Jackson, Mississippi and New Orleans.

Nonresidential construction is up

from a year ago, however, because of continuing strength in industrial construction. New
plans

for

several

large

chemical

plants

in Louisiana

were

announced recently.

Construction of retail space in Nashville was also reported to be at record levels
according to several contacts.
Spending on capital goods continues to hold up in the Southeast, although there
have been a few reports of plans having been revised down recently.
involves purchases of new equipment rather than capacity expansion.

Much spending
Producers of

VI-3

industrial pumps, fabricated aluminum, and processed food report plans to update older
machinery.

Several wood and pulp producers have announced plans to expand capacity

because of strong overseas demand.

A large producer of building materials, however,

reports recent cuts in capital spending plans for 1990 by 50 percent.

Their purchases of

new equipment have been put on hold until construction activity picks up.
Financial Services:

Several bankers in Georgia and Tennessee report that

commercial loan demand is weak. Consumer lending, on the other hand, is reported to be
growing in some states. Several lenders pointed out that auto loans by banks are down
substantially because of falling auto demand and because more and more people are using
home equity loans to finance automobiles.

Real estate and mortgage lending is down

compared to last year, and a contact in Atlanta thought that mortgage demand in that
market is at its worst since the early 1980s. Several lenders added that lending standards
have become much more strict for real estate loans in the last few months.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary.

Several reports indicate softening in manufacturing, centered

predominantly on motor vehicles but also including some types of electronic
equipment and nonauto consumer durables.

Other respondents with manufacturers see

continued expansion in line with the pace set earlier this year, generally a more
subdued rate of rise than last year's robust increases.

Construction in the

District continues relatively strong though Michigan is weakening.

Consumer

spending on nondurables is not showing the weakness evident in durables.
merchandise sales are expected to grow sluggishly over the year ahead.
farmland values continue to increase.

General
District

Large grain shipments to the USSR are

stressing domestic transportation facilities.
Total payroll employment in District states has been little changed, seasonally
adjusted, since early this year and manufacturing has fallen, with half of the
decline at Michigan factories.

The average unemployment rate in the District rose

to 6.1 percent in September, highest this year, from a low of 5.0 percent in
April.

Michigan unemployment increased most among District states, but Illinois,

Indiana, and Iowa also recorded sizable increases.
Surveys of purchasing managers in the District show a mixed pattern.

Chicago

purchasing managers reported an upturn in production and orders in October and less
widespread declines in backlogs.

Indianapolis purchasing managers, still seeing

expansion, indicated that increases in production and orders in October were more
widespread than last summer but less so than a year ago.

Milwaukee purchasers say

orders, production, and backlogs fell in October, continuing a shift from expansion
to slowdown underway for more than a year.
Manufacturing Industries.

A number of contacts in manufacturing indicate that

orders and activity are continuing to rise, in most cases less rapidly than last
year.

Others report declines, concentrated at motor vehicle makers and their

VII-2
suppliers, though volume also has turned down or is expected to slow in a few other
sectors including nonauto consumer durables and some types of electronics.
However, other motor vehicle plants continue to work overtime, and another
foreign-owned assembly plant started production in the District in October.

One

major auto maker is forecasting a recession for the national economy; another
thinks this projection is too pessimistic.
Markets for many types of industrial machinery and equipment have continued to
expand, though generally more slowly than last year.
been stronger than expected.

In some cases, sales have

Sales have remained 3 to 4 percent above a year

earlier throughout this year for a maker of electrical controls and supplies sold
widely to manufacturers of industrial equipment including pumps, compressors, fans,
motors, and other types of capital goods.

A second-half slowdown anticipated by

customers earlier this year has not materialized; sales remain as brisk as before.
Another capital goods producer indicated that sales of food industry machinery are
holding up reasonably well.
but may be bottoming.

Materials handling equipment sales weakened earlier

Sales of farm tractors and implements are running well ahead

of last year, and a manufacturer in the District expects a further gain in
shipments next year to meet retail demand and build inventories.

Heavy

construction equipment demand has been firmer for road building and mining.

Light

construction equipment sales, chiefly for residential building as well as some road
repair work, were reported weaker earlier this year, but one producer expects its
sales in 1989 to exceed last year, and projects a further gain in 1990.

Lower

orders for metal-cutting machine tools this year are said mainly to reflect
cutbacks by motor vehicle makers.

The market for diesel engines is off sharply

because of lower orders and production cuts at heavy truck manufacturers and a less
robust picture for industrial diesels.

Softness in the semiconductor market

reflects cutbacks at motor vehicle manufacturers and less favorable prospects for
other end-markets.

VII-3
Steel producers also are cutting shipments to motor vehicle manufacturers, but
industrial and construction demands for steel are holding up well.

Calendar-year

1989 shipments, previously forecast to be below 1988, are now expected to be
higher.

The pace of investment in projects making heavy use of steel has stayed

strong in chemicals and the paper industry, as well as for investment in steel
mills themselves.

Sales of steel for use in commercial construction are also
Starts on new projects have slowed, but may pick up as

described as doing well.

uncertainties over pollution abatement requirements are resolved.
Construction and Real Estate.

Indicators of construction activity and

prospects remain favorable in much of the District.

Contracts for construction of

nonresidential and residential buildings were higher, during this year's first nine
months, than last year in the District states.
declines.

Michigan, however, showed sizable

Indicators of current construction activity also indicate expansion.

For example, year-to-date shipments of gypsum board to the five District states
were 6 percent higher than a year earlier.

A large Chicago-area building material

supplier views prospects for downtown and suburban construction as favorable for
the next four to five years, and plans to add capacity.
construction in the Chicago area is quite active.
but still at a "good" level.

Light industrial

Residential building is down,

Existing home sales are sluggish, despite lower

The inventory of homes on the market has risen, and they

mortgage interest rates.
are taking longer to sell.
Consumer Spending.

A contact with a large general merchandise retailer thinks

nonauto consumer spending is unlikely to provide much support for continued
economic expansion in the year ahead.
been weak.

Sales of household durables generally have

Home fashions have been selling poorly.

Though appliance sales have

improved recently at one large retailer, year-to-date sales of "core" appliances
have been below last year.
have softened.

Buying of household furniture and lawn care equipment

Some apparel lines have been selling relatively well, including

VII-4
men's and children's clothing.

Industry-wide department store inventories are

viewed as heavy, indicating that a highly promotional Christmas is likely.

Next

year's sales at general merchandise retailers are expected to be only a little
higher than in 1989.

Catalog and direct mail marketers' sales were described as

soft in September and October.
Agriculture.

Our latest survey of agricultural banks found that District

farmland values rose 1.7 percent during the third quarter and 8 percent during the
year ending September 30.

The survey also indicated that farm loan repayment rates

picked up somewhat this summer.

Interest rates charged by banks on farm loans

edged lower for the second consecutive quarter but were still 50 basis points
higher than a year ago.

Loan-to-deposit ratios at District agricultural banks,

following a two-year uptrend, are at a five-year high but still far below the peak
of the late 1970s.
Barge rates and the demand for rail cars have firmed considerably this fall in
response to large grain shipments to the USSR.

While not unprecedented, the volume

of Soviet grain shipments will stress the domestic transportation network.

A major

bottleneck at the soon-to-be-replaced Alton (Illinois) Lock and Dam on the
Mississippi River has resurfaced with the pick-up in barge traffic.

Low water

levels on both the Mississippi and the Missouri River could further limit barge
traffic or result in an early, season-ending closure to traffic on the upper
portions of those rivers.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Economic activity has continued to slow in the Eighth District
in

recent

months.

Manufacturing

activity

has

declined

transportation sector accounting for most of the slowdown.
activity has also been weak.

with

the

Construction

While retailers are optimistic about the

holiday season, small businesses are somewhat pessimistic about future
economic conditions.

Auto sales have weakened considerably.

Smaller

District banks reported increased third-quarter earnings, while larger
banks reported lower earnings.
Consumer Spending
A
retailers

November

16-21

survey

indicated

considerable

of

District

variation

in

general
recent

merchandise
sales.

Most

respondents reported sales gains from a year earlier of 3 percent to 6
percent.

Two respondents, a discount store and a large department store

chain, reported double-digit sales increases.

The holiday season outlook

is generally optimistic. Items selling particularly well include women's
cosmetics,

apparel,

toys and home furnishings.

such as consumer electronics, were mixed.
have weakened considerably in recent months.

Sales of durable goods,

Eighth District auto sales
One Louisville auto dealer

reported October sales of imported vehicles to be down almost a third
from

a

year

earlier.

Most

dealers

believed

weak

sales

and

high

inventories will continue into the first quarter of 1990.
Outlook
A recent
revealed

rising

survey

of

pessimism

small

businesses

regarding

future

in

the

Eighth

economic

District

conditions.

VIII-2

Manufacturers

tended

to

be

more

pessimistic

than

other

businesses.

Compared with last year's responses, fewer respondents planned to make
major investments in plant and equipment in the next two quarters.

The

survey

the

also

proportion

revealed

a

slight

respondents

of

easing

with

in

labor

unfilled

job

shortages,
openings

as

dropped

approximately one-fifth compared with one-fourth a year earlier.
openings were for skilled workers.
respondents

than

in

the

to

Most

Nevertheless, a larger proportion of

earlier

survey

planned

to

increase

average

employee compensation.
Manufacturing
Reports

suggest that District manufacturing activity declined

slightly in recent months.
home

appliances

transportation

equipment,

experienced

declining

Layoffs of motor vehicle assembly plant workers have continued

orders.
in

and

Producers of electrical equipment, including

recent months both in
and

Louisville,
St.

in

where slowing truck sales

Louis,

where

temporary

layoffs,

scheduled

to be idled until late November.

production again early next year,
2,300 workers.

3,300

led to

auto workers

are

The two plants will cut

causing an indefinite layoff of up to

Arkansas auto parts suppliers have also reduced their

workforces in recent months.
Construction and Real Estate
Reports indicate that home building in St. Louis, Arkansas and
western Kentucky is
dwellings.

weak,

Recently,

St.

Louis

vacancy

industrial space have risen slightly.
breakfast

cereal

plant

construction of multi-family

with very little

in

Memphis

rates

for both office

and

Construction of a $1.2 billion
was

recently

suspended

by

a

manufacturer that is experiencing slowing sales and falling market share.

VIII-3

Natural Resources
A damaged lock and dam (L&D) and low water levels have sharply
curtailed commodity movement

on the Mississippi River, and the situation

will likely worsen through mid-December.
when barge traffic

These problems come at a time

corn purchases.

has increased due to an unexpected surge in

Soviet

Queue times at the damaged L&D are as much as six

days,

compared to a normal 10-hour delay.

The delays are forcing some corn

exporters

River

to

ship

from

the

Ohio

valley,

Iowa-Illinois area, in order to meet export contracts.

instead

of

the

The tie-ups will

be exacerbated in early December when the river will close for about four
days as part of a construction phase for a new L&D that will replace the
damaged L&D in 1992.

Industry contacts expect barge traffic to resume at

a normal pace by year-end.
Banking
Most
earnings.

Eighth

District

banks

reported

increased

third-quarter

Smaller banks continued to add to their profits primarily as a

result of larger spreads and improved asset quality, while the District's
largest banks saw third-quarter earnings fall.

Increasing problem loans

forced District banks to add to their loan loss reserves, most notably at
the larger banks.

Large District banks are now experiencing the effects

of overbuilt markets and the corresponding difficulty faced by developers
in meeting their debt obligations. Continuing problems with commercial
real estate lending, coupled with the continuing loan problems of less
developed

countries,

are

District's largest banks.

major

factors

depressing

earnings

at

the

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth

District

employment

situation

shortages

of workers

economic

in

conditions

the district

for

entry-level

has

have

been

jobs.

been

fairly

favorable,

Consumer

merchandise has been strong, automobile sales have

good.

with

The

reports

spending

on

of

general

continued to show large

month-to-month fluctuations, and housing activity has continued at a moderate
pace.

Manufacturing activity has

been mixed,

and

conditions

in

resource-

related industries have been fairly good.

Employment
The district employment situation has been fairly good.
throughout the district

reported difficulty finding workers for entry-level

jobs even at wages well above the minimum wage.

The ongoing expansion of the

mining industry in Montana created strong demand for workers.
for workers

was also

Employers

from lumber

reported

expansion

projects

Strong demand
in

northern

Minnesota and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and prison construction in the
Upper Peninsula.
remained

at

Nevertheless, skilled labor cost increases in the district

a moderate

3

to

4

percentage

increases due to fringe benefit costs.

point

range,

with

most of

the

Unemployment rates in the district

were roughly unchanged in the reporting period from the corresponding period a
year ago.

Consumer Spending
Consumer
strong.

spending

on

general

merchandise

has

continued

to

be

One retailer reports that October sales were 8.5 percent higher than

a year ago in comparable stores and total sales in October were 16.2 percent
higher than in October 1988.

An appliance retailer reports that October sales

in comparable stores were 5 percent higher than a year ago.

Inventories were

IX-2

reported to be at acceptable levels.

Retailers were cautiously optimistic

about year-end sales.
Automobile sales have continued to show large month-to-month variability.

Dealers for one domestic line report that sales in October were 25

percent lower than a year ago, but sales in the three-month period from August
to October were up 25 percent from the same period a year ago.
cars and trucks were at unusually high levels.

Inventories of

Reports indicated that condi-

tions in the used car market were good.
Housing
levels.
was

has

been

basically

unchanged

from

last

year's

The number of new housing permits issued in Minnesota in September

10 percent

1988.

activity

lower than

in August but

roughly the same as

in September

In the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area, the number of new hous-

ing permits fell by 25 percent from August to September but was 3 percent
higher than in September

1988.

Housing sales

in this metropolitan area in

October were about 2 percent higher than in October 1988.
in construction of homes priced

A sharp reduction

above $250,000 was reported.

home remodeling activity was also reported.

Considerable

A director reports weakness in

commercial construction in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area with few new projects
being started and only previously committed projects going forward.
Tourist associations

Tourist spending has continued to be strong.

in the district report many inquiries for the upcoming season.

Most areas

near the Canadian border reported strong demand from Canadian shoppers and
tourists.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing
continued

softness

Suppliers

to

the

in

activity has
the

aircraft

computer,
and

been

generally mixed.

electronics,

aerospace

and

industries

There has

defense

report

been

industries.

strong

demand.

IX-3

Most manufacturers report

Reports from the capital goods sector were mixed.

to be investing cautiously in capital equipment, preferring to pay down debts
unless

the

equipment

can

reduce

operating

costs

immediately.

Lingering

drought worries also slowed equipment purchases by farmers in parts of the
district, although ranchers showed signs of increasing their investments in
capital goods.

The expansion of the mining and lumber industries contributed

to the fairly good demand for capital investment in the western and northern
portions of the district.

Resource-Related Industries
Resource-related industries have been doing fairly well.
in

agriculture

were

generally

good,

except

Dakota, where fall precipitation was sparse.
crop

production

Farmland

values

was

continued

southern Minnesota
sales

reported

have

increase;

the

western

part

of

North

In Montana, the wheat and barley

doubled
prime

over
corn

last
and

year's

soybean

levels.
lands

in

sold for about

$1,500

per acre, with some instances of

These

prices

are considerably

at $2,000 per acre.

depressed levels

to

to

in

Conditions

earlier in the decade.

higher

than the

Cattle prices were reported to be

high, and ranchers were optimistic about their prospects.

Expansion in the

lumber industry was brisk with new construction and expansion plans in all the
lumber

producing areas

strong activity.

of

the district.

The mining

industry also reports

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT-KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to grow moderately.

Although auto sales are weak, other retail sales have improved over the past
three months.

Auto and other retail inventories are above desired levels.

In

the manufacturing sector, slowing sales have contributed to leveling off of
input prices and ready availability of most inputs.
to cut back on production unless sales improve.

Some manufacturers expect

Resource industries continue

to improve, as farm incomes remain strong and exploration for natural gas
boosts drilling activity.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report higher sales than a year ago,

with improvement over the past three months.
across the district.

Winter apparel sales have generally been slow due to

unseasonably warm weather.
months.

Demand for retail goods varies

Prices have held steady or decreased in recent

Most respondents report higher than usual inventories due to warm

weather and expansion for the Christmas season.
remain on hold through the rest of the year.

Inventory purchases will

Retailers expect holiday sales

to exceed year ago levels, and some expect price reductions over the period.
Automobile dealers report weak new car sales over the last month.

Most

dealers are trying to trim inventories and expect little improvement in sales
during the coming months.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report input prices have remained

steady or increased slightly from three months ago and have increased 3 to 5
percent from a year ago.
months.

Few price changes are expected over the next three

Inputs are readily available, except for silicon used for computer

components and certain wood products, while lead times have generally remained
about the same.

Most firms are satisfied with inventory levels after trimming

X-2
them in recent months for seasonal reasons and to increase efficiency.

But

some firms plan continued modest inventory reductions during upcoming months.
Most plants are operating near full capacity, with no reports of bottlenecks
from labor shortages or inadequate plant capacity.

However, there are some

indications that operations soon will be scaled back because of slowing sales.
Energy.

Stable oil prices and increased exploration for natural gas

continue to push district drilling activity above year-ago levels.

The

average number of active drilling rigs in the district increased from 289 in
September to 312 in October, the fourth consecutive month of increase.

Thus,

drilling activity stands nearly a fifth higher than one year ago.
District housing starts have increased

Housing Activity and Finance.

from a year ago, and most homebuilders report starts steady or ahead of last
month.

New home sales have generally been steady, with prices increasing.

Stable housing activity is expected in coming months.
Most respondents from district savings and loan institutions report net
deposit outflows over the past month, although deposit flows were more mixed
than last month or a year ago.

Expectations for future deposit flows vary.

Healthy savings institutions expect greater inflows, while troubled savings
institutions expect greater outflows.

Mortgage demand remains weak, with

continued weakness expected until spring.

Respondents report steady to

slightly lower mortgage rates and believe rates will decline in coming months.
Banking.
month.

District bankers report increased loan demand over the last

Increases occurred in commercial and industrial loans, consumer loans,

and mortgage loans.

Home equity loans, commercial real estate loans, and

agricultural loans were unchanged.

Most bankers either have reduced their

prime rate recently or expect to do so in the near future.

Consumer loan

X-3
rates were mostly unchanged, however, and generally are not expected to change
in the near term.

Deposits increased during the past month, primarily because

of large gains in NOW accounts.
slightly or were unchanged.

Other deposit categories either increased

With both loan demand and deposits increasing,

loan-deposit ratios were relatively stable over the last month.
Agriculture.

Yields of fall crops ranged from below normal to normal

across the district.

Early cold weather cut yields of the Kansas milo crop

and the Oklahoma cotton crop.

Corn and soybean yields were generally normal

in the district, except for reduced soybean yields in northern Missouri due to
the drought.

Most of the new winter wheat crop is in good condition, but dry

weather has left the crop susceptible to cold weather damage.
The supply of pastures and forages should be sufficient to meet
livestock feeding needs throughout most of the district this winter.

Where

rainfall has not been sufficient to support grazing of the winter wheat crop,
cattle herds are being sustained with hay and other forages.

Ample forage

supplies combined with strong cattle prices have encouraged some district
cattle producers to begin expanding herds.
District bankers expect little change in generally strong farm credit
conditions, but reduced crop yields and lower crop prices in some parts of the
district may slow the rate of paydown and increase the carryover on farm
operating loans.

In most of the district, however, near-normal crop yields

and strong livestock prices have maintained high farm incomes, leading
district bankers to expect farm loan paydowns to reach last year's high level.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy is showing little growth.

Orders to District

manufacturers are declining somewhat, growth in retail sales has begun to slow
and auto sales are slipping.

Expansion continues in the service sector.

Contract construction values are rising modestly.
drilling are strictly seasonal.

Increases in oil and gas

The drought persists in some agricultural

areas.
Sales patterns vary widely among District manufacturers but, on
balance, there has been a slight decline.
continues to increase.

Demand for oilfield equipment

Sales of primary metals products have lately fallen in

what one respondent noted as a "180 degree about face" from patterns of
earlier in the year.

In the fabricated metals industry, demand has slipped

for construction-related products but has picked up for energy-related goods.
Orders to lumber manufacturers are weakening in the wake of what one
respondent referred to as a sales "bubble" in August and September.
paperboard are also off.

Sales of

Stone, clay and glass firms report some recent

increases in demand -- chiefly in the Houston area and in south Texas.

Orders

to electronics-related industries are generally softening, and some major
layoffs have recently been reported.

Transportation equipment output and

employment are growing due, in part, to expansion in defense-related aircraft
production.

Little change has recently occurred in orders to the food

products industry.

Apparel producers' sales are down slightly from earlier

this year, but remain above a year earlier, and inventories are said to have
crept up to undesired levels.

Some chemical producers are reporting increases

XI-2

in their sales in the wake of a recent chemical plant explosion, but they
expect some softening next year.

Oil refiners note that sales of gasoline

have fallen below a year earlier.
Retail sales growth had begun to slow on a year-over-year basis,
with particularly weak sales of durable goods, but post-Thanksgiving reports
suggested some acceleration in general merchandise buying.

Some stores that

concentrate in nondurables have reported that sales growth in the District
slightly exceeds national rates.
District sales have declined for both domestic and imported cars and
trucks.

The recent reductions are said to have occurred, in large part, as a

backlash to September's heavy end-of-model-year purchases that stemmed from
special incentive programs.
The services industry continues to grow strongly.

Service industry

employment is growing significantly faster than overall employment.
services firms, in particular, report strong sales growth.

Business

Of such firms, the

highest rates of growth are being reported by computer and data processing
services.

Business services firms in general are very optimistic about

expansion over the next year.
Construction activity remains far below the levels of the mideighties, but there are tentative signs of expansion.

Industry spokespersons

are cautiously optimistic about the future, but they also express a great deal
of uncertainty.

The value of construction contracts is edging up in District

states, chiefly as a result of growth in residential activity and some erratic
expansion in nonresidential building.
sluggish performance at best.

Nonbuilding activity continues to show

Industry spokespersons are optimistic about

XI-3

some continued expansion in homebuilding.

They also say that falling

multifamily vacancy rates and firming rents in some large District cities
suggests the continued modest expansion in apartment-building.
Although District oil and gas drilling activity is expanding, recent
growth only reflects seasonal patterns.
activity has shown little change.

After seasonal adjustment, drilling

Leading indicators of drilling, including

well permits and the seismic crew count, also suggest little near-term
expansion beyond normal seasonally-based growth.

Industry spokespersons are

nevertheless optimistic about expansion in 1990, following the usual first
quarter dip, because of what they say is a growing perception that $20 oil is
here to stay.

Another source of optimism about growth in drilling activity is

the new horizontal drilling technology, which is particularly applicable to
formations that are common in certain portions of the District.
In agriculture, the principal problem is low soil moisture.
are particularly serious in south Texas and along the Gulf coast.

Conditions
In Texas,

drought damage this year is valued at $1.5 billion and more than half of the
total damage is said to have occurred in south Texas.

Cattlemen have reduced

their herds and Texas red meat production in September was 15 percent below a
year earlier.

Northern portions of the District have been less severely

affected by dryness, and winter wheat planting and the corn harvest are both
occurring on schedule.

Prices received by District farmers are 5 percent

above a year earlier, paced by a 10-percent increase in crop prices.
Livestock and livestock products prices are up 3 percent.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions continue to be generally healthy in the Twelfth Federal Reserve
District. Nevertheless, western business leaders' expectations about future growth have
deteriorated somewhat during the past month, particularly regarding business investment. Wage
and price pressures continue modest in most cases. Consumer spending is healthy but not
growing rapidly, with weakness noted in auto sales. Manufacturing activity is reported to be
mixed, with some producers at capacity and planning expansions, while others report slower
orders. Conditions in most resource sectors are satisfactory, with strong growth in agricultural
exports. Construction and real estate activity is reported to be strong or improving in most of
the West, except Arizona. Banks and thrifts continue to compete vigorously for deposits, while
loan demand remains strong for most categories and regions.
Business Sentiment
Twelfth District business leaders' expectations regarding GNP growth have deteriorated
slightly during the past month, as three quarters of the respondents now anticipate that growth
will be slower during the next year than its historical average. Expectations deteriorated
particularly sharply for business investment. Only 15 percent expect stronger investment,
compared with 30 percent last month, while 59 percent now anticipate weaker business
investment, compared with only 30 percent of last month's respondents.
Wages and Prices
Wage and price pressures continue modest in most cases. Reports of wage and price
increases of up to 4 or 5 percent are common. Retailers report that competition and price-

XII - 2

conscious consumers are keeping a lid on retail prices. 57,000 machinists at Boeing recently
agreed to a 10 percent increase in base wages over three years, in addition to cost-of-living
adjustments.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending is healthy but not growing rapidly. Department store sales are
reported to be in line with expectations, with intense price competition. The financial problems
of some department store chains are causing concern in the industry. A car dealer reports that
customer traffic declined about 40 percent during the first half of November, to the lowest level
of the year. Customers are not responding to incentives, but it is not clear whether this is an
early sign of further weakening, or simply a payback for the strong sales of August and
September. All product lines are affected: imports and domestics, new and used.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the West is mixed. An Idaho respondent reports that
production in his area is at capacity, and several firms (particularly food processors) plan
expansions. Food processing activity in California also is strong. The Boeing strike resulted in
some lost commercial aircraft production, but the huge order backlog should yield healthy
activity as work resumes in the wake of the recent settlement. A construction and engineering
firm reports that while demand from manufacturers continues to grow, the rate of growth has
slowed in recent months.
Several respondents, however, note slower orders for manufactured goods. Moreover, a
heavy equipment manufacturer reports that export sales were down 1 percent during the third
quarter compared to their year-earlier level. A paint and coatings manufacturer reports that
most of the companies his firm deals with have experienced a slowdown during recent months.

XII - 3

Recent performance varies widely among high-technology manufacturers, as one respondent
reports that lower chip prices have hurt semiconductor producers.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in most resource sectors are satisfactory. Gold prices are up. Metals
industries are producing at high levels, although they are not growing. However, the forest
products industries seem to be slowing somewhat. Lumber orders and log exports both have
fallen during the past year, with recent activity 10 to 15 percent below year-earlier levels.
Agricultural industries report healthy conditions, with strong export growth. California
farm exports are expected to be about 10 percent higher in 1989 than they were in 1988, with
exports of nuts, fruits, and vegetables particularly strong. Livestock operators are doing well,
with steady increases in exports. Wine exports are starting to "take off," particularly to the
U.K. and Japan. The extent of earthquake damage suffered by food processors and by flower
and nursery greenhouse operators in Watsonville, Gilroy, and Hollister remains unknown.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity is reported strong or improving in most of the West
outside Arizona. Building activity in Nevada continues at a vigorous pace, and home values in
the Puget Sound area are up by as much as 30 percent over their year-earlier levels. Increases
in building and sales activity, as well as in property values, are reported in Oregon, eastern
Washington, Idaho, and Utah. California's coastal markets have cooled since the frenetic pace
seen a few months ago, but values continue to exceed their year-earlier levels by 10 to 15
percent, and activity in less expensive parts of the state is very strong. Arizona, however,
continues to suffer from overbuilt markets for apartment, office, retail, and industrial space.

XII - 4

Financial Sector
Banks and thrifts continue to compete vigorously for deposits, while loan demand
remains strong in most categories and regions. However, the rate of growth in lending appears
to have slowed from the robust pace seen earlier this year. A California banker reports that
the rate of growth in consumer lending slowed in September and October, as home equity
lending grew more slowly and credit card borrowing continued to be slow. An Oregon banker
notes some decrease in demand for non-mortgage credit. Several bankers report that
delinquencies are down from their year-earlier levels.

