SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

October 1990

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ........

i

First District - Boston. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

I-

Second District - New York. . . . . . . . . . ........ .

II-

Third District - Philadelphia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

III-

Fourth District - Cleveland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Sixth District - Atlanta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

.

Seventh District - Chicago. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

VI-1
.

Eighth District - St. Louis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Ninth District - Minneapolis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tenth District - Kansas City. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Eleventh District - Dallas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Twelfth District - San Francisco. . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

V-1

VII-1
VIII-1
IX-1
X-1
XI-I
XII-1

i
SUMMARY*

Economic activity appears to have grown slowly in most Federal Reserve
districts since early August, but seems to have declined somewhat in others.
Many districts reported a weakening in business and consumer confidence.
Retail sales, including new car sales, were sluggish or down in most of the
country.

Indicators of manufacturing activity were mixed to weaker.

Commercial and residential construction declined, although sales of homes rose
in some areas.

Total loan demand at commercial banks was lackluster, and

business lending decreased across the nation.

In agriculture, crop yields and

livestock prices were generally strong, although various factors detracted
from farm sector conditions in some areas.

With respect to energy, higher oil

prices appeared to be stimulating oil drilling, although some shortages of
skilled workers were reported.
Retail Trade
Retail activity apparently weakened in most of the nation.

All

districts except Chicago reported that sales grew more slowly or declined.
Many noted slower sales of durable goods, particularly autos, and some
indicated that retailers had laid off workers.

Retailers generally believed

their inventories were at satisfactory levels, although some had begun to trim
their stocks.
Most districts reported that retailers were generally pessimistic about
their sales prospects in coming months.

The retailers blamed lower consumer

confidence brought on by greater uncertainty and higher fuel prices for the

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and based on information
collected before October 19, 1990. This document summarizes comments received
from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a
commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

current and expected weakness in their sales.

Some worried that they would

have to discount prices significantly to move merchandise.
Industrial Activity
Conditions in the manufacturing sector apparently weakened somewhat.
Chicago reported relatively strong activity, but most other districts gave
mixed reports or indicated declines.

Weakness was evident across most

industries, although several districts reported boosts in energy- or defenserelated production.

Reports received from six districts indicated that, on

balance, manufacturing employment declined.

No district indicated serious

manufacturer concern over inventory levels, although Philadelphia and Kansas
City noted that producers were reducing inventories.

Exports from the

Richmond and Cleveland Districts rose but those from the Chicago and Boston
Districts fell.

Scattered reports on producer prices suggested that prices of

raw materials rose while finished goods prices were relatively stable.
Manufacturers in several districts were concerned about their business
prospects in the coming months.

Some planned further reductions in employment

and were cautious about their capital spending plans.
Construction and Real Estate
Most districts reported slower construction activity.

Scarce financing

and earlier overbuilding were associated with abrupt declines in starts of
commercial buildings and residential developments in several metropolitan
areas.

New York observed that reduced commercial construction was expected to

help ease the vacancy rate in midtown Manhattan.
Housing starts were reported to be down in most districts, but home
sales registered increases in several.

Six districts noted general weakness

in residential construction, although multi-family activity was higher in the
Dallas district.

Home sales rose in at least parts of five districts, but

Atlanta and San Francisco reported general declines.
Some districts commented on home prices.

Atlanta and San Francisco

indicated that the median home price had declined from a year ago.

New York

attributed unsold homes to unrealistic pricing.
Financial
Activity in the financial sector was generally softer.

Several

districts reported that some financial institutions had tightened their
lending standards, especially for real estate loans, because of uncertain
economic prospects or higher capital requirements.
unchanged to lower in most districts.

Total loan demand was

The demand for commercial and

industrial loans was weak across the nation, while the demand for consumer
loans was mixed.

Many districts indicated that loans to commercial real

estate developers were down.
Agriculture
The agricultural sector was generally strong across the country.
Several districts noted that yields of most crops were expected to be good,
and Minneapolis and Kansas City indicated that higher livestock prices and low
feed costs would help support farm income.

In the St. Louis and Richmond

Districts, recent rains and cold weather caused some delays in harvest
activity and damaged soybeans somewhat.

Also, several districts reported that

low crop prices or higher production costs might limit the incomes of some
farmers in their areas.
Three districts reported on farm lending activity.

Kansas City reported

that the demand for agricultural loans rose, and Chicago and Richmond reported
a good pace of repayments on agricultural loans.
Energy
Several districts reported on energy-related developments.

Kansas City

iv

noted increased oil drilling activity, and Dallas and San Francisco expected
an increase soon.

Atlanta and San Francisco indicated shortages of skilled

labor in their oil-producing regions.

St. Louis observed that higher fuel

prices were being blamed for cutbacks in the transportation sector, and Boston
and Chicago noted transportation surcharges resulting from these higher
prices.

Richmond and St. Louis indicated that coal production was up,

although coal prices were mostly unchanged.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Growing uncertainty about economic conditions characterizes reports
from the First District.

Retailers and wholesalers report weak sales,

intense price competition, and tightening cost control measures.

A

majority of First District manufacturers report year-over-year gains in
sales and orders.

However, several contacts describe these increases as

unrepresentative or unsustainable, and orders are generally growing more
slowly than sales.

Faced with an unusually large number of unknowns,

manufacturers are battening down the hatches.

Retail
Retailers and wholesalers report flat or marginally higher sales at
best.

Sales were substantially lower than a year ago for some clothing and

for building materials.
merchandise.

Price promotions continued to be necessary to move

All respondents indicate that they are paring costs by

reducing inventories or employment, or by deferring capital projects.

In

the absence of some new positive force, retailers and wholesalers continue
to express a lack of optimism about the possibilities for an economic
recovery in the region in the next year or so.

Manufacturing

A substantial majority of First District manufacturing contacts
report that sales continue to exceed year-ago levels, with gains ranging

from 4 to 16 percent.

However, several firms discount these gains as

reflecting idiosyncratic developments, such as new products or recently

announced but not yet effective price increases.

Some also fear that a

pick-up in demand from the auto industry may not prove sustainable.
The news concerning orders is mixed.

At over half the firms, orders

are above year-ago levels, but almost half the contacts report a slowdown

in incoming orders or customer delays.

On a positive note, a First

District computer company announced in its quarterly earnings report that
it had experienced growth in its U.S. orders for the first time in several

quarters.

By contrast, some respondents sense a softening in demand from

the commercial aircraft industry.

services are also weak markets.

Construction and medical and financial

Several contacts describe a recent

slowdown in incoming orders as geographically widespread, encompassing many
U.S. trading partners including Canada, the United Kingdom, France, Italy
and Korea.

Inventory levels are satisfactory at half the contacts but have

become a slight problem elsewhere.
Input prices are generally reported to be stable.

In buyers'

markets, two contacts have been renegotiating vendor contracts and are
receiving discounts of 5 to 10 percent.

So far, recent oil price increases

have surfaced only as transportation surcharges and increased airfares.

A

majority of contacts have raised their own selling prices on all or
selected products by 2 to 7 percent.
At most of the companies contacted, employment levels are flat or
down by 2 to 20 percent.

Two firms anticipate additional reductions.

Half

of the respondents indicate that their New England employment has fallen
more than average.

I-3

Several First District manufacturing respondents have revised their
capital spending budgets downward in 1990.
mixed.

Their plans for 1991 are

Almost all expenditures are for equipment, including computers, for

productivity enhancement, and for new products.

Much of this spending will

occur in New England.
First District manufacturers expect to see more of the same slow,
spotty business conditions at best.
down, cutting costs.

They report that they are battening

Most see the outlook as clouded by unusually large

uncertainties that are inhibiting investment decisions.

Nevertheless, one-

half the respondents hope to outperform the economy because of new or highquality products that are gaining market share.

Residential Real Estate

All First District realtors surveyed characterize the number of real
estate transactions as "reasonable" this fall, given the current state of
the regional economy.

Sales have increased relative to the slump

experienced a year ago as sellers become more realistic about asking
prices.

Nevertheless, homes still remain on the market for an average of

150 days, a considerable increase from the 30-day average of several years
ago.

Condominium sales have decreased, but single-family home purchases

grew relative to the summer quarter.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK
Developments in the Second District economy show continued weakness
since the last report.

Retail sales contacts report a year-over-year

decline for the second consecutive month.
remains weak in much of the District.

Residential construction

The market for office space, while

soft, appears to have improved slightly.

Unemployment rates rose during

September, but are below the national average.
City employers plan substantial layoffs.

Several major New York

Respondents at small and

medium-sized banks were equally divided between those reporting credit
tightening and those whose willingness to extend credit has not changed.
Consumer Spending
For the second consecutive month, all of our retail contacts
reported year-over-year sales declines in September.

They attributed the

fall in sales to concerns over the economy, uncertainty caused by the
possibility of war and rising oil prices, and unseasonably warm September
weather.

In addition, particularly strong sales in September 1989

exaggerated the year-over-year decline.
Changes in comparable store sales -- which exclude the effect of
stores opened during the year -- ranged from -7.2 percent to
-14.0 percent between September 1989 and September 1990.

The weakness in

sales was broadly spread across most categories of goods, with home
furnishings and childrenswear sales showing particularly sharp declines.
Sales of women's higher-priced apparel remained strong,-however.

Reports

on inventories were mixed, with some stores reporting above-plan
inventories and modest inventory cuts while others reported inventories
slightly below plan.

II-2
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction in the Second District remains very weak.
Downstate New York and Northern New Jersey homebuilders characterize
credit as extremely tight, with reports of no financing available for
speculative building or land acquisition and many existing loan
commitments being renegotiated or canceled.

There continues to be a glut

of housing inventory -- some of it unrealistically priced -- on the

market.

Although new construction in Western New York appears stronger

than in the rest of the District, it too has begun to soften.
Three consecutive months of strong leasing activity caused midtown
Manhattan's primary vacancy rate to fall for the first time this year.
With only 700,000 square feet of additional space scheduled for
completion in 1990, the midtown vacancy rate is expected to decline
further over the next few months.

Downtown Manhattan vacancy rates

remained roughly stable as average asking rental rates declined.

The

market for office space elsewhere in the New York City metropolitan area
was soft but generally stable.
Other Business Activity
Unemployment rates in the Second District rose significantly during
September, but remain below the national average.

New York State's

unemployment rate rose from 5.0 percent in August to 5.5 percent in
September, while New Jersey's rate rose from 4.8 percent to 5.2 percent
over the same period.
Many recent job losses have been concentrated in the New York City
metropolitan area.

Last month, Pan Am cut 1,200 area workers and Chase

Manhattan announced the layoff of 5,000 predominantly local employees.
This month, Saks announced that it would cut approximately 350 employees
from its New York corporate headquarters.

On the other hand, in Central

New York, more than 3,000 jobs were created with the opening of

II-3
Syracuse's Carousel Mall and an additional 340 positions were generated
by Union Carbide's decision to consolidate its national technical
operations near Albany.
Financial Developments
Senior officers at small and medium-sized banks in the Second
District survey generally characterized the local economy as sluggish and
weakening over the last three months.

Roughly half of the respondents

were generally less willing to lend as compared to three months ago,
while the remainder said their willingness to extend credit had not
changed.

In contrast, the majority of lenders reported no change in

their willingness to extend credit for consumer installment and home
equity loans.

For those banks which have tightened credit standards,

some are more strictly enforcing existing rules while others are
requiring lower maximum loan-to-value ratios and increased collateral.

A

weak local economy and a poor real estate market were commonly cited
reasons for raising loan qualifications.

Other bankers stated that they

were simply maintaining their conservative lending policies.

For

commercial real estate loans, respondents were split between those
reporting lower loan demand as compared to three months ago and those
reporting unchanged demand; the weakness was most pronounced for new
construction loans.

Although several bankers predicted a decline in real

estate loan demand over the next six months, the majority anticipated
that demand will remain stable.

Business loan demand was characterized

as soft or weaker than three months ago.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic
October, with

activity in the Third District was

generally sluggish in mid-

further weakening in manufacturing and

reports from the banking sector.

retail

trade

and mixed

Manufacturing activity in the region continued

to fall in October, and reports of slower business were more widespread than they
were a month ago.

Area firms noted declines in orders and shipments and said

they were trimming employment.

Retailers generally said sales were weaker than

they had expected for the fall.

Most reported sales running at or below year-ago

levels,

in dollar

terms.

Large

Third District banks

have been posting very

slight gains in loan volume, overall, during the past six weeks.
growth

has

been

in

consumer

lending,

including

home

Most of the

equity

loans,

while

commercial and industrial loan volume continued to fall.
Third District business contacts express concern that the regional economy
could weaken further.
winter.

Manufacturers expect business to

They generally intend to hold capital spending to a steady rate over the
Retailers are growing

next six months, and they plan more cuts in employment.
more

drop further over the

cautious

in their

outlook.

They hope

to match

the

dollar

sales

level

reached in the final quarter of last year, but they expect profits to suffer if
extensive discounting is required to achieve this.

Bankers anticipate slackening

loan demand in all credit categories until the economy regains strength and they
foresee only a modest rebound in lending even with a renewed business expansion.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers

in

the Third

District

continued

to

report

deteriorating

business in October. Over half of the firms contacted indicated that activity at
their plants in the region was

slowing, and weakness was noted in every major

III-2
industry in the region with the exception of stone, clay, and glass products.
Area

firms

generally were experiencing

a downtrend in both new orders

and

shipments, and the declines were more widespread in October than they were a
month ago.

In tandem with the drop in shipments, reductions in inventories

reported by area firms indicated a slowing pace of output.

Falling production

activity was also reflected in deteriorating employment measures; virtually none
of the firms polled was adding workers, and more than a third of the companies
surveyed were scaling back working hours.
The outlook for the next six months among surveyed manufacturers remains
pessimistic, on balance.

About a third of the local plant managers surveyed

expect a turn for the better but nearly half anticipate further weakening in the
industrial sector.

The consensus forecast is that the slowing trend in new

orders and shipments will continue over the winter.

With the declining pace of

business, area firms expect to work down both order backlogs and inventories
further between now and next spring.

They also plan more cuts in employment. In

line with their cautious outlook, area manufacturers said they will hold capital
spending to a steady rate over the next six months, on balance.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in mid-October overwhelmingly indicated
that the pace of sales was below their expectations.

Most said that sales for

the past six weeks were flat or below the year-ago period, in current dollars.
The usual fall upturn in sales has not materialized, according to merchants, and
while some attributed this to unseasonably warm weather in recent weeks, the slow
sales rate has affected all types of goods-not just seasonal merchandise-and
all types of stores in the Third District.
Merchants are becoming apprehensive about sales for the rest of the year.
They hope to match the 1989 final quarter, in dollar terms, but say that if price
markdowns are necessary to do this their profits will drop significantly.

Store

III-3
officials generally said they are satisfied with inventories, but stocks could
prove excessive if sales decline further.
becoming

more

reluctant to

ship under

One merchant noted that vendors are
the

usual

credit terms

in

light

of

generally poor retail sales prospects and the continuing financial difficulties
of certain major stores.
FINANCE
Total

loan volume

outstanding

at

major

Third

District

banks

barely

increased in September after slipping in July and August, and while lending
continued to gain slightly in early October, area bankers said they did not
believe a sustained pickup in loan demand was getting underway.

Most of the

recent growth has been in consumer loans; bankers contacted in mid-October said
credit card and other personal installment lending was moving up slowly but
steadily, although auto loans were dropping fairly sharply as a result of both
falling demand and tightened credit standards.

Real estate lending was also

moving up, and bank loan officers indicated that a substantial portion of the
increase was the result of recent home equity loan promotions.

Also, some banks

were taking residential mortgage loans onto their own books as opposed to placing
them with their mortgage company affiliates.
volume in mid-October was
summer.

Commercial and industrial loan

still on the downward trend that began during the

Bankers generally noted weak demand for credit by businesses and some

said their outstandings were reduced by recent charge-offs.
Looking ahead, Third District bankers expect a falloff in loan demand until
the economy regains strength.

They anticipate drops in all categories of credit

until business and consumer spending picks up.

Some bankers believe that even

with an economic upturn, lending, especially

to businesses, will grow only

slowly, due

to heightened

concerns

for credit

quality

and moves

by banks

generally to improve capital ratios.
Total

deposits

at

large

Third

District

banks

declined

in

September

III-4
although, overall, deposits have been steady in recent months.

Bankers surveyed

in mid-October said the funding situation was adequate given slow current and
anticipated asset growth.

However, some noted developments that portend funding

difficulties in the longer term; bankers referred to the recent severing of some
long-standing

interbank

borrowing

relationships

and

declining

interest

institutional investors in placing uninsured funds with banking companies.

by

IV

- 1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

The economic outlook has deteriorated further in recent weeks

because of the surge in crude oil prices, but Fourth District respondents do
not believe this District is in a recession.

Near-term prospects for

Non-automotive retail sales have weakened but auto

inflation have worsened.

sales have been better-than-expected since the oil-price shock.

Growth in the

District's economy continues to be supported by manufacturing, but housing is
weakening more than usual for this time of the year.

Loan activity remains

weak, and some lenders believe that credit tightness is now affecting some
lending in the District.
The National Economy.

A stronger-than-expected surge in crude oil prices

has contributed to a further deterioration in the near-term outlook for the
economy.

About three-fourths

of a panel of forecasters now expect at least

two successive quarterly declines in real GNP beginning this quarter, compared
with about one-third only six weeks ago.

Others still expect sustained growth

in real GNP at annual rates of about 1% to 2% this quarter and next.
Oil and Inflation.

The downward revisions in output projections is

accompanied by a step-up in expected inflation rates.

Many respondents

attribute their higher inflation forecast to higher crude oil prices than
was assumed in their forecasts of six weeks ago.

The rise in oil prices into

a $35 to $40 per barrel range was judged to be based on fears of further

IV - 2

disruptions in oil supply.

Respondents generally assume the price of crude

oil to settle in a $25 to $30 range next quarter.

The surge in the price

indexes is still expected to be short-lived, moderating to a 4% to 5% rate by
next spring.
Regional Economy.

District respondents generally believe that the economy

in the Fourth District is not in a recession, but they are cautious about
short-term prospects.

They are encouraged by the steadiness in manufacturing

output and employment in the District.

Some others are concerned over

weaknesses in retail sales and construction, and a below-expected level
of activity even before the oil-price shock.

In Ohio, nonfarm employment in

September virtually matched the latest peak in August, and manufacturing
employment, unchanged in the last three months, was only slightly below its
peak in early 1989.

The unemployment rate in September was 5.2%, and for the

third quarter, the average rate moved slightly below the national average.
Some public officials are concerned that Ohio could have a budget deficit
of as much as $300 million for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1991, partly
because of a revenue shortfall.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales since the oil-price shock have been mixed

but generally better than widely expected, especially for new cars.

Some

retailers report sales fell in the last two months because of uncertainties
over an auto strike and the Gulf situation.

Expected sales during the late

fall and the holiday season are being scaled down from pre-oil shock

forecasts.
Auto dealers in the District report, however, that new car sales in
September were slightly better than in August, probably because of year-end
clearance of 1990 models, and they also report rather "good" sales of 1991

IV -

models.

3

Dealers do not note a marked shift in consumer buying toward more
Orders for 1990:IVQ are reported to be at least equal to

fuel-efficient cars.

1989:IVQ, and many anticipate order increases in late November and December
for 1991:IQ delivery.
Production last quarter held up a little better than many

Manufacturing.

respondents expected, supported especially by the automotive, machinery, and
steel industries.

Nonetheless many respondents appear skeptical over

near-term prospects.

Auto production plans for the fourth quarter are being

sustained at nearly the late July projections, according to some auto makers.
Exports are still a major source of growth for capital goods, although some
export-sensitive producers report a slump in export orders in August and
September.

Some producers also note a pickup in cancellations and deferrals,

but not to the extent of suggesting a scaling back of capital spending plans.
Despite some recent buildup, inventories are still believed to be at desired
levels, and manufacturers do not plan to build inventories as a price hedge.
Steel operations have continued at nearly 85% of capacity, supported by a
continued decline in steel imports, and strength in machinery and agricultural
industries that have compensated for softness in autos and appliances.
Domestic production has also been supported by a strike in the steel industry
in Canada.
Construction.

Home builders in northern Ohio report a slowdown in

building that is more than seasonal.
buyers.

They attribute this partly to a lack of

Small builders of single-family units apparently still have access to

borrowed funds, but builders of multi-family units complain about
difficulties in obtaining financing.

IV - 4

Home sales in the $150,000 to $200,000 price range have slowed, but are
still generally strong in the $250,000 to $400,000 range, although some
builders and lenders report a virtual standstill in activity in some
high-growth suburban communities.

In general, sales of existing homes

averaged about 95% of the asking price in September, which has hardly changed
from a year earlier.
Financial Developments.

Loan activity is weak across the board, and has

softened further since early August, according to some bankers.

The reduced

pace of loans reflects a sluggish economy and tight lending policies.
Loan delinquencies and nonperforming loans have risen at several banks, and a
few bankers now perceive a credit squeeze having spread to small businesses
and consumers in the District.

Some ascribe credit growth restraint to a need

to meet higher capital requirements.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity generally weakened further in early October,
and the attitudes of businesses about the near-term outlook became more
pessimistic.

Retail and manufacturing activity slowed.

commercial buildings were virtually at a standstill.

Starts of new

Loan demand was weaker

at District financial institutions, but interest rates were little changed.
On the brighter side, export volume rose at District ports and the District's
farming sector was generally healthy.
Retail Trade
Responses to our regular mail survey of retailers suggested that retail
sales--including sales of big ticket items--declined in early October.

Most

stores also reported declines in shopper traffic and many retailers indicated
that they had trimmed employment.
Department store executives reported that they had reduced their sales
projections and expected to hold down their employment and advertising this
Christmas season.

These retailers and others surveyed were pessimistic

about the outlook for their businesses and local economies, and the national
economy.
Manufacturing
Our regular mail survey of manufacturers showed decreases in their
shipments, orders, and employment in early October.

Nearly half of the

respondents identified poor sales as their most important business problem.
Rising crude oil prices apparently contributed to sales declines; about three-

fifths of the respondents said that their sales were adversely affected by the
boost in oil prices.
Most surveyed manufacturers reported higher raw materials costs, but few
had raised the prices of their finished products.

Their inventories of

materials and finished goods had changed little from the levels reported in
our previous survey in August.
Manufacturers' assessments of current business conditions and their
outlook for the near term were more pessimistic in October than in August.
Most respondents believed that economic conditions in their local areas and in
the nation had weakened in early October; only a few expected business
conditions to improve in the next six months.
Coal
District coal production and prices have remained relatively stable,
unlike in earlier periods when they rose sharply along with the price of oil.
The reason for this stability, according to our contacts in southwest Virginia
and West Virginia, was that most oil-burning electric utility companies
converted to coal in the 1970s so that little additional conversion was now
possible.

Also, utility companies reportedly were heavily stockpiled with

coal because the summer was not as hot as usual.

Coal industry executives

expect some upward pressure on coal prices, however, from increased export
demand.

At the port of Hampton Roads (Norfolk), coal exports were said to be

near a record pace in September.
Ports
Reports received from District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads--showed that export volume rose from the prior month at all three ports,

while import volume was generally unchanged.

Also, port representatives

continued to expect exports to grow faster than imports over the next six
months.
Nonresidential Construction
Contacts in the commercial real estate and banking sectors indicated
that high vacancy rates and tighter loan standards have virtually halted new
construction starts in the District.

According to managers of office

buildings and industrial parks, projects now underway were generally funded by
loan commitments made more than six months ago.
Financial
A telephone survey of District financial institutions indicated lower
demand for consumer and commercial loans in early October than in September.
Lenders attributed the weaker demand to uncertainty resulting from Mideast
tensions, the lack of a Federal budget accord, and slower growth in the
domestic economy.

Nearly all lenders reported no change in their loan rates.

Agriculture
Preliminary results from a survey of District agricultural bankers
suggested that the area farm economy was generally healthy going into the peak
harvest season.

Most bankers contacted reported that farmland values had

risen this year in their areas, but only one in six expects further increases
in the next three months.

Funds available for agricultural loans were at

normal or above-normal levels at 90 percent of the reporting institutions, and
a similar proportion reported that agricultural loan repayment rates were
normal or above-normal.

Collateral requirements for farm loans, however, were

higher than usual at about one-fourth of the banks.

V-4

Heavy rainfall throughout the southern and western portions of the
District delayed harvest activity somewhat--especially of soybeans--during the
second week of October.

Preliminary estimates indicate that soybean yields in

the District may be somewhat lower than average due to a dry September.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: Most Sixth District firms contacted in October report marginally slower
growth than last month and generally flat year-over-year sales. Retailers, with few exceptions,
report slower sales in September than in August and attribute this to a further erosion in
consumer confidence. Banking contacts supported this view and indicated that in the last month
or so consumers have become more conservative in taking on new debt and business loan demand
has softened. Retail contacts were less optimistic this month than last concerning their outlook
for sales for the remainder of the year and into 1991, sentiments echoed by District
manufacturers of consumer and nondefense goods. However, defense and oil related producers
cited a recent increase in orders. Most realtors report weaker residential and commercial sales
in September than in August but a few areas in the District are reporting improvements. Recent
contacts report shortages of skilled labor in oil producing regions in the District. They generally
indicate that oil price increases have not yet been incorporated into the price of most finished
goods.
Retail Sales: Retailers generally report flat year-over-year sales volume in September,
as compared to slight growth in previous reports. Contacts in Florida and Georgia, our two
largest states, report that small retailers and department stores are seeing a significant reduction
in gross receipts. These contacts indicate that announcements of layoffs at retail stores are
becoming more common, some associated with debt-ridden parent companies but others
associated with weakening sales. In contrast, discount department stores are reportedly showing
some strength and are largely responsible for the aggregate level of retail sales remaining flat.
Most retail contacts report that floor traffic is off from last month and consumers are purchasing
less expensive items. These reporters still attribute the recent slowing to reduced consumer
confidence resulting from the recent political and economic uncertainties and fueled by the

VI-2
media. A contact in Florida reported that the most recent (September) University of Florida
Consumer Confidence index fell from the July level (their last survey) and that the survey's
report on the percent of consumers willing to undertake big-ticket purchases also slipped. While
this survey is limited to Florida, the findings generally agree with the observations of most retail
contacts in the District.
Financial Services: Banking contacts also report that growing consumer uncertainty
was reflected in their attitude toward taking on new debt. Consumer loan growth in September
was at less than half the pace of a year ago. Most of the lending officers that were contacted
also indicated that business loan demand weakened in September reflecting slower business
activity.

The major exception was credit demand by firms associated with the health care

industry.
Manufacturing:

Reports on manufacturing around the District were mixed, with

defense and oil related activities showing strength while orders slowed for most other producers.
Contacts in Alabama report that military apparel producers are running at full capacity with tens
of millions of dollars in new contracts awarded since July. Florida contacts indicated a pickup
in high tech military orders destined for the Mid East. Most manufacturing contacts producing
goods for the private sector reported flat to weakening orders in September. A manufacturer of
pump and metering equipment reports that orders are down 5 to 10 percent. According to this
contact, both domestic and foreign orders were down: domestic, because his manufacturing
customers are reducing capital expenditures, and foreign, reflecting cessation of business with
Iraq and Kuwait. A producer of heating and air conditioning equipment reports that total current
sales are even with a year ago but distributors are now cutting new orders and reducing
inventories and pre-season air conditioner orders are running 14 percent below last year's level.
Textile and apparel contacts expect the continuing slowdown in orders to last through the first

VI-3
of the year. Apparel producers without military contracts continue to announce layoffs and plant
closings. Textile producers report a weakening of orders in the past few weeks.
Construction: Construction contacts indicate that construction activity is generally flat
throughout the Southeast relative to last year. Several contacts indicated that a number of new
commercial and residential projects were placed on "hold" in September. Realtors in most areas
of the District indicate substantially weaker sales in September relative to last month especially
in Florida and Georgia while in other areas, such as Louisiana and Alabama, reports were of flat
to slightly stronger sales. These later reports come from oil producing or support areas and areas
with significant aerospace activities.
Wage and Prices: Contacts reported continued tightening in labor market conditions
for certain types of workers in oil producing areas. Skilled workers such as welders, pipe fitters,
engineers, geologists and geophysicists are reportedly in short supply in Louisiana.

Most

manufacturing and transportation companies report that oil price increases are not yet reflected
in higher final product prices to consumers. A textile producer noted that the price of synthetic
fibers has escalated dramatically during the past month with the price of nylon, the major
component of most synthetic carpet, increasing by 12 percent. He added that market conditions
for carpet do not allow these increases to be passed through to consumers at present so the
increased cost are shrinking profit margins.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary The District economy continues to expand slowly, although several contacts
expressed concern about future growth. Consumer spending still appears stronger in the
Midwest than in the nation as a whole. District manufacturing activity is rising, although several
sources reported some new weakness in export markets. Capital investment planned for 1990
generally is being completed, but additional caution is being expressed about spending plans for
1991. Financing for new "speculative" construction projects has virtually ceased, according to
several District sources, while projects that have received financing continue to move ahead.
Some manufacturers have begun attempting to raise prices to reflect higher oil costs. Several
contacts noted that buyer delinquency rates have risen slightly.
Consumer Spending Retail sales generally continued to be stronger in the District than
in the nation as a whole, although some problem areas persist. A general merchandise chain
reported slightly better than expected same-store sales growth in September, and an economist
for the chain noted that spending on household durables grew faster than the company-wide
average. Sales were reportedly weak, however, in areas of Michigan and Indiana that are linked
to the auto industry. An analyst for a national discount chain stated that company sales
experienced a year-over-year decline nationally in the first two weeks of October, after sales
growth slowed consistently (in nominal dollars) over the five months ending in September.
Traffic and sales volume in District stores were generally stronger than the company's national
average, except in the Detroit area. Industry inventories are being watched closely, according
one retail analyst, and efforts are being made to limit ordering to items that are out of stock.
Auto sales continue to show surprising strength, although car buyers still expect rebates.
One of the largest motor vehicle dealers in the Seventh District reported continued sales growth
in September and early October, with little change in mix. The dealer attributed some of the
strength to aggressive promotion and market-share gains. However, heavily leveraged dealers
are increasingly cautious in committing to inventory and promotions. An economist for a major
domestic automaker stated that dealers continue to receive much of their inventory financing

VII-2
from auto producers, but are ordering cautiously. This contact also noted that there was little
evidence of substitution of cars for light trucks since the oil price increase. Still, a soft economy
is expected to reduce car and truck sales by about a half a million units (at a seasonally adjusted
annual rate) in the fourth quarter from earlier expectations, according to this economist.
Manufacturing District manufacturing activity continued to expand, on average, with
strength in steel, auto, and industrial equipment production offsetting new softness seen in
agricultural equipment and electronic components production. An economist with a major
Midwest steel producer stated that industry order books for the fourth quarter were "virtually
full," with no sign of an increase in order cancellations. While auto industry inventories are
generally considered low, an analyst stated that fourth quarter auto production probably will be
down from the relatively strong third quarter. An economist for a manufacturer of agricultural
equipment stated that October sales continued to look "terrible," following weakness that began
in August both for the company and the industry. However, this company's sales of industrial
products in the District rose on a year-over-year basis, as well as on a seasonally adjusted monthto-month basis from July through September. An analyst for a major District producer of
electronic components reported that order growth for his company's products had peaked in midsummer, and growth is expected to continue to slow in the near future.
Area purchasing managers' surveys exhibit mixed conditions. The index produced by the
Chicago area survey showed expansion in September, compared to the decline indicated by the
national survey. In contrast, the Milwaukee and Detroit surveys showed weakening activity in
September. One contact suggested that the Detroit weakness was due in large part to uncertainty
prior to the resolution of labor negotiations between auto producers and the UAW.
Several District sources reported that exports, which have been a significant contributor
to the relative strength in the Midwest economy, showed signs of softening recently. An analyst
with a manufacturer of moving equipment stated that retail sales of its products outside of the
United States had weakened over the past two to three months. An economist with a major
manufacturer of agricultural equipment reported that overseas sales also had begun to trend

VII-3
downward in recent months, particularly in much of Europe. On the other hand, a large District
manufacturer of equipment and supplies reported that export growth was continuing.
Investment Capital spending plans for 1990 are generally proceeding on schedule,
although increasing uncertainty is being expressed about plans for 1991. A major District
manufacturer of machine tools reported that the company's sales to and orders from the auto
industry remained strong through September. This contact expected continued growth over the
near-term, as domestic producers continue retooling. Sales outside the auto industry remain
relatively weak, although the weakness developed before the onset of the Middle East crisis. An
economist for a major producer of basic materials used in construction reported little change in
the company's own project schedules, noting that the company's largest project was, if anything,
being accelerated. However, an analyst for a large District producer of a wide variety of capital
equipment cited a recent decline in sales, as well as a flattening in orders, for customers
producing in cyclically sensitive sectors. A bank economist stated that customer feedback
indicates that capital projects underway are being completed, while there is some new reluctance
to commit to start-ups that begin next year.
Construction and Real Estate A number of contacts stated that financing for new
"speculative" construction projects had virtually ceased for both commercial and multifamily
development. Many carefully researched projects continue to move ahead, however, particularly
in the food processing, pharmaceuticals, and energy industries, as well as in public
infrastructure. An analyst with a District manufacturer of moving equipment stated that sales to
construction markets in the District have held up well. While construction markets in the
District have been reported as generally outperforming the national average this year, two
contacts reported data for August that show this relative strength receding, both in construction
contract awards and in cement industry sales.
A Chicago real estate agent described the local housing market as "surprisingly strong."
While homes are on the market longer and prices are not rising as fast as a year ago, sellers are

VII-4

holding firm on price, according to the realtor, and volume is still up over last year. One large
realtorreported that first-time home buyers may be more active recently, calling it a 'buyers
market', in part because mortgage rates are relatively low.
Prices District sources indicate that some manufacturers have begun trying to increase
prices in order to compensate for higher crude oil prices. An economist for a major District
manufacturer reported increased usage of "temporary surcharges" covering transportation costs
and energy-intensive materials. An auto industry analyst stated that it was "too early to tell"
whether the oil price increase would spread through production costs to auto prices, noting that
automakers stockpile oil and hedge their exposure to volatility in energy costs. An analyst with
a manufacturer of agricultural machinery reported the price of its own products had not been
raised since the recent escalation in oil prices began. This contact also stated there had been
little change in the prices of many purchased materials, principally because of weakness in the
markets for the final product.
Credit Conditions Several contacts indicated that borrower repayments had slowed
slightly. A consumer credit analyst for a major District lender reported a small rise in
delinquency rates over the past two months, principally in unsecured and revolving credit. This
contact stated that the rise in itself was not alarming, but noted that there appears to be a growing
proportion of consumers not accounted for in delinquency rates because of increasing personal
bankruptcy filings. An economist with a manufacturer of farm equipment and consumer
vehicles reported a rise in delinquencies by consumers of recreational vehicles, but little change
in the delinquency rates for buyers of agricultural and construction equipment. An analyst for a
manufacturer of moving equipment stated that delinquencies experienced by the company's
finance subsidiary had climbed since late summer.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy showed little or no expansion in recent weeks.
Slow District growth in consumer spending and in some service-producing
sectors, particularly health services, is being offset by declining
construction and durables manufacturing activity.

Higher energy prices

are being blamed for cutbacks in the transportation sector.
construction is generally weak.

New home

Agricultural conditions are mixed.

The

amount of commercial and industrial loans outstanding at the District's
largest banks continues to decline.
Consumer Spending
Contacts report that real retail sales have been near year-earlier
levels.

Spending on vehicles and other durables has been slowing.

New

car sales are flat to well below year-earlier levels in many areas, while
used cars sales are flat to slightly higher.

Contacts suggest consumer

confidence has eroded because of weakness in the national economy and
uncertainty regarding the federal government budget agreement and the
Persian Gulf conflict.

Retailers generally expect fourth quarter sales,

adjusted for inflation, to be flat or just slightly higher than last
year.

As a result, some retailers are ordering or planning to order less

merchandise than previously planned.
Manufacturing
Contacts report production slowdowns and layoffs at many durable
goods plants.

Falling orders from the construction and auto industries

will cause a glass factory to close indefinitely in November and have
resulted in production slowdowns in factories making rubber insulation,

VIII-2

heat exchangers, air conditioners, metal tubing and copper electrical
components.

Slowing sales, a trend that is expected to continue, have

led producers of major consumer appliances to lay off more than 2,000
workers.

In contrast, rising demand for freight cars has led one steel

plant to begin recalling workers and double production.

A primary

aluminum producer reports that orders have not slowed and expects no
abnormal slowing for the rest of the year.

Nondurables manufacturing

activity is generally steady or expanding slowly.
State Government Activity
Because of slowing economic activity, the growth of gross general
revenues, and sales tax revenues in particular, has slowed in recent
months, but revenues remain slightly higher than a year earlier in
Arkansas, Missouri and Tennessee.

Revenues are currently meeting

anticipated levels in these states.

In Missouri, contacts anticipate

further weakening, which may necessitate budget cuts.

There has been no

deceleration of tax revenues in Kentucky, where the state's economy
continues to expand slowly.
Transportation
Higher energy prices are being blamed for cutbacks in the
transportation sector.

A large airline announced that it would lay off

as many as 100 management and clerical workers in St. Louis and stop
hiring pilots and flight attendants.

A Memphis-based trucking business

said that higher energy prices, a truck driver shortage, and weak auto
and home sales influenced the cancellation of a planned fleet expansion.
Two contacts attribute a portion of the recent growth in express delivery
services to the nation's widespread economic slowdown: as the economy
slows, firms tend to monitor their inventories more closely and rely more
on just-in-time deliveries.

VIII-3

Construction and Real Estate
Housing starts of single family homes and existing home sales in
the District range from down substantially in St. Louis to fairly strong
in Louisville.

Developers in St. Louis, Louisville and Memphis report

some difficulty obtaining construction financing, although mortgage
financing appears plentiful.

Memphis home sales are down slightly,

especially in more upscale neighborhoods.

In Louisville, however, both

new and existing home sales are up over last year, with the market's
relative strength attributed to continued growth in the service sector.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Agricultural conditions are mixed.

Recent rains throughout the

District and above normal temperatures in the Delta have been beneficial
to late-planted crops and pastures.

These same rains, however, have

caused flooding in Arkansas, delayed crop harvesting throughout the
District, and may have reduced cotton quality.

In addition, a recent

cold front may have caused frost damage to late-planted soybeans in some
areas.

District coal production continues to run more than 5 percent

ahead of last year.
Banking and Credit

Total loans and leases on the books of the District's 11 largest
banks declined just over 1 percent in the third quarter, after increasing
almost 9 percent during the same period last year.

Commercial and

industrial (C & I) loans declined 12.5 percent during the third quarter
compared with a 5 percent decline a year earlier.

Consumer and real

estate loans continue to increase, albeit at a much slower pace than last
year.

Contacts at small and mid-size District banks report declining

C & I loan demand from traditional as well as new customers.

These same

bankers indicate that they are reviewing the declining pool of loan
applications more closely.

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic conditions have been showing signs of weakness
recently.

Labor market conditions have been mixed.

Growth in spending on

general merchandise has slowed down lately, automobile sales have been sharply
lower, and housing

activity has

declined.

industry and in manufacturing have been mixed.
been doing well.

Conditions

in

the construction

Resource-related industries have

Wage and price increases have remained generally moderate.

Employment, Wages, and Prices
Labor market conditions have been mixed in the district.

Minnesota's

unemployment rate was 4.3 percent in August, down from July's 4.6 percent level
but up from 4.0 percent in August 1989.

Unemployment rates in Montana, North

Dakota, and South Dakota were lower in August than in July and also lower than
in August 1989.
a year.

Manufacturing employment in the district has been flat for over

Production, construction, and electrical workers are reported to be in

oversupply, but shortages are reported for medical and hospital workers.

The

nationwide slowdown in residential construction has resulted in layoffs among
housing construction suppliers.
Wage

increases have

remained moderate

except

specialists whose wages have been rising sharply.

for

technically

skilled

The main source of pressure

on labor costs has continued to be from benefits, mainly health insurance and
workers compensation premiums.

However, some directors report that they are

expecting sharply higher wage increases beginning next year.
except for fuel costs, have generally been moderate.

Price increases,

Trucking companies have

begun to impose surcharges to recoup their sharply higher fuel costs.
of prices received by farmers has declined substantially.

An index

IX-2
Consumer Spending

District retailers of general merchandise report a slight slowdown in sales
growth lately.

One major retailer

reports

that, compared to

a year ago,

September sales were up 2 percent and sales in the first 9 months of the year
were up 4 percent.

An appliance retailer reports that September sales were 4

percent higher this year

than last.

Retailers report that

they are

less

optimistic about sales in the fall season than they were before the Gulf Crisis.
Throughout the district, inventories are reported to be at acceptable levels.
New car sales have been sluggish. Dealers for one manufacturer report that
September new car sales were 20 percent lower than a year ago.

However, last

September's sales were artificially boosted by incentive programs. These dealers
expect October sales to be much better when compared with last year.

Automobile

sales, however, have generally been lower this year than last. Through the first
7 months of the year, Minnesota's new car and truck registrations were down 13.3
percent from last year.

This decline has been concentrated in the Minneapolis-

St. Paul metropolitan area.

Sales in the rest of the state have held up fairly

well compared to last year.
Housing starts have declined sharply in Minnesota.

The number of new

housing permits issued in that state was 25 percent lower this August than last.
This decline was primarily concentrated in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan
area where the number of new housing permits declined by 37.7 percent over the
same period.

In the first eight months of this year in this area, the number of

permits issued has been the lowest since 1982.

However, housing sales have been

robust in the metropolitan area. Housing activity elsewhere in the district has
been moderately good.

IX-3
Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the district's construction industry have been mixed, with
particular weakness in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area.

In that area,

the dollar value of contracts for future construction in August was 16 percent
lower than in August 1989.

There is a substantial oversupply of office and

commercial space, and very few projects are expected to be started for at least
a couple of years.

Elsewhere in the district, construction activity has been

moderately good.
Conditions in the district's manufacturing industries have been mixed
lately.

The computer and electronics industries in the district are reported to

be in a recession.

Sales of recreational vehicles are reported to be 25 percent

lower this year than in 1989 and 40 percent lower than in 1988.

However,

aircraft industry suppliers report that their sales are 30 percent higher this
year than last, and the medical instruments industry is reported to be growing
strongly.

This industry expects a 10 to 15 percent growth in sales next year

from this year's strong levels.

Defense industry and ordnance suppliers have

recently seen a sharp pickup in orders.

Resource-Related Industries
The district's resource-related industries appear to be fairly healthy.
Crop yields throughout the district have been above expectations and close to
record setting levels.

Recent declines in agricultural product prices have

prompted farmers to store crops rather than sell them. Ranchers in the district
report that this year has been the best in their experience.

Livestock prices

have been holding fairly steady and feeding costs have been relatively low.
mining industry has also been doing well.

The

However, the lumber and wood products

industries have begun to feel the effect of the slowdown in home construction.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to grow slowly.

The

agricultural sector remains strong, supported by good fall crops and high
cattle prices.
modest pace.

In the energy sector, drilling activity is increasing at a
Retail sales--including new car sales--are softening, however.

Both retailers and manufacturers are trying to trim inventories.

Housing

starts are down from a month ago as mortgage rates remain steady to somewhat
higher.

Loan demand at commercial banks was unchanged last month, despite

decreases in the demand for commercial and industrial loans and commercial
real estate loans.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report flat to worsening sales over

the past three months.

Most respondents are trimming inventories as sales are

expected to soften through the rest of the year.

Prices, which have been

generally flat to slightly higher, are expected to stabilize in coming months.
New auto sales in most district states are down and are expected to be flat to
down during the rest of the year.

Dealers are generally trying to trim

inventories, partly because of the cost of floorplanning.

Dealers are having

trouble getting some potential buyers financed because buyers are less
qualified and lenders are tightening credit standards.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report increasing input prices over

the last three months following a period of stable prices.

The recent price

increases result partly from fuel surcharges pushing up transportation costs.
Respondents expect input prices to increase further over the next three
months.

Several firms are reducing stocks in light of higher than normal

inventory levels.

While few firms are having difficulties obtaining inputs,

some are concerned about the future availability of petroleum derivatives.

X-2
Energy.

Exploration and development activity in the district is

increasing but continues to lag behind the rate of oil price increases.

The

district rig count rose from 282 in August to 305 in September, bringing the
third quarter average to 12 percent above last year's level.

Over the same

four-quarter period, the price of crude oil increased about one-third.
Industry observers expect a stronger increase in drilling activity only if oil
prices remain above $25 a barrel for a sustained period.
Housing Activity and Finance.
last month.

Housing starts are generally down from

New home sales across the district are mixed, while new home

prices are generally stable.

Most builders expect starts and sales to remain

flat or show slight improvement in the months ahead, depending on developments
in interest rates and the Gulf crisis.

Prices of building materials are

rising, but availability is not a problem.
Most district savings and loan respondents report net outflows of
deposits over the last month and expect additional outflows in the near term.
Mortgage demand is down and is expected to weaken further due to seasonal
factors, a weaker economy, and stable to higher mortgage rates.

Respondents

exhibit considerable uncertainty about the future direction of mortgage rates.
Banking.
last month.

Commercial bankers report that total loan demand was unchanged

Increases in the demand for consumer loans, home mortgage loans,

and agricultural loans were offset by decreases in the demand for commercial
and industrial loans and commercial real estate loans.

Loan-to-deposit ratios

are down slightly from both last month and a year ago.

Total deposits

increased slightly over the past month, with increases in demand deposits, IRA
and Keough accounts, and small time and savings deposits.
large certificates of deposit fell.

NOW accounts and

Bankers report no major changes in their

X-3
prime rates or consumer lending rates and expect no changes in the near
future.

Most respondents report they have not changed credit standards over

the past month.

A few respondents, however, have either tightened credit

standards or are reviewing loan applications more closely.
Agriculture.

The fall harvest in much of the district has reached the

halfway point and is progressing on a normal schedule.

Dryland corn and

soybean yields are generally about average, while irrigated crop yields are
above average in parts of Kansas and Nebraska.

Milo yields are variable.

Winter wheat planting is proceeding on schedule in most of the district,
and the new wheat crop is developing nicely.

But wheat planting was delayed

by dry soil conditions in western Oklahoma and southern Kansas and by the late
harvest of soybeans from double-cropped acreage in Missouri.

Low wheat prices

are expected to maintain a high rate of participation in the government pricesupport program despite anticipated cuts in support levels.
While lower crop prices and reduced support levels may restrain farm
income growth, high cattle prices continue to support strong incomes for
district cattle producers.

In response to high prices, most district ranchers

are choosing to sell feeder cattle instead of feeding them to heavier weights
or retaining them for breeding herds.

High fed cattle prices and low

feedgrain prices are offsetting the effect of high feeder cattle prices on
cattle feeding margins.
capacity.

As a result, most district feedlots are operating at

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic output in the District is flat to slightly down.

Manufacturing

activity has slipped, particularly in the construction-related and electronics
industries.

Most retailers say sales have been flat or declining across a

broad spectrum of goods and that they are reducing inventories from moderate
levels.

Auto sales have fallen.

Output in the service sector continues to

grow although several sectors have weakened.
to decline.

Construction activity has begun

Higher oil prices have yet to motivate an increase in drilling

but indicators suggest growth in the next few months.

Falling product prices

and increasing energy costs are reducing net farm income.
In general, manufacturing orders and production have declined in recent
weeks, but most respondents say that inventories are still near desired
levels.

Although most product prices are holding steady, some food processors

are raising their prices in response to rising transportation costs.

Orders

for lumber and wood products and fabricated metals have decreased due to
declines in construction nationally.

Stone, clay and glass producers also

note a reduction in orders, although much of this weakness has stemmed from
decreased highway construction in Texas.

Orders and prices for oil field

machinery have increased moderately and producers say the outlook is strong.
Electronic producers note falling orders for semiconductors and products
related to defense, housing, autos and appliances.

Respondents say that

orders from the personal computer industry have increased.
strong in the steel industry.
noticeably.
levels.

Output remains

Demand for apparel products have declined

Petrochemical industry production has remained constant at high

Product prices for ethylene and plastics have increased only slightly

XI-2

while input prices have jumped, causing margins to be squeezed.

Oil refinery

profit margins have been volatile, but are significantly lower than earlier
this year.

Some producers mention declines in gasoline and diesel fuel

orders, but others say orders have been flat.
District retail sales have been flat recently with several respondents
noting declines.

Weakness is widespread across product lines.

report that they are reducing inventories.

Retailers

One respondent said that the

current reduction in inventories almost guarantees a slow holiday season.
Sales at discount stores continue to be slightly stronger than at other
stores.

Sales continue to grow in Houston and along the Texas side of the

Mexican Border, although growth is slowing.
District auto sales fell in September, dropping 3.5 percent from a year
earlier in the Dallas/Fort Worth area and 10 percent in Houston.

Respondents

say that increased economic uncertainty has caused sales to decline.
Demand for District services continues to increase although it has
softened in some sectors.

Demand continues strong for consulting services,

particularly office automation.

Part-time employment agencies say that demand

has been steady overall, despite declining placements in the finance,
insurance and real estate industries.

This weakness has been offset by

increases in demand by manufacturers, who are holding their permanent staffs
at lean levels.

Suppliers of legal services note continued steady demand for

bankruptcy services but slowing activity in business litigation.
report declining ridership and large increases in input costs.

Airlines
Increased

demand for services and declining property values have financially stressed
local governments.

Many local governments are finding it hard to increase

XI-3

employment or services, although Houston is hiring workers in several areas.
District construction activity has declined somewhat.

The recent

weakness has occurred mostly in the non-residential and non-building sectors.
Non-building activity, however, continues to increase in Louisiana.

The

District multi-family sector continues to improve while single-family
homebuilding recently has dipped slightly.
Output in the District energy sector is increasing moderately.

The

continuing crisis in the Middle East is keeping the price of West Texas
Intermediate crude near historic highs, around $40 per barrel.

One respondent

says that the current supply shortfall of 1.1 million barrels per day should
support prices of about $25 per barrel, but that expectations of war have
motivated a $15 per barrel premium.

High price expectations have led to a

significant increase in well permit applications in Texas and Louisiana.

The

rig count is up slightly in Texas, but rig counts are down in Louisiana and
New Mexico.

While drilling has not increased significantly, many independent

producers are increasing well maintenance in order to raise production.

If

oil prices remain high, major oil companies are expected to increase drilling
significantly early next year.
District agricultural incomes will likely be less than previously
forecast.

Harvest is well underway and yields have been good despite dryness

earlier in the year.

Operating expenses, however, are above expectations due

to increased irrigation and rising fuel and chemical prices.

September prices

received by Texas farmers and ranchers fell one percent from August, but
remained 8 percent above last year's levels.

Prices of most crops fell, while

the livestock and livestock products index reached a record September high.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic growth in the Twelfth District continues, although the pace of growth has
slowed further in recent months. Western business leaders are pessimistic about the prospects for
national economic growth during the next year. Prices for petroleum-related products have
increased sharply, but price increases for other products remain clustered near five percent.
Retail sales are growing more slowly than previously, or are declining, in most parts of the
District. Manufacturing activity continues to be mixed. Agricultural conditions remain solid, and
some energy-related industries are benefiting from higher oil prices. Real estate markets continue
to cool in many parts of the District. Financial institutions report mixed conditions.
Business Sentiment
Western business leaders' projections of future economic activity continue to deteriorate.
Sixty-seven percent now expect a national recession in the coming year, while the remaining 33
percent foresee only slow GNP growth. Most respondents describe current inventory levels as
acceptable, but many note that efforts are currently under way to reduce inventory levels as
concerns about the economy's future grow.
Wages and Prices
Prices of petroleum, transportation, and products derived from petroleum have increased
sharply, but price trends for most other goods remain relatively stable. One respondent reports
that the large increase in crude oil prices has caused the addition of a "fuel surcharge" to
shipment costs. Price increases for many non-fuel items are moderated by softening consumer
and business demand. Most respondents report overall price increases of about 5 percent from
last year.

XII-2
Wage increases remain moderate, at about 4 to 5 percent compared with last year. In
Washington, however, the continued boom in commercial aerospace has pushed up wages in the
transportation equipment industry nearly 10 percent from a year ago.
Retail Trade and Services
Most respondents report that retail sales have recently grown more slowly or declined.
Retailers attribute the sluggish sales to badly shaken consumer confidence. One auto dealer in
the inter-mountain area reports that while showroom traffic remains high, customers are hesitant
to purchase. A retailer in Southern California indicates that September was the weakest sales
month in several years. General merchandise retailers expect this weak demand to continue into
the holiday season, and report an increased effort to reduce inventories now to avoid heavy
discounting in the coming months. In contrast, sales are reported to be strong in parts of the
Northwest, inter-mountain states, and Hawaii. In Honolulu, one shopping center reported that
August sales were 16 percent above their year-earlier level.
In the Seattle area, both law and accounting firms reported a flat August and September.
Growth in tourism continues to fuel Hawaii's economy. In August, the number of visitors was up
7.8 percent from a year earlier.
Manufacturing
Western manufacturing activity remains mixed. In the Northwest, the boom in commercial
aircraft activity continues, with record orders and backlogs, and hardly any slippage from the oil
shock. However, productivity increases are preventing even this strong sector from experiencing
significant employment gains. Total manufacturing employment District-wide is declining, with a
majority of California's job losses in defense-related industries.
While most manufacturers' inventories are reported to be satisfactory, an electronics
manufacturer and a maker of heavy equipment report that their inventories are higher than

XII-3
desired. The heavy equipment company faces significant layoffs as a result.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
District agriculture remains strong. Prices for most crops are high, with the exception of
California pistachios and almonds, which are in over-supply. Livestock prices continue high.
The slowdown in housing construction nationwide has combined with stockpiling of logs,
due to federal timber supply restrictions, to increase inventories of both logs and lumber. As a
result, some lumber and plywood plants in the Northwest are laying off workers.
One respondent notes that spending plans for oil and gas exploration and production are
up 25 percent. In California, however, new oil exploration is on hold because of the volatility of
oil prices and the shortage of skilled oil field workers.
Construction and Real Estate
Real estate and construction activity are slowing throughout the District. Both home sales
and median prices continue to decline from year-earlier levels in California. Even the previously
robust Sacramento market appears to have cooled in the past two months. Slowing activity in the
Seattle area is now showing up in the data, as prices and sales have levelled off. In Idaho,
construction is reportedly slowing in the Sun Valley area and new commercial development loans
are becoming more difficult to get.
Financial Sector
District financial institutions report mixed conditions. In California, loan demand is
reported to be growing more slowly or declining in many credit categories, although some Central
Valley banks note increasing deposit growth and "good" loan demand. Institutions in the Pacific
Northwest and in Hawaii report continued strong conditions. Banks throughout the District
continue to be very cautious in their lending practices, particularly with respect to land and land
development loans.

