SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

March 1990

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .................................................
First District - Boston .................

........

i

..........................

. .

I-

Second District - New York ..........................................

II-

Third District - Philadelphia .......................................

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland ........................................

.

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ..........................................

.

V-1

Sixth Distirct - Atlanta ........................................

... .

Seventh District - Chicago .........................................
Eight District - St. Louis ...................... ......

.............

Ninth District - Minneapolis ..................................
Tenth District - Kansas City .......................

.......

..................

VI-1
VII-l
VIII-1
IX-1
X-l

Eleventh District - Dallas ...........................................

XI-1

Iwelfth District - San Francisco ................................... .

XII-1

i
SUMMARY*
Summary. Most Federal Reserve Districts describe economic activity as expanding
slowly. Consumer spending varies from moderate to strong, except for auto sales which have
slowed after a January rebound. The manufacturing sector is soft, but is improving in some
Districts. The weakness in autos and auto-related industries, however, is widespread.
Construction activity continues to slow in most Districts, but Chicago and San Francisco still are
reporting relatively strong activity. Agricultural conditions are generally good, although several
Districts cite serious concern over the lack of soil moisture. Banks have become less aggressive
in making new loans, and demand for most types of loans has softened.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales have continued to improve in recent months. Most
Districts indicate that retail sales gains in February were above a year ago, led by women's
apparel and electronics. Cleveland and San Francisco note that retailers are reporting betterthan-expected sales gains. However, retail sales in New England are weak, partly due to
consumers turning cautious. Sales of "big ticket" items in Richmond are flat and demand for
durable goods in Atlanta is weak. Most Districts report that retailers have inventories under
control, although Chicago and Cleveland report downward pressure on prices as retailers attempt
to cut excess inventories.
A slowdown in auto sales since January's rebound is widespread. However, dealers'
inventories are in better shape, with several Districts reporting stocks to be at or below year-ago
levels. Philadelphia and Chicago note that dealers are cautious about new orders because of
slow sales. Minneapolis notes that some dealers are having financial problems and some
consolidation may take place in 1990. Kansas City, Cleveland, and Dallas report that weak sales
are associated with tightening credit availability. Reasons cited for the credit tightening range
from tighter credit standards to personal credit history problems left over from earlier depressed
times.
*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and based on information obtained before March 6, 1990. This

document summarizes comments received from business and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a
commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

Manufacturing. Manufacturing activity is mixed, with Boston, Philadelphia, and St.
Louis reporting manufacturing declines and most other Districts reporting moderate
improvement. New York indicates that purchasing agent surveys indicate rising new orders and
production. Capital goods producers in Cleveland and Chicago report a slow upward trend in
orders. San Francisco's commercial aircraft industry is showing no sign of slowing and aircraftrelated equipment producers in Boston are facing rising demand. Both Chicago and San
Francisco report strong sales of farm machinery. However, Boston cites weakness in computers,
auto parts, and paper. St. Louis and Philadelphia report weakness in employment and orders,
particularly among durable goods industries.
Only the weakness in the auto industry appears to be widespread. Atlanta notes that plant
closings and layoffs in the auto industry are hurting suppliers, but no further weakening is
expected. Auto output has already begun to revive in the Cleveland District, however, and most
plants are expected to be running in the Chicago District by March.
Construction and Real Estate. Construction activity is slowing in most Districts. New
York reports that their "boom" in residential construction has subsided throughout the District,
due to higher prices, lack of good land, and an easing of pent-up demand. Most observers are
not anticipating a pickup in 1990. Commercial building has slowed in Atlanta because of
overbuilding and slow employment growth. Construction activity is flat in Minneapolis and not
expected to improve in the near future. Although San Francisco reports nonresidential
construction around its District is mixed, overall construction activity is strongest in Chicago and
San Francisco. Homebuilding in St. Louis has been rising, due partly to favorable weather
conditions. Kansas City notes that mortgage loan demand is weak and is not expected to
improve.
Agriculture and Natural Resources. Improved economic conditions in the agricultural
sector continue to buoy farm incomes. Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City report that the
yields on the winter wheat crop are expected to range from near normal to above normal. Freeze
damage to fruits and vegetables caused some problems in the Atlanta and Dallas Districts, with

prices of some produce rising to their highest levels since 1984. While most produce prices are
expected to decline over the year, Atlanta notes that citrus prices are likely to remain high all
year. Chicago and Minneapolis cite high livestock and dairy prices as bolstering farm income.
Kansas City notes that farm income for livestock producers is doing better than for cash grain
farmers. However, concerns were expressed throughout the farm belt that moisture levels in the
soil are low, despite recent precipitation. Minneapolis notes some concern that below-normal
precipitation could bring another drought to the Upper Midwest.
Other resource-related industries are generally very strong. Minneapolis states that
mining is one of the strongest sectors of the Upper Midwest economy, with iron and precious
metal mines expanding capacity. Forest product industries are strong, with most plants running
at capacity and many expanding capacity. However, forest product firms in San Francisco have
been scaling back output as logging restrictions take effect. Oil and gas drilling in the Southwest
is up sharply, although drilling activity is expected to moderate. Kansas City cites a seasonal
decline in exploration and development of oil and gas in January, but that decline is coming off
six consecutive months of increase.
Financial Markets. Most Districts report that financial institutions are either less willing
to extend credit or actually tightening credit terms. Atlanta particularly notes tightening of credit
standards for real estate loans. Richmond cites a decline in the supply of real estate loans.
Retailers in Boston and Philadelphia state that not only are sales being constrained, but retailers
themselves are having difficulty ordering because of tighter credit availability.
Loan demand also appears to be softening. Richmond and Kansas City report that
demand for commercial and industrial loans has softened recently. Except for home equity
loans, growth in consumer loan demand has weakened in Atlanta. New York notes that a
widespread decline in interest rates has had no effect on loan demand, which is currently lower
than a year ago. Loan volume in Philadelphia was up in early February from a year ago, but was
slipping in mid-February.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Contacts in the First District report that economic conditions
continue to be mixed.

Half of the manufacturers contacted are experiencing

increases in shipments and orders compared with early 1989, while the other
half face declines.

Retailers report sales below expectations but sense a

more stable business climate.

Several contacts suggested that recent

newspaper reports focusing on difficulties in the region's construction,
real estate, and banking industries have led to exaggerated impressions of
New England's economic slowdown.
Retail
A panel of First District retailers report February sales as
generally weak and below planned levels.

They attribute part of the recent

weakness to weekend snowstorms and part to continuing consumer caution.
But the heavily promotional climate of the recent holiday season has
apparently eased in much of the industry.

The respondents see business

conditions as stabilizing, and their mood is brighter now than it was in
January.
Respondents say inventories are generally in line.

Some have excess

stocks while at least one plans to increase inventory levels.

A few

retailers report that creditors - banks, factors, and vendors - have become
more hard-nosed; others have observed no change in credit conditions.

In

the area of fixed investment, most retailers say they have scaled back
their plans.

Some firms are nevertheless adding new stores; and several

large malls, in various stages of completion, are moving forward.
Nonetheless, the reduced buoyancy of the regional economy and slowing cash
flows have made the industry cautious and conservative.
Retail contacts see regional economic conditions, and thus their own
business, continuing to stabilize over the next few months.

They expect

this stabilization to lead to an upturn in consumer confidence.
Manufacturing
According to First District manufacturing contacts, demand
conditions vary considerably across industries and products.

Half of the

respondents indicate that shipments and orders are above last year's levels
For the remainder, sales and

- by as much as 25 percent in one case.

orders are down - from marginally to 12 percent.

(Although the number of

contacts where sales are growing about equals the number reporting
declines, those facing soft demand tend to be the larger firms.)

Demand

for instruments, auto parts, paper and computer-related goods is weak.
Niche or new products and aircraft-related equipment face stronger demand.
Overseas markets continue stronger than domestic but are growing more
slowly than they were a year or so ago.
Inventories are generally described as satisfactory.

However,

one-third of the respondents expressed some concern about inventory levels
if shipments continue below expectation.
Most First District respondents expressed relief that materials
prices are flat or declining slightly.

Two firms mentioned recent

increases in copper and petrochemical prices, however.

In the case of

their own selling prices, contacts are reportedly tailoring their pricing

I-3

strategies to fit specific markets.

Almost one-half of the firms are

offering discounts in those markets where competition is particularly
stiff; however, an equal number reported price increases.
Employment levels are reportedly flat to down for most respondents.
Several firms have made or plan substantial layoffs.

By contrast, two

manufacturers have recently increased employment, but their gains are small
compared with the layoffs reported elsewhere.
One-third of the respondents plan capital expenditures 15 to 50
percent below 1989 levels; however, an equal number expect to increase
capital spending - in some cases, quite significantly.

Investment goals

include retooling for new products, expansions and a few new facilities.
Manufacturers were divided in their assessment of the future.
Almost half of the manufacturing contacts expect faster growth in 1990 than
occurred in 1989 (with anticipated sales gains ranging up to 12 percent and
profitability improving even more).
best.

The balance foresee sluggish growth at

Members of this more pessimistic group describe themselves as

"sober" and anticipate a "rough" couple of years for themselves and their
industries.

Several respondents (from among both optimists and pessimists)

suggested that the state of the regional economy "feels worse than it
really is" and that the "doom and gloom talk" is exaggerated.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments continued to be mixed in the Second District in recent weeks.
January retail sales results varied widely and conditions in the District's commercial
real estate market were mixed. Residential construction slowed throughout the District
in 1989 and most observers do not anticipate much of a pickup in 1990. However, January
surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester showed an improvement in general
business conditions and District unemployment rates fell below the national average.
Following the lead of major banks, small and medium-sized banks in the District dropped
their prime lending rate in January.
Consumer Spending
The pattern of retail sales varied widely in the District during January.
Over-the-year changes ranged from -7% to +22% and from "decidedly below" to "very much
above plan."
results.

The Campeau bankruptcy was cited as a factor explaining the divergent

Consumer uncertainty about the future of the Campeau stores and the reluctance

of some suppliers to ship merchandise to them may have led to a shift in sales
elsewhere.

With an increasing number of manufacturers resuming shipments and growing

consumer perception that the Campeau stores will remain open, respondents anticipate a
less varied pattern of sales results in the months ahead.
Apparel and sportswear remained best-sellers during January and household items
were also popular at some stores.

However, big ticket items moved slowly, particularly

at stores whose viability and ability to provide service were in question.

In general,

District department store contacts reported inventories to be on or below target.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction slowed throughout the District in 1989 and most
observers do not anticipate much of a pickup in 1990.

While homebuilding activity was

II-2

considerably more brisk in areas such as Buffalo and Syracuse than in the New York
metropolitan region, the "boom" has apparently subsided everywhere.

Factors most

commonly cited are the continuing high prices of existing homes on the market, a lack of
reasonably priced, developable land, and the satisfaction of much pentup demand.

The

need for "affordable" housing remains strong, however, and a number of communities are
grappling with the problem in part because it is seen as a deterrent to future business
development.
Conditions in the commercial real estate market have recently been mixed.
Office leasing activity was quite strong in midtown Manhattan and, in Stamford,
Connecticut overall leasing activity surpassed the addition to the market of new or
existing space for the first time in several years.

In Westchester County a sharp

cutback in new construction is credited for the probable bottoming out of office rental
rates and an expected decline in vacancy rates.

However, the office market is described

as soft in some other parts of the District such as Buffalo and downtown Manhattan,
where financial firms have been retrenching, and in northern New Jersey as well.

While

a slowdown in new office building is expected to stabilize or lower vacancy rates in
some of these areas, many observers expect Manhattan's rates to rise because of the
large number of buildings nearing completion and ongoing downsizing at brokerage firms.
Other Business Activity
January surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester showed an
improvement in general business conditions, new orders and production.

None of the

Rochester managers reported a worsening of conditions and in Buffalo, the percentage
reporting a decline in orders fell to 7 percent from 42 percent in December.
majority in both surveys noted stable input prices.

A sizable

With regard to the outlook,

90 percent of Rochester respondents expect 1990 to equal or surpass business conditions
in 1989 and 82 percent foresee capital expenditures either equal to or greater than
investment in 1989.

II-3

District unemployment rates continued moving erratically in January as New
York's rate fell .8 percentage point to 4.7 percent while New Jersey's rate rose
.9 percentage point to 4.6 percent.

As was true nationally, New York's rate declined

slightly from a year earlier, but New Jersey's rate rose.

Recent developments in the

brokerage industry could result in an increase in District unemployment levels in the
months ahead.

The unexpected liquidation of Drexel Burnham and the employment cutbacks

recently announced by Shearson Lehman and Merrill Lynch could entail the layoff of about
10,000 and some observers anticipate additional restructuring in the industry.

In

addition, Fisher-Price will close a toy factory in upstate New York, and G.E. Aerospace
announced plans to lay off 5600 workers at its east coast plants.
Fiscal problems are now plaguing all three states in the District as tax
revenues fall increasingly short of projections.

New Jersey expects a $550 million

deficit in the current fiscal year while New York faces a $1 billion deficit in the year
ending March 31 and sizable deficits over the next few years.
Financial Developments
Following the lead of major banks, small and medium-sized banks in the Second
District dropped their prime lending rate by one-half percentage point in January.

The

majority of the surveyed banks reported a general decrease in lending rates across the
board.

Almost all bankers noted that other business loan rates have fallen since they

are usually tied to the prime.

Most mortgage rates also dropped, reflecting the tying

of many adjustable rate mortgages to the prime.
generally steady.

Rates on consumer loans, however, were

Nearly all of the bankers noted that the change in the prime had no

effect on general loan demand.

Loan demand today is lower than a year ago and many

bankers spoke of a particular weakness in the real estate market.
that demand for primary mortgages was especially slow.

One banker stated

Most bankers see no basic

improvement in this situation unless a significant decline in interest rates occurs.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications from business contacts in the Third District in February were
that economic activity was virtually flat, overall.

The manufacturing sector

continued on a downward path in February, with the orders picture even dimmer
than in the past few months.

Retailers reported only marginal year-over-year

gains in dollar sales, while auto dealers said a healthy rate of sales early in
the year was beginning to fade.

Bankers noted a falloff in loan growth due to

slackening demand and caution in extending commitments, especially for buyouts
and real estate lending.
The consensus in the Third District business community is that current
conditions are likely to persist through most of the year.

Negative opinions

about future business activity edge out positive views among manufacturers,
prompting plans to trim employment and capital spending. Retailers do not expect
consumer demand
merchandise.

to

regain vigor,

and

they are being cautious

in ordering

Bankers foresee only a slight advance in lending, at best.

MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity

in the Third District continued to

decline

in

February, and indications from companies contacted during the month were that
the downturn, which began last spring, was steepening.

Within a generally soft

manufacturing sector, conditions in durable goods industries are somewhat weaker
than in nondurables.
Most measures of industrial activity indicated a slowing pace of business
in February.

While shipments were edging up slightly, the rate of gain slipped

III-2

from the pace set in the previous three months, and new orders, which had held
up through the fall, were declining. Delivery times reported by industrial firms
continued to grow shorter, reflecting the softening order situation.

Despite

the drop in orders, surveyed firms generally reported they were working down
inventories.

And, although the overall picture was dim, employment measures

have shown little change; while area firms were trimming hours somewhat, overall,
payrolls were being held steady.
of stabilizing;

Industrial prices in the region show some signs

a majority of the companies contacted noted steady prices

for

the goods they purchase as well as for the products they make.
Looking ahead, pessimistic opinions about business conditions over the next
six

months

slightly

outnumber

positive

forecasts

among

Third

District

manufacturers, although, in the aggregate, managers at area plants expect both
new orders and shipments to run at steady rates over the period.
pace

of business

observed since

affecting production plans,

But the slower

the beginning of the new year apparently

as local firms indicate they expect

is

to pare back

employment and working hours and make some cuts in capital spending.
RETAIL
Third District retailers surveyed in late February generally indicated that
sales

for

the month were

current dollar terms.
well

only marginally

above

the

February 1989

level,

in

While no line of goods stood out as selling particularly

or poorly, some merchants

said that women's spring

apparel was

selling

better than expected for this early in the year.
Most retail contacts in the Third District expect sales for the rest of
the year, in current dollars, just to inch above last year's level.
being very cautious in ordering merchandise.

Most are

Orders by retailers are also being

III-3

restrained by credit conditions, as factors financing inventories for some local
stores have cut back on the amount of funds they are willing to advance.
Third District auto dealers generally posted sales in early February above
the year-ago level, but sales after mid-month slipped to a level just even with
the 1989 rate for the same period.

Although some import dealers expect sales

to continue to be healthy, most dealers, both of domestic models and of imports,
expect further declines this year.

Area dealers have cut back on orders

to

manufacturers and they consider their current inventories, at around one and onehalf month's supply of cars, to be satisfactory.
FINANCE
Total loan volume at major Third District banks

in early February was

approximately 15 percent above the year-ago level but bankers contacted late in
the month said growth has slipped from that rate.

A combination of slackening

demand and tighter credit standards has reduced growth in nearly all categories
Commercial and industrial loan volume has been virtually flat in

of lending.

recent weeks, according to bankers, and commitments
capital investment financing have dropped sharply.
also

have

curtailed

construction.

lending

for

real

estate

for leveraged buyout

and

Most Third District banks

acquisition,

development,

and

Consumer lending growth has been below bankers' expectations, and

bankers describe personal loan demand as weak, except for home equity credit.
Looking
significantly.

ahead,

bankers

do

not

expect

lending

activity

In the absence of more vigorous economic growth,

to

pick

up

they expect

virtually flat commercial loan demand and only slight gains in consumer lending.
Real estate lending will remain restricted.
are not aggressively seeking deposits.

In line with this scenario, banks

IV - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Respondents in the Fourth District expect a slightly improved pace of
overall economic activity this quarter from last.

They expect some let-up

in food and energy prices, but a 4 percent underlying inflation rate is
The worst of the

expected to persist, at least for the next several quarters.
slowdown in manufacturing activity is believed to have passed.

Interest rates

are still expected to ease over the next few months, but not as much as
was thought a few weeks ago.
The Economy.

Most respondents describe the economy as being sluggish or

in a growth recession, but they expect a gradual strengthening in output over
the next few quarters.

Despite mixed signals about the economy, the

respondents generally have not changed their outlook for 1990 and do not
believe that prospects for a recession have increased.

They believe that some

of the special factors that accounted for the weakness in overall output in
recent months, especially auto output cutbacks and the Boeing strike, are
already providing some impetus to the economy.
Prices.

Respondents believe that the latest surge in food and energy

prices has about run its course.

They see encouraging signs in the latest

easing in crude oil and gasoline prices.

The spike in those prices is judged

to be temporary, originating from a convergence of special factors involving

IV - 2

supplies.

Declines in spot prices for crude oil, fuel oil, and gasoline are

taken as evidence of rapidly improving supplies that will probably lead to
further declines in crude oil prices over the next several weeks.
The latest spurt in food prices was partly in response to the freeze last
December.

Produce, milk, and processed fruit and vegetable prices are easing.

Some other prices, however, including cereals, some dairy products, and
coffee, all rose much more than expected last quarter, and have been sticky on
the downside.

If those prices ease more, overall food prices could increase

in a 4 percent to 4 1/2 percent range this year, similar to recent years,
according to an industry source.
Despite the expected easing in food and energy prices, the prevailing
view is that inflation will hold at about a 4 percent rate over the next
several quarters.
Consumer Spending.

Retailers are becoming more optimistic because sales

in February were somewhat better than they expected.

Sales are on an

improving trend instead of being flat, according to one retailer.

They assert

that retail prices have been flat to moderately higher in recent months, and
are likely to remain under downward pressure as some retailers cut
higher-than-desired inventories.
Manufacturing.

Most respondents believe that the worst of the slowdown

in manufacturing output has passed and that a slight decline in production
this quarter will be followed by a slight pickup next quarter.

Production in

February is generally believed to have rebounded from the January decline.
Automotive output revived, and most traditional capital goods industries are

IV - 3

still on a slowly rising trend that is offsetting softening in some high-tech
industries, especially office computers and communications equipment.
Purchasing managers in Cleveland and Cincinnati report higher output and
production for the second consecutive month in February, and commodity prices
in the Cincinnati area firmed for the first time in the last eight months.
Some of the cautiously optimistic tone about manufacturing stems from the
auto industry.

New car inventories have been brought down substantially since

year-end 1989 and should be in a normal range by the end of March.

Production

in February and March is expected to rise to about a 6 million to 6.5 million
unit annual rate from the 4.1 million rate in January.

Dealers in the Fourth

District expect to step up orders for second quarter delivery because of their
improving inventory condition.

Big Three auto dealers attribute the better

sales level of this quarter than last to the incentive programs.
Although they report that captive finance companies have been tightening
credit standards in response to the high percentage of loan defaults last
year, they believe commercial banks are still making credit readily available
for both consumers and dealers.
Steel producers continue to operate at about 80% of capacity.

Production

is expected to increase next quarter because of rising seasonal demands, some
pickup in the auto industry, and less inventory liquidation by steel
warehouses.

Spot prices are described as weak, and prices in export markets

are so depressed that some domestic producers have decided to withdraw from
that market.

IV - 4

Profit margins in manufacturing have been deteriorating, especially in
the auto and related industries and in computer and office machinery
industries, and are characterized by some as recession margins.

The erosion,

however, doesn't necessarily imply a retrenchment in capital spending.

A

steel producer reported that modernization plans are still on schedule, and a
capital goods producer pointed out that cash flow is a key to investment.
Financial Developments.

Economists contacted still expect some easing in

interest rates as market fears about inflation lessen and the economy
continues on a slow growth path.

Some economists, however, expect that

interest rates may not recede as much as they previously thought because of
rising interest rates abroad. Some banks and thrift institutions in this
District report that their lending policies have been tightening.
Nonperforming loans in this region rose last year but were still well below
the national average.

A thrift institution observed that new regulations that

affect lending to any

single builder probably are not constraining new

construction because there appears to be ample funds available to
credit-worthy builders.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity was mixed in February as it was in January.
Sales of most retail goods rose, but not sales of new cars.
lackluster.

Tourism was

The manufacturing sector rebounded somewhat after its January

decline although furniture production remained depressed.
at District ports and imports were mixed.

Exports increased

The demand for business loans was

down and lenders were more cautious about making real estate loans.

The

agricultural sector survived a cold snap with little damage to crops.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales of general merchandise rose in mid-February as compared
with earlier in the month according to our regular mail survey; however,
department stores reported that sales of big ticket items were flat.

Most

retailers expect sales to continue rising over the next six months.
According to our telephone survey of automobile dealers and dealer
associations, sales of new cars in February were below January and year-ago
levels.

Despite widespread manufacturer and dealer discounts, demand was

depressed for all new models, foreign and domestic.

Although new car sales

were weak, nearly all car dealers said their inventories were now at
comfortable levels.

Some dealers said that sales of used cars were brisk.

Our telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts indicated that
tourist activity this winter was about even with last winter's.

Poor skiing

conditions in some parts of the District were offset by good golf weather.
Tourist areas throughout the District expect their business to be better
than usual in coming months.

Manufacturing
Our regular mail survey of manufacturers, which registered declines in
virtually all measures of manufacturing activity in January, indicated
increases in shipments and new orders in February.

Unfilled orders,

employment, and the length of the workweek, however, were unchanged.

Prices

for raw materials rose at the same moderate pace reported in January.
Inventories of materials and finished goods were largely unchanged.
In contrast to overall manufacturing activity, furniture output
weakened further in February according to most of our respondents.

Many

plants shortened their workweeks, and at least two companies announced
plant closings.
District manufacturers, including furniture producers, remain
optimistic about prospects for growth in their businesses and in the nation
during the next six months.

Respondents who look for increases in

shipments, new orders, unfilled orders, employment, and the workweek
outnumbered those who expect decreases.

About 60 percent expect their

exports to increase in 1990 compared to the half who reported increases in
1989.

Most of the producers believe national economic activity will expand

or remain close to its current level over the next six months.
Ports
Representatives of the three major District ports--Hampton Roads
(Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore--indicated that export activity was
higher in February than in January while import activity was mixed.

Imports

increased at Charleston, decreased at Baltimore, and remained unchanged at
Hampton Roads.

All three ports expect the volume of exports to increase

more than the volume of imports over the next six months.

Financial
The demand for commercial loans softened further in recent weeks
according to executives of District financial institutions.

A few

respondents noted increases in the pace of business bankruptcies.

Some

indicated that certain retailers, such as automobile and boat dealers, faced
financial difficulties.
Several business and financial executives called attention to the
reduced supply of real estate loans.

They said that pension funds and

insurance companies had become more cautious in their lending for land
development.

They also said that many banks and thrifts had reduced or were

seeking to reduce their real estate loan portfolios in order to increase
other types of loans and investments and their capital.

According to these

executives, some of this increased caution in real estate lending is
warranted in light of overbuilding in many urban areas, but some viable
development projects cannot proceed because of a lack of financing.
Agriculture
A recent cold snap, which ended almost two months of unseasonably warm
weather, caused little damage to District crops.
blooms, but not enough to reduce production.

Apple trees lost some

Peach trees were almost fully

in bloom and suffered some damage in northern parts of the District, but
most orchards are located farther south and escaped the brunt of the cold.
Some damage also occurred to blueberry and ornamental crops.

Winter wheat

growth has been far ahead of normal and suffered no damage from the cold.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview:

Contacts continue to report generally slow growth throughout the

Southeast, with little change reported in comparison to the last report.

They report

weakness in some raw materials prices and wage increases similar to the current
inflation rate.
industries.

Manufacturers indicate no further weakening except in the auto related

Retailers report some gains in sales relative to last year, although demand

for durables remains weak.

Contacts in the construction sector continue to cite

overbuilding in most markets.

Exploration for natural gas in the Gulf is reported to be

increasing.

District lenders and borrowers are reporting a tightening of credit standards

for real estate.
Wages and Prices: A number of industrial contacts have indicated that the prices
of some raw materials have been falling recently. One said that aluminum and copper
prices have been dropping, in contrast to the tight markets seen last year. Several pulp
and paper producers have commented that the prices of input chemicals have remained
unchanged or have been weakening.

A producer of polyester fibers notes that slowing

carpet demand has recently resulted in falling prices for synthetic fiber.
Most employers reported that wages have been rising at roughly the rate of
inflation.

A few shortages of skilled workers were mentioned.

A builder in the

Jacksonville area said that skilled construction workers were in short supply.

Several

contractors and oil-rig operators in Louisiana also continue to report shortages of skilled
workers.
Most retailers said they were having no trouble with deliveries from their
suppliers. Several added that their suppliers had been giving them a better selection of
products at lower prices.

VI-2
Manufacturing and Employment: Several automobile plants in the Southeast are
laying off workers or closing completely. A number of contacts noted that the slowdown
in auto production is also hurting suppliers.

Several producers of parts and tires have

closed or are laying off workers in Alabama and Tennessee.

A fabricator of aluminum

auto parts says that the demand from domestic auto producers has softened recently.
Textile and apparel producers report no further weakening from last month,
while paper producers report that business is up somewhat compared to a year ago. One
contact revealed that his backlog of orders currently is up 30 percent over the same
period last year.

Another reports continued strong shipments of boxes and linerboard.

Two producers in Mississippi noted that their firms have recently modernized and
increased efficiency.

One felt that the improvements would help their competitiveness

overseas.
Retail Sales: Retailers in the District are generally reporting small increases in
the inflation-adjusted value of sales in February compared to a year ago. Although they
felt that sales in January and February were encouraging, they remain uncertain about
the rest of the year.

Several contacts noted that women's apparel and electronic

products were selling well.

A few retailers said, however, that sales of consumer

durables, particularly furniture, continue to be below year-ago levels, and they do not
expect much improvement soon.
Several auto dealers explained that the uptick in sales in January was unexpected
and that sales in February were again weak. Most dealers said they do not expect much
improvement for the rest of 1990.

Almost all dealers indicated that excess inventories

have been successfully worked down and now stand at levels lower than last year at this
time.
Real Estate and Construction:
construction market.
reasons for weakness.

Contacts continue to report a slow commercial

They cite previous overbuilding and slower employment growth as
Several developers have noted that while the demand for

VI-3
speculative buildings is down, the demand for owner-occupied or signature type buildings
and public buildings is still quite strong.
Residential construction was strong in January, but several builders said that this
was due to unseasonably warm weather and are expecting declines in new starts and
building permits.

Many contacts are reporting that desired reductions in inventories of

residential units are just beginning, particularly in Tennessee and Louisiana. They do not
expect construction to pick up much until 1991.
The disposition of the RTC's residential assets was frequently mentioned as
adding to uncertainty in real estate markets.

Several developers stated that it is now

more difficult to get bank financing, and they expect that new capital requirements and
limits on how much a particular savings and loan can lend to a developer will keep the
supply of loans tight. They added, however, that most of the tightness in lending has so
far been the result of overbuilt markets rather than of the savings and loan problem.
Financial Services: Several bankers noted that overall growth in consumer loans
has weakened

in the past several

months, although home

equity loans are still

increasing. A few bankers asserted that consumers appear to be paying off some of their
outstanding debt.

Other bankers added that problem real estate loans have caused a

tightening of real estate credit standards. Problems associated with real estate loans are
expected to persist in 1990 but at a level somewhat lower than in 1989. Several contacts
in Louisiana expect a pickup in commercial and residential lending, although they will be
starting from a very low level of activity.
Agriculture and Natural Resources: Agricultural contacts are reporting that the
post-freeze vegetable crops in Florida are doing well and that prices may be back to
normal by mid-March or early April.

They expect prices of citrus products to remain

high throughout the year.
Oil drilling continues to expand slowly.

Domestic producers are reporting that

they are shifting their exploration budgets more towards natural gas.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Overview. Economic activity in the Seventh District is slow but improving, according to
District respondents, with much of the softness coming from the auto industry. Retailers report
that sales volume is strong, enough to suggest that the economy is not currently in a recessionary
environment. However, production in the auto industry continues to be weak, with auto dealers
reluctant to increase orders. Steel orders have risen, however, as the auto industry gears up to
reopen plants that were temporarily closed to reduce auto stocks. Capital-goods producers report
that orders are beginning to improve. District construction and real estate activity continues to
outpace the nation. Movements in agricultural prices are mixed, but improvements in farm land
values have slowed.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales have continued to improve since the beginning of the
year, although District sales were lagging the nation in early February. A major mass
merchandiser in the District reports that January sales of durable goods, in current dollars, were
3 percent above a year ago. Traffic counts in stores were above year-ago counts for the first time
in eight months. Total company sales in the District were up substantially in the first week of
February, but lagged sales nationwide. An economist in the retail industry expects that the dip in
housing starts is now over and improvements over the next few months will begin to strengthen
sales of housing-related goods. Several retailers report that inventories are high, in part because
imported goods were ordered early in 1989 in order to be available for the Christmas season. As
a result, buying from manufacturers is constrained and price discounting continues to be
widespread. However, one retailer stated that the resolution of the Campeau Corporation's
financial situation eased some of the price competitiveness among retailers.
On the production side, shipments of appliances have been below year-ago levels, but
producers' inventories are in good shape. A producer of a wide range of household appliances
reports that shipments were down 3 percent in the first six weeks of 1990, compared to a year
ago. An industry analyst expects shipments to rise in the second quarter of 1990 and to continue
rising gradually throughout the year.

VII-2
Motor Vehicles. Auto production continues to be the major drag on the District
economy. Car sales dropped in February from the brisk pace in January, according to an
industry analyst, but stocks (measured in days supply) were at near normal levels for February.
Some producers are reluctant to reopen plants until dealer orders improve. One industry
economist reported that dealers are overly cautious in ordering, fearing a repeat of the
overstocking that occurred in the fourth quarter of 1989. Sales during the second quarter of 1990
may be constrained because dealers will not be adequately stocked for the spring season. A
shortage of minivans next quarter is also a possibility, but production can be expanded quickly if
necessary, according to one producer. Plant closings were extended in February on some midsized cars, but most plants in the District are expected to be running in March.
Steel. Steel production was weak in December, but demand since January has been
improving across a broad base. Inventories were being pulled down at the end of last year,
because steel prices were falling and producers holding steel inventories wanted to avoid paper
losses. However, shipments to durable-goods manufacturers have begun to edge up in recent
months after reaching a bottom in November, according to a steel analyst. Coated sheet steel is
reportedly in short supply. Orders are "flooding in" from auto producers and orders from
appliance producers are also rising. Also, orders for steel used for oil and gas drilling and for
pipelines were reported to be improving. Service centers report that business is good, with order
volume up so far this year.
Capital Goods. Capital-goods producers in the District generally report some
improvement in orders through February. Orders for heavy trucks have troughed and are now
moving up, according to a supplier of components to the industry. Orders of metal-cutting tools,
however, are down 10-15 percent from a year ago. Also, light industrial equipment sales for
homebuilding and construction, which declined 5 percent in 1989, were still on a downward
trend in January, according to an industry analyst. Farm machinery sales are doing exceptionally
well, with tractor sales up 15 percent last year and still improving. A producer of a wide range
of industrial products reports a good volume of orders for all product lines, with no apparent fall

VII-3
in market demand for their industrial products since the beginning of the year. Most of their
plants are operating at near-capacity levels.
Construction and Real Estate. Construction activity started the year briskly, according to
Chicago-area suppliers to the industry. Strength is across-the-board, with industrial construction
doing well and commercial construction described as very strong. A large Chicago-area building
materials supplier reports that shipments are up 7 percent since the beginning of the year and
backlogs have been rising. A producer of gypsum board reports plants are running close to
capacity, with shipments to both residential and nonresidential construction contractors
outpacing the national average.
Housing activity in the Chicago area shows signs of reviving from last year's slump.
Warm weather has been a contributing factor, but favorable mortgage rates are also cited as
important. Mortgage applications are 10 percent higher than a year ago, according to a Chicago
bank. Sales of existing homes in the first two months of 1990 are far ahead of last year's pace,
according to a local realtor. Moreover, housing permits for new construction surged in January,
suggesting continued improvement in housing activity over the next few months.
Agriculture. Recent strength in cattle and hog prices has buoyed returns to District
livestock farmers. Milk prices, after surging to record highs in late 1989, are now declining
seasonally. The decline may pull milk prices down to year-ago levels by spring if milk
production turns up as expected. Corn and soybean prices remain well below year-earlier levels
despite relatively tight grain supplies both domestically and worldwide. Recent precipitation
patterns have eased, but not overcome, the low soil-moisture conditions in the western corn belt.
Our latest survey of agricultural bankers indicates that the uptrend in District farmland
values slowed in the final quarter of 1989. On average, District farmland values rose less than 1
percent in the fourth quarter and about 6 percent during all of last year. Lower crop prices and
concerns that the 1990 Farm Bill will scale down government farm program benefits have
contributed apparently to the slower rise in land values.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Summary
The Eighth District economy is still expanding slowly.
and

business

manufacturing,

services

are

especially

durables

experiencing

moderate

production,

Agricultural real estate values are rising.
that credit standards

for commercial

growth

Health
while

to contract.

continues

Large District banks report

lending for

certain loan

types

and

customers have tightened somewhat.
Outlook
A recent

survey

of small businesses

in

the

District

indicates

that little change is expected in overall economic conditions in the next
few

months.

Most

product prices.

plan

no

substantial

changes

workforce

in

size

Although the majority of firms report inventories
more

than a

quarter

satisfactory

levels,

inventories,

twice as many as a year ago.

more pessimistic than other respondents.

the retailers

of

or
at

report excess

Manufacturers generally were
The number of manufacturers who

said it was a good time to expand their operations fell sharply from a
year ago, and substantially fewer manufacturers plan major investments in
plant and equipment in the near future.
Labor Markets
Moderate job growth continues in medical and business services
while

retail

employment
Louis'
years.

and wholesale
continues

to

decline.

rate

to

The building of a

jet

unemployment

trade

rise

shows

its

maintenance

Manufacturing

of auto workers

Layoffs
to

change.

little

highest
facility,

level

in

caused St.
nearly

which was

two

to employ

VIII-2

800 Memphis

workers,

businesses

was postponed

indicates

the

indefinitely.

shortage

of

A survey of small

qualified

workers

for

nonmanufacturing jobs has eased slightly over the past few quarters while
the shortage of manufacturing workers, particularly skilled labor, has
lessened substantially.

Louisville and St. Louis businesses, however,

report increasing difficulty in finding qualified workers.
Manufacturing
Plant closings and temporary layoffs,

mostly in

small plants,
Employment

have accelerated in recent months according to contacts.
levels

plants making machinery,

in

apparel have dropped recently.

fabricated metals

and textile and

After inventories of its products rose

steadily, a Missouri auto assembly plant laid off almost 2000 workers and
will close indefinitely

this fall,

eliminating 4000 jobs.

Louisville

workers who assemble medium- and heavy-duty trucks were laid off for one
week in early February.

Later this year, however, production of a cargo

truck will be shifted to Louisville from Brazil,
levels.

stabilizing employment

A large producer of electrical components for consumer durables

reports that orders have weakened in recent months and are expected to
remain flat

through

Sluggish

1990.

auto

demand and

slow growth

in

construction and consumer durable goods production have weakened steel
sales, resulting in a softening of steel prices.

An upturn in orders is

anticipated by year's end, however.
Construction
Aided by mild weather, homebuilding has picked up recently.
Missouri

contact

relatively

low

notes,
prices

however,
for

their

that some
new

homes.

developers

receiving

are

Contacts

One

in

Memphis

anticipate a decline in apartment building following moderate growth last

VIII-3

year, but expect a substantial increase in single-family homebuilding.
is

Western Kentucky
homes,

but

sales

a stagnant market

experiencing
of moderate-

and

lower-priced

for higher-priced

houses

are

strong.

Louisville homebuilders say building will be strong this year because
housing construction has not kept pace with job growth.
Agriculture
Contacts
rising,

with

report

faster

that

District
in

appreciation

agricultural land

the

District's

values

northern

are

states.

Contacts estimate current agricultural land values are 2 percent to 10
percent higher than six months ago.

Recent rains have brought topsoil

moisture conditions to levels ranging from excessive in southern parts of
the District to adequate in

northern regions.

Subsoil moisture levels,

however, remain deficient over most of Missouri.

The winter wheat crop

is reported to be in good condition over most of the District.
Banking
Five
willingness

of
to

the

District's

extend

credit

largest
to

new

banks

and

indicate

existing

that

their

commercial

industrial customers has not decreased during the past six months.
respondents
acquisitions,
months.

say

credit

however,

Standards

investment-grade

standards
have

for

tightened

loans

related

somewhat

for non-merger-related

to

during

and
Most

mergers

and

past

six

the

loans have not changed

for

commercial and industrial customers but have tightened

somewhat for below investment-grade customers.

The banks' willingness to

make construction and land acquisition and development loans has declined
over the last six months.

Real estate lending at the 11 largest District

banks slowed considerably during the three months ending in February from
its pace of one year ago.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District conditions are moderately good, and the general tone here is one
of cautious optimism.

Labor markets are still tight but manageable.

Wage and price

increases remain moderate in most district markets. Spending on general merchandise has
been fairly strong during the first two months of this year, but car sales and construction
activity have been generally lackluster. Resource-related industries have been doing quite
well generally. However, concern about a lack of moisture is widespread. Unless spring
brings precipitation across the Upper Midwest, another serious drought is possible.

Employment, Wages, and Prices
Labor markets remain fairly tight through most of the district, as they have
been for some time. The unemployment rate in Minnesota was 4.3 percent in January,
down from 5 percent a year earlier.

Between December 1989 and a year earlier,

unemployment declined in Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota, but it rose in
Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

The Minneapolis-St. Paul area has

continued to feel some effects of cutbacks in the computer and electronics industries, and
districtwide December 1989 employment in manufacturing was slightly below a year ago.
Wage and price increases remain moderate. Wage increases in the 3-5 percent
range are reported in most district industries.

However, sharp increases in health care

costs are prevalent. In some recent settlements, these costs have almost entirely absorbed
employee compensation gains. High gasoline costs are causing problems for some district
truckers and loggers, but gas prices appear to have peaked in mid-1989; they have
modestly declined since then.

This Bank's directors note that capital equipment price

hikes are running in the 3-6 percent range, except in the paper industry, where they are a
bit higher. One director reports modest increases in material costs.

IX-2
Consumer Spending
Retailers report that recent sales levels have been "OK" to "moderately good."
One large retailer notes that inventories are well under control and expectations for
Easter shopping are bright. Regional centers within 100 miles of the northern U.S. border
are benefiting from brisk sales to Canadian shoppers. New car sales are reported as soft in
much of the district, with used cars moving considerably better. Some dealers have been
struggling in recent months, and modest consolidation in the auto dealership industry is
possible in 1990.

Housing sales have been generally flat overall, but with considerable

variation around the district. Weakness is noted in most of North Dakota and the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan, but moderate strength is reported in western Wisconsin.

In

Minnesota's Twin Cities, unusually warm weather is cited as the reason January 1990
home sales exceeded those a year ago by about 20 percent.

Tourist activity has varied

widely around the district, depending on the amount of snow. An excellent early snowfall
has helped ski resorts in western Montana, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan is
enjoying good snow cover; resorts there are generally busy.

Most parts of western

Wisconsin, however, have had limited snowfall, and tourism has suffered.

In several

district states, dogsled racing is attracting crowds and media attention.

Construction
Construction activity in the Ninth District is generally flat, and industry
respondents are not optimistic for the rest of 1990-particularly not for commercial real
estate.

Although less affected than some parts of the United States, the Twin Cities

suffer from excess capacity, with still more coming on line this year. Minnesota contracts
for new construction declined throughout the second half of last year and by December
were about 40 percent below midyear levels.

A notable exception to weakness in

commercial construction is the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, which will benefit from
pipeline construction and several large public projects.

IX-3

Resource-Related Industries
Mining remains one of the strongest sectors of the Upper Midwest economy.
This is true in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, where iron mines are profitable and
expanding capacity. It is also true in Montana, where precious metal mines are running
at full capacity and expanding. The drilling rig count in Montana, however, is down to
about five, which is low by virtually any standard. The district's forest product industries
are generally strong, with fiberboard plants running at full capacity and paper plants
making substantial capital investments to expand capacity.

Increasingly, however,

environmental concerns are affecting capital spending plans in some industries, including
mining, logging, and paper.
The agricultural sector has one or two bright spots in the Ninth District. Dairy
prices dropped sharply in February, but until then had been running at record highs. A
director reports that Wisconsin dairy operators are investing in equipment improvement.
Cattle ranchers in Montana have benefited from excellent prices, good grass, and generally
benign weather conditions.
Still, there is great concern in much of the district about a lack of soil moisture.
The effects, so far, have been limited. Winter wheat losses due to lack of snow cover have
been less than feared, thanks to relatively mild weather.
below-normal precipitation.

However, most areas report

Since most areas are still recovering from drought,

groundwater levels are typically very low. In parts of Minnesota, shallow wells have gone
dry, and the state has recently reconvened its task force on drought. Many district lakes
are at extremely low levels, and fishing, which is a major summer tourist attraction, is
likely to suffer.
In sum, most of the Ninth District needs water badly. If precipitation comes
when farmers need it and the weather cooperates thereafter (which is what happened last
year), the agricultural sector could still do quite well.
drought problems in 1990 cannot be ignored.

However, the risk of significant

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The Tenth District economy is still growing modestly.

Retail

sales continue to improve, although new car sales remain sluggish in some
district states.

Manufacturing plants are operating below capacity, lessening

pressures on materials input lead times and prices.

While housing starts vary

across the region, mortgage loan demand remains weak at district thrift
institutions.

At district commercial banks, loan demand is generally constant

to down slightly.

Agriculture continues to lend support to the district

economy, especially through strength in incomes of livestock producers.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report higher sales over a year

earlier and steady to improving sales over the last three months.
especially strong for apparel and housewares.
improve further during the coming months.

Demand is

Most retailers expect sales to

Prices generally have been fairly

stable over the last three months and are expected to remain so or rise
slightly in the next few months.

Retailers are satisfied with their

inventories and expect to keep them at current levels.

New auto sales remain

sluggish in some district states but have improved in others.

Some dealers

report tightening credit terms both for inventories and for potential buyers.
Most dealers continue trimming inventories in expectation of flat to slightly
lower sales in the coming months.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report input prices only slightly

higher than a year ago.

Prices have increased on a few items in the last

three months, but no major price changes are expected over the next three
months.

Materials inputs are readily available and lead times are generally

unchanged.

Most firms continue to try to trim their inventories.

operating below capacity, with no reports of labor shortages.

Plants are

X-2
Energy.

After six consecutive months of increase, exploration and

development for oil and gas in the district declined in January.

The average

number of active drilling rigs in the district decreased from 337 in December
to 298 in January.

This mostly-seasonal decline caused the district rig count

to fall about 3 percent below its year ago level.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Residential construction activity varies

widely across the district, but recent increases are partly attributable to
unseasonably mild weather.

Most home builders expect housing starts to be

flat or up slightly this year, with the behavior of mortgage rates the big
question mark for the industry.

Construction materials are readily available

with few reports of price increases.

Most district savings and loan

respondents report that deposits remained unchanged or declined over the last
month.

In most cases, however, net deposit flows were more favorable than a

year ago.

Most respondents expect no change or a slight fall in deposits in

the near term.

Mortgage demand is weak at most institutions and is not

expected to improve significantly.

Mortgage rates have remained steady to

slightly higher, and expectations for future mortgage rates are mixed.
Banking.

District commercial banks report loan demand unchanged or down

somewhat over the last month.

Commercial and industrial loans, construction

loans, and commercial real estate loans were weak.

Demand for other types of

loans was generally unchanged, except for a higher demand for mortgage loans
at several banks.

Most banks report loan-deposit ratios unchanged from last

month, but higher than a year ago.

Most banks also report unchanged prime and

consumer lending rates, and do not expect to change these rates in the near
term.

Deposit behavior was mixed at responding banks, with about equal

numbers reporting higher, lower, and unchanged levels of total deposits.

Most

X-3
banks report increases in demand deposits, and decreases or no change in NOW
accounts.

MMDAs, small time deposits, and large CDs generally increased or

remained unchanged, although several banks report declines in large CDs.
Agriculture.
winter wheat crop.

Recent rains have improved the condition of the district's
Soil moisture reserves have been partially replenished,

but more moisture will be needed soon to ensure development of the crop.
Despite some early winter-kill damage in Oklahoma and wind damage in Wyoming,
near-normal wheat yields are expected in most parts of the district.
Spring credit reviews reveal greater strength in farm incomes for
livestock producers than for cash grain farmers.

Dry growing conditions

lowered dryland crop yields and increased irrigation costs for grain
producers.

Reduced yields, smaller government payments, and lower crop prices

combined to lower cash-grain income.

Low feed costs and high livestock

prices, however, bolstered incomes for livestock producers.

Ranchers have

postponed herd rebuilding in favor of selling feeder cattle to feedlot
operators at high prices.

While dry weather has limited pasture development

in parts of the district, cheap grain and mostly plentiful forage supplies
have reduced feed costs for most cattle producers.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy is growing slowly but persistently.
orders are up slightly.

Manufacturing

Retail sales growth is moderate to strong.

sales have begun a modest rebound.

Auto

The service sector continues to expand.

Despite slipping construction contract values, employment is growing in that
industry.

Oil and gas drilling activity posted strong year-over-year gains

in February.

Drought and freezing weather have caused problems in

agriculture, but product prices are up markedly.
Manufacturing sales have shown slight growth on net, but a large number
of respondents report little change in either direction.

Oilfield equipment

manufacturers say that stable, high oil prices have led to year-over-year
growth in sales, but some respondents note that seasonal factors have softened
domestic orders for now.

Foreign demand is cited as very strong.

Among

primary metals producers, orders to iron and steel firms are steady while
orders for aluminum have softened compared to last year's extremes, but remain
high.

In fabricated metals, demand has changed little overall, but sales in

the District have picked up very slightly while those to northeastern firms
have slackened.

Lumber and wood products sales are also generally steady.

Reports by stone clay and glass producers are very mixed, with strong growth
for some Houston-area firms and more sluggish sales elsewhere.

Demand for

electronics-related products has lately showed little change overall, but
manufacturers are almost uniformly optimistic about growth during the second
half of 1990.

Food products companies note overall expansion in sales, with

strong recent upticks in fast-food-related sales that are suspected to be

XI-2

weather-related.

Apparel orders are generally increasing; some firms said

that unexpectedly high rates of growth had led to undesirably low inventories.
In San Antonio, however, a large apparel firm closed its plant and moved it to
the Caribbean, leaving 1100 workers unemployed.

Demand for chemical products

has slipped somewhat, compared to a year earlier, but volume is still very
high.

Selling prices have softened.

By contrast, sales of refined petroleum

products are above a year earlier although they have slipped, after peaking
during December's extreme cold wave.
Among retailers, sales growth ranges from moderate to strong, and
several chain stores note that rates of expansion for the District are higher
than for the nation.

Some respondents cited heavy discounting, however.

Sales expansion rates are particularly high in cities near the Mexican border,
owing to the strength of the peso.

Sales growth in the Dallas/Ft. Worth area

was also strong, with more moderate expansion in Houston.
District auto dealers note that sales are higher than a year earlier,
but they are holding inventories to low levels.
difficulty getting credit for their customers.

Dealers say they are having
A Houston respondent noted

that this is sometimes a particularly acute problem there, because of personal
credit history problems left over from the oil-related economic weakness of
1982-86.
The District services sector continues to show expansion, but with a
good deal of variance among individual sectors.
is showing particular strength.

The business services sector

Some medical-service related firms note that

the first quarter has been soft so far.

XI-3

The recovery in District construction has begun to slow.

Nonresidential

contract values have declined steeply, chiefly because of a drop in new
petrochemical plant construction.
recently slipped.

Residential contract values have also

Respondents say they nevertheless expect growth this year

in both single-family and multifamily activity, as a result of falling
apartment vacancy rates and of pent-up demand for single-family homes.
Oil and gas drilling activity continues to rise.

Although oil prices

have slipped somewhat from the high levels of January, they remain well above
a year ago.

Drilling has picked up sharply.

was 33 percent higher than a year earlier.

In late February, the rig count
Applications of the new horizontal

drilling technology have resulted in marked growth in extraction activity in
some areas of the District.

Despite the recent strong expansions in the rig

count, a number of respondents expect overall District drilling activity to
increase at a modest pace for the rest of 1990.
Drought and freeze damage are causing problems in District agriculture,
but product prices have reached their highest levels since 1984.

Subnormal

soil moisture levels are impairing crop and livestock operations throughout
Texas and New Mexico.

Winter wheat is showing signs of drought damage.

south Texas, prolonged dryness has left virtually no subsoil moisture.

In
As a

result of December's freeze, it may be two years before marketable citrus can
again be produced in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas.

In January, the Texas

All Crops Index of farm prices rose to its highest level since 1984, and was 6
percent above a year earlier, with grapefruit prices leading the increase.

XII - 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Twelfth District economic conditions remain fundamentally unchanged, with healthy
growth in most parts of the West. Nevertheless, business leaders continue to expect relatively
slow national growth during the coming year. Wage and price pressures are significant in parts
of the District, but prices are stable or falling in others. Sales of soft goods remain satisfactory,
but car sales pick up only when attractive incentives are offered. Manufacturing activity
continues at satisfactory levels. Prices and production are strong for most agricultural products.
Forest products firms, however, continue to scale back output as logging restrictions take effect.
Some builders and developers report that they are finding it more difficult to obtain financing
as many lenders tighten their credit criteria.
Business Sentiment
Expectations of Twelfth District business leaders have changed little during the past
month, as 80 percent still expect that real GNP will grow more slowly than its historical average
during the next year. Respondents still anticipate slow consumer spending, although the
proportion expecting improvement rose from 2 to 13 percent. The proportion of respondents
expecting a rising inflation rate increased from 11 to 39 percent.
Wages and Prices
Wage and price pressures vary significantly by sector and region. The cost of providing
health benefits rose by 30 percent for San Francisco Bay Area employers during the past year,
and respondents report continued upward wage pressure for health care workers. Price
increases are significant in the agricultural sector as well. Prices received have risen

XII - 2

significantly for citrus and vegetables, and costs have risen 8 to 12 percent during the past year
for farm equipment and fertilizer.
On the other hand, retailers report flat prices due in part to heavy promotions.
Prices for forest products have been flat to down during the past year, with newsprint prices
down 10 to 15 percent from their year-earlier level. Aluminum and copper prices also are
down. A surplus of premium wine "in the pipeline" is expected to lead to lower prices within
the next two years.
Consumer Spending
Retailers report that consumer spending on general merchandise and apparel has been
"generally good," which is somewhat better than expected. Inventories of soft goods reportedly
have been well managed.
Car dealers report that customer traffic is down in February, particularly for used cars.
Traffic and sales are off for both domestic and import dealers, but weakness is more
pronounced on the domestic side. Sales are reported to be much stronger when incentives are
available, and fall sharply when incentives are lifted.
Manufacturing
Reports suggest that conditions continue satisfactory in the manufacturing industries.
Commercial aircraft orders show no signs of slowing, so production should remain at its current
high level for the next several years. However, capacity constraints make further increases in
production unlikely. Farm machinery dealers report strong sales for 1990 deliveries as a result
of strong commodity and livestock sales.

XII - 3

Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural conditions are good in most parts of the District, with high prices and
strong production. However, recent winter storms did not provide enough moisture to alleviate
concerns about water shortages in many parts of the West.
The price of gold has been fluctuating in a narrow range and remains at a level that
makes production quite profitable. Consequently, production at District gold mines, particularly
in Nevada, continues at high levels.
Restrictions on timber-cutting from US Forest Service lands continues to make logs
scarce and expensive. Some firms have closed mills and laid off workers because they are
unable to produce profitably. Allowable cuttings are expected to be cut further in coming
years.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction and real estate activity continue healthy in most of the West,
but conditions in nonresidential markets are more mixed. Northwestern cities are seeing strong
building activity and relatively low vacancy rates in most markets. Some observers consider
segments of the Los Angeles and San Francisco area markets to be somewhat overbuilt,
although respondents indicate that problems are unlikely to be serious unless rates of
absorption fall below their current levels. The office vacancy rate in Phoenix continues to rise,
since the volume of new space coming on line is outpacing absorption. A nationwide retailer
reports that bids for construction of new shopping facilities come in at very competitive prices
in Phoenix, but that in California and Washington it is hard to get bidders, and current contract
prices are about 10 to 12 percent higher than their year-earlier level.

XII - 4

Some builders and developers report that they are finding it more difficult to obtain
financing since the thrift bailout began. The new limits on loans to one borrower are having a
particularly significant effect on some builders. As a result, some projects that otherwise would
have been built are being curtailed. One respondent notes that well-financed developers seem
to be proceeding on the theory that their projects will be delivered when others are unable to
find financing.
Financial Sector
Since implementation of the thrift bailout began, many lenders (both thrifts and banks)
have tightened their lending standards and become less aggressive about courting new loans.
However, several observers, from both inside and outside the financial industries, have not seen
any changes in lending practices since the bailout began.

