SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

January 1990

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . .
First District - Boston .

I-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Second District - New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IIIII-

Third District - Philadelphia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fourth District - Cleveland..

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IV-1

. ..

.

V-1

. . .

.

Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . .

. . . . . . . ..

Sixth District - Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Seventh District - Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Eighth District - St. Louis..

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Ninth District - Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tenth District - Kansas City . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . .

.

Eleventh District - Dallas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Twelfth District - San Francisco . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

VIVII-1

VIIIIX-1
X-l
XI-1
XII-1

i
SUMMARY*

Economic activity is expanding slowly in most of the nation, with
conditions somewhat stronger in the West than the East.

Retail sales in

the holiday season ranged from "disappointing" in Boston to modest in
Philadelphia and Atlanta and relatively strong in Chicago, Minneapolis,
and San Francisco; however, widespread discounting generally reduced
store profits.

Manufacturing activity is generally sluggish with

production declines in some industries (autos, in particular) offsetting
gains in others (such as commercial aircraft and oilfield equipment).
Several Districts reported that the steel and computer industries, among
others, may be "bottoming out."
Unseasonably cold weather dampened construction activity in some
areas, but real estate markets generally held steady.

Cold or dry

weather also adversely affected citrus, vegetable, and winter wheat
crops.
well.

Other agricultural and resource-related sectors did moderately
The outlook is for slow growth in all regions in 1990; some

respondents expect improvement late in the year.
Retail
Retail results for the Christmas season were mixed.

Most

Districts in the eastern third of the nation -- Philadelphia, Cleveland,
Richmond, and Atlanta -- found sales up about 5 percent.

New York

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and based on information
obtained before January 13, 1990. This document summarizes comments
received from business and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and
is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

respondents reported stronger sales and Boston somewhat weaker sales.
Retailers in Districts farther west -- Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis,
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco -- had a better holiday season.
Consumer durables, such as furniture and housewares, moved less briskly
than apparel and other nondurables.

Inventories of certain items were

high in Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago, as Christmas sales ran below
expectations and promotions failed to bring stocks into line.

Auto sales

were reported to be weak nationwide, although Chicago cited national data
indicating that sales picked up at the turn of the year.
Most Districts reported widespread discounting.

In some

Districts, especially steep discounting by department stores adversely
affected sales at discount and specialty stores.
Retailers expect flat sales or modest increases through the first
six months of 1990.

Results in the first weeks of January were said to

be encouraging.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity was reported to be slow in most of the
Districts.

In Boston, Cleveland, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco,

however, some industries were said to be showing signs of "bottoming out"
and were posting slight gains in orders from year-ago levels.

Food,

apparel, lumber, commercial aircraft, and farm, oilfield, and some
electric equipment all made gains.

Defense, construction, and automotive

products continued to face weak demand; however, respondents from Chicago
and Cleveland suggested that current cutbacks in auto production may
prove adequate to eliminate the industry's inventory overhang.

Orders

for first-quarter delivery also suggest a gradual improvement for steel.

iii

Although a Minneapolis computer firm recently made a large layoff, Dallas
and San Francisco reported signs of a pickup in that industry as well.
Manufacturers in the Chicago, Dallas, and Boston Districts found that
significant foreign sales are helping to offset weak domestic demand.
Manufacturing employment was reportedly flat to down compared with
earlier in 1989, with firms in the New York, Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and San Francisco Districts facing major layoffs in autos,
aerospace, or computers.
steady or falling.

Except for fuel, input prices were said to be

Scattered evidence suggests that selling prices were

also steady or falling, with discounting occurring in some industries.
Despite weakness in autos and parts of aerospace, New York and San
Francisco reported major investment projects by firms in those
industries.

Boston, Cleveland, and Atlanta also indicated that several

respondents plan capital spending above 1989 levels.
Most manufacturers expected slow growth in 1990, with a weak first
half followed by gradual improvement.

Despite widespread public concern

about possible defense cutbacks, defense contractors in the Boston and
St. Louis Districts expected declines in defense spending to be gradual,
with limited local impact.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
December's severe cold weather adversely affected some
agricultural sectors and led to large increases in fruit and vegetable
prices.

Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City also noted

possible or confirmed damage to winter wheat crops due to cold, dry
weather.
Reports from other agricultural and resource-based sectors were

more positive.

Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco all

mentioned high cattle prices and strength in the beef or dairy
industries.

Atlanta and St. Louis referred to sharp energy price

increases, believed to be temporary and weather-related, while Atlanta,
Kansas City, and San Francisco described greater oil and gas exploration
or drilling activity.

Mining and lumber industries were reported to be

doing well in the Minneapolis and San Francisco Districts.
Banking
Regional financial conditions varied by District and by type of
loan.

Bankers in Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, the Pacific Northwest

and central California reported increased demand for business or consumer
loans.

By contrast, New York District banks saw a decline in demand for

most types of credit.

While Philadelphia lenders experienced an increase

from year-earlier levels in total loans outstanding, they noted a recent
decline in loan demand.

Mortgage lending is down, according to New York,

Atlanta and St. Louis institutions, while San Francisco mentioned that
some Arizona and Alaska banks face real-estate related problems.

Several

Districts noted that banks have initiated credit reviews and were
tightening criteria for making loans - especially for real estate
purposes.
Real Estate
Most Districts discussing real estate reported steady or modestly
improved conditions.

Atlanta, Kansas City, and Philadelphia noted some

signs of weakness, however.

Expected declines in mortgage interest rates

provided some reason for optimism in the real estate outlook.
Homebuilding activity was mixed.

Richmond, Chicago, Minneapolis,

and San Francisco showed strength in at least some parts of their
Districts, but New York, Atlanta, and Kansas City experienced slow or
declining activity.
Reductions in home prices in Boston and the New York metropolitan
area have boosted sales activity but have not eliminated the oversupply
of homes available for resale in either region.

Real estate prices were

also said to be declining in St. Louis; by contrast, they were reported
steady in Kansas City and up sharply in the state of Washington.

Sales

of expensive homes were said to be holding up well in parts of Miami,
while lower-priced homes were the top performers in California and Boston.
Nonresidential property markets were generally slow.

Office

vacancies rose in Manhattan and Florida, and Atlanta reported slower
pre-leasing of new projects in its downtown.
increases in office building occupancy.

Dallas, in contrast, found

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Reports on First District economic conditions were mixed in early
January.

Retail results were generally disappointing, but most

manufacturers and realtors reported modest gains in sales.

All types of

contacts face intense price competition, with discounting becoming
increasingly widespread.

First District manufacturers indicate that

international demand is stronger than domestic and that growing shares of
their sales are made overseas.

Most contacts expect the first half of 1990

to continue soft, with a pickup possible later in the year.
Retail
First District retailers report weak sales, slow traffic, and a
heavily promotional atmosphere through the Christmas season.
items and building supplies sold especially poorly.

Discretionary

Some firms that had

expected stronger sales are now carrying excess inventories.
Most respondents report wholesale prices rising at the same rate as
earlier in 1989 -- flat to up 7 percent, depending on the line of
business.

Prices at retail rose less than at wholesale, as large retail

establishments reduced gross margins in response to stiff competitive
pressures.

Smaller establishments, which seem less subject to price

competition, either maintained or increased their gross margins.
Retailers surveyed said that the cost of doing business continues to
increase.

Commercial rents are reportedly still rising, even though

vacancies are up.

Total labor compensation is growing at an annual rate of

about 10 percent, with benefit costs rising much faster than wages.
with weak sales and rising costs, several firms report work force

Faced

I-2

reductions; all report increased labor availability.
A majority of retailers foresee weak sales through the first half of
1990, with possible improvement late in year.

Most have no plans for

expansion, and are using available funds to pay down debt.
Manufacturing
Conversations with First District manufacturers generally had a
positive tone.

A majority report modest growth in sales and orders - with

gains ranging from slight to 10 percent above year-ago levels.
International markets remain stronger than domestic, with contacts
benefitting from a mini-boom in European capital spending and a few
reporting gains in the Japanese market.

Several respondents now obtain

close to half of their sales revenue from overseas (through subsidiaries as
well as exports).

While some firms have seen a pickup in demand for

automotive, commercial aerospace, and computer- and construction-related
products, others see no such trend.

Paper and defense products are said to

be weakening.
All manufacturers are making concerted efforts to remain "lean."
Most report that inventories are at satisfactory levels, although one-third
describe them as undesirably high.

Employment levels remain largely

unchanged.
Most First District manufacturers report that materials prices are
flat or falling.
printing costs.

They cite plastic resin, steel, paper, DRAMs, and
Faced with intense worldwide competition, most

manufacturers have passed some of these cost savings on to their
customers.

While two contacts have raised prices 5 percent, almost half

mentioned discounting within their industry.

Among firms discussing

margins and profits, reports were mixed; however, two contacts expect a big
improvement in profits this year.

The majority of First District manufacturers contacted this month
expect to increase capital spending from 1989 levels.
range from 8 to 40 percent.

Budgeted increases

Capital spending plans target replacement,

consolidation, productivity improvements and, in a few cases, modest
capacity expansion; however, little construction is planned.
A majority of First District contacts characterize their outlook as
"guarded," although two expect 1990 to be an exceptionally strong year.
Most anticipate U.S. GNP growth of less than 2 percent, with a weak first
half followed by a modest pickup later in the year - "a soft landing and a
soft take-off," as one respondent described it.

Several expressed concern

about the financial viability of their customers in the retail industry.
Almost all contacts view the 1990s with optimism.

Many firms feel well

positioned in foreign markets where they expect rapid growth.

Although

concern has been expressed about defense cutbacks, the defense contractors
contacted anticipate very gradual declines in real defense spending in the
first half of the decade.
Real Estate
First District realtors expressed renewed optimism as the volume of
home sales increased through the start of the new year.

This improvement

was attributed to lower asking prices and recent declines in mortgage
interest rates.
year ago.

Properties continue to remain on the market longer than a

The nascent pickup in residential real estate transactions has

been driven largely by lower-priced (below $150,000) single-family homes.
Commercial property sales remain quite sluggish.

All the realtors

contacted expect sales to increase in future months, provided present
market conditions prevail.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The Second District economy has continued to show little change from the
mixed patterns described in other recent reports.

Sales results at department

stores were uneven in what retailers described as an unusually competitive
environment, and homebuilding activity was seasonally slow.

Unemployment rates in

New York and New Jersey moved in opposite directions and office vacancy rates also
varied.

Most officers of small to medium-sized banks reported an over-the-year

decline in demand for many types of bank credit.
Consumer Spending
Sales results at District department stores were mixed in recent weeks with
some meeting or surpassing planned levels and others falling below.

All respondents

commented on the unusually competitive environment this holiday season which
manifested itself in a high level of price-cutting throughout the period and
resulted in below-targeted profit margins.

Over-the-year sales gains during

November ranged between 1.5 percent and 9.7 percent while the December range was
from 3 to 12.2 percent.

A survey conducted by the Retail Council of New York State

covering some 100 stores across the state found sales during the five-week
pre-Christmas period to be 7 to 10 percent above a year earlier.
In general, women's apparel remained the strongest selling item.

However,

with the arrival of unusually cold temperatures in November, retailers also
experienced strong demand for outerwear, leather goods, sweaters and down
comforters.

Some contacts mentioned a pickup in sales of furniture and home

furnishings following earlier softness.

Due in large part to the heavy promotional

activity in recent weeks, inventories are generally at desired levels with the major
exception of the reportedly understocked Campeau-owned chains which some
manufacturers are reluctant to supply.

II-2

Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity is seasonally slow throughout the District but the
underlying demand for new homes remains mixed.

A glut of homes for resale continues

to plague much of the New York metropolitan area whereas some upstate New York
communities report that buyer interest in their areas is still strong.

Home prices

have declined somewhat in the New York metropolitan area, due largely to reductions
by hardpressed sellers.

Regarding the outlook, homebuilders in the downstate area

are not optimistic, anticipating that, despite lower mortgage rates, "1990 will be
another tough year".
While office leasing activity in Manhattan was reported brisk in recent
weeks, substantial amounts of additional space were placed on the market by
consolidating and restructuring firms.

As a result, vacancy rates for primary space

in both midtown and downtown Manhattan rose and some observers anticipate further
increases as buildings now under construction are completed.

Office vacancy rates

remain high in some of the District's suburban areas but, for the most part, have
stabilized or declined recently due to a slowdown in new construction.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates moved in opposite directions during December.
New Jersey's rate fell to 3.6 percent from 5.1 percent in November while New York's
rate rose to 5.6 percent from 5.1 percent.

Rates in both states varied erratically

and over an unusually wide range in 1989.

More recently, as part of the nationwide

cutback in auto production, several thousand workers have been on temporary layoff
at District auto plants, and close to 1000 workers have been permanently laid off
due to the closing of the Lockheed Electronics plant in Plainfield, New Jersey.
The percentage of Buffalo purchasing managers reporting improved new orders
rose sharply in December but continued to be surpassed by firms reporting a
decline.

The number of firms reporting greater production increased slightly but

was also surpassed by those with declining output.

II-3
Among recent developments in the District, Ford Motor Co. announced a $200
million modernization plan for its Buffalo stamping plant and the Newark Housing
Authority unveiled plans for a $400 million riverfront project to be built in the
downtown area with construction to begin this year.

On a less positive note, tax

revenues throughout the District are falling short of expectations and both New York
City and New York State face sizable budget deficits in their current fiscal years.
Financial Developments
Most officers of small- to medium-sized banks in the Second District
reported an over-the-year decline in demand for many types of bank credit,
frequently citing sluggish local economies as the cause.
loan demand declined at all but one reporting bank.

Commercial and industrial

Bankers indicated that caution

in the business community and anticipation of interest rate declines may be
forestalling demand.

The single officer who noted an increase in strength said his

community is home to large, non-cyclical firms which are currently expanding.
respondents reported that consumer loan demand has also fallen off.

Most

A few officers

ascribed the decline to consumer uncertainty about interest rates and the future of
the economy.

However, most believed that as a result of incentives created by tax

reform, consumer borrowing has been largely redirected into home equity financing.
While all other loan demand has declined, nearly half of the officers reported
increased demand for home equity loans.
lending has also declined.

Most respondents said that mortgage

Several bankers indicated that in recent years real

estate prices have been somewhat overvalued and that potential buyers are waiting
for the market to complete its natural correction.

Two officers noted that mortgage

demand in their communities is quite strong, crediting the growth to businesses
relocating into their vicinities because other areas were too expensive.

Despite

the fact that overall loan demand has been soft recently, bankers foresee slow to
moderate loan growth in the coming year.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District were mixed as the new year began.
Manufacturing

continued

on

the

slackening

trend

that

began

in

mid-1989.

Retailers achieved modest gains in unit sales for the Christmas season although
price discounting was widespread.

Overall loan volume at major banks was growing

fairly steadily, but commercial and personal loan demand appeared to be easing
somewhat and banks were implementing more conservative credit standards.
The outlook in most sectors of the region's economy is for very modest
expansion.

Among manufacturers, positive views for the first half of the year

barely exceed negative expectations.
the winter

running little better

Retailers generally see unit sales through
Bankers

than even with the year-ago pace.

expect loan growth to continue in most credit categories, but at a slower rate
as economic growth slows and more restrictive credit standards are applied.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District in early January continues
to

In nearly

fall.

of the

all

industries

surveyed, firms

reporting

slower

business edged out those posting gains.
Some
region's

measures

of

business

goods-producing

sector

conditions
remained

indicated

soft

overall.

improvement,
For

but

example,

the
area

manufacturers indicated that new orders were rising slightly as the new year
began, but the order rate was lagging behind shipments, leading to a drop in
order backlogs.
1989.

Local firms have been reporting shrinking order books since mid-

Lagging demand for manufactured goods is reflected by shorter delivery

times as well, according to managers at area plants.

The

slackness

manufacturing sector also appears to be bringing some stability to
prices;

two-thirds

of the

firms

surveyed said input prices were

in

the

industrial
steady from

III-2

December into January, and three-fourths said they were holding prices constant
for the goods they make.

As area firms adjust production to the slow growth in

orders, they are generally allowing inventories to decline; and, while most are
holding employment steady, some are trimming payrolls.
Looking ahead, area manufacturers have mixed views, although slightly more
firms expect improvement than anticipate further slowing in the first half of
the year.
orders.

On balance, managers at area plants expect marginal gains in new

They expect to step up shipments at least as much, however, which will

prevent order backlogs from growing. Plant managers also anticipate some further
trimming of employment and hours.
RETAIL
Third District retailers

generally met

sales goals

for

the

Christmas

shopping period, which was characterized by early and widespread discounting.
Year-to-year sales gains for the season as a whole ranged up to 5 percent, in
real terms, for area stores.

Most department stores in the region indicated they

achieved the modest sales improvement they had expected, but among discount and
specialty stores results were mixed.

In particular, sales at clothing stores

in the last half of December did not appear to be consistent with the stronger
performance in earlier fall months, after taking seasonal factors into account.
Merchants contacted in early January said sales were running about even
with or slightly above the year-ago pace.

For the rest of the winter, most

retailers expect sales to just match last year's, in real terms.

None of the

store executives surveyed expressed strong optimism for the coming spring season.
Several mentioned concern in the industry that major national retailers who are
facing cash-flow difficulties might step up price discounting.

After heavy

discounting this Christmas, retailers are looking to reestablish stable pricing
policies before the spring selling season begins.

III-3

FINANCE
Total loan volume at major Third District banks in late December was
approximately 15 percent above the same period in the prior year, although growth
appeared to ease during the month.

Bankers contacted in early January said a

slowdown in the rate of growth was continuing.

Most expect overall loan demand

to move up only modestly as the national economy enters at least one or two
quarters of slower growth.
As the new year began, commercial and industrial lending was being scaled
back at several

large banks

prompted

reviews

retailers,

credit

of

in the

companies

in particular, were being

commitments were being made.

district as
in

those

conditions

in some sectors

industries.

reviewed and

Builders

some reductions

and

in loan

Many bankers in the district expect the cutback

in construction financing to result in lower total real-estate-based lending.
However, some foresee a pickup in residential real estate financing, in response
to recent and anticipated reductions in mortgage rates, which would mitigate the
extent of the decline.
Consumer lending has been growing at a steady pace since last summer, but
bankers generally expect growth to diminish, at least through the first half of
the year.

They cite the decline in auto

sales as a negative

influence on

consumer borrowings, and several note that, while credit-card sales are growing
steadily, paydowns are on a rising trend, leaving net outstandings nearly flat.

IV - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

District respondents believe that the regional and national
economies are still on a growth path, even if real GNP may have shown little
or no change, or perhaps declined, last quarter.
first-half sales.
industrial

Retailers expect sluggish

Some respondents believe that the worst of the cutbacks in

production are about over, although softening continues in some
Further declines in interest rates are generally

high-tech industries.
expected by spring.
The Economy.

The predominant view of the Fourth District panel is that

the real GNP growth rate last quarter ranged between zero and a 1 percent
annual rate.

They do not, however, believe that last quarter marks the

beginning of a recession, and most still expect that slow growth in output
this half will be followed by a revival in growth to about a 2.5 percent rate
in the second half.

One panelist still expects a mild recession this half.

Consumer Spending.

Last quarter's apparent weakness in spending was led

by a cutback in consumer spending, especially for new cars.

Major retailers

report that sales during the holiday season rose about 5% to 6% from a year
earlier, but that the season was as promotional as 1987.

They expect

relatively sluggish sales in the first half of 1990, with strengthening
beginning in the summer.

Inventories are close to plans, but still a little

IV - 2

high in view of uncertain sales prospects.

A national retailer is planning to

reduce inventories significantly through aggressive sales promotions and
cutbacks in orders from suppliers over the next few months.
The tone of comments from auto dealers is guardedly optimistic.

Sales of

1990 models are reported to be about "normal" to slightly below normal for
this time of the model year, although foreign makes have been selling better
than domestic cars.

Some domestic dealers claim that price increases of Big

Three cars average about 4% for 1990 models, partly because of added safety
features mandated by law, but some foreign car dealers report no price
increases for their cars.

Incentives are again available on a full range of

domestic cars, but some foreign car producers apparently are offering dealer
incentives that they expect are sufficient to close sales.

Domestic car

dealers report they have been cautious in orders for 1990 models in an effort
to hold down floor-plan costs.
Manufacturing.

Some manufacturers believe that the worst is over for

cutbacks in output, although the extent of an anticipated recovery is
uncertain.

Orders for heavy-duty trucks in the last three months have revived

from last summer's low, but the recovery is still well below the peak levels
of 1988.
Auto production may be slashed to an annual rate of 4.5 million to
5.0 million units in January, probably the low for the year, because of excess
stocks and an uncertain sales outlook.

Production is expected to climb to

about a 6 million annual rate in February and March, if sales respond to
broadened incentives.

IV - 3

Steel production, which had been at virtual capacity until last summer,
has been cut to about 80% of capacity.

A major producer reports that orders

are beginning to pick up across-the-board for first-quarter delivery, and
another expects that production will hold at about the level of last quarter
through 1990.

Lower steel consumption, led by weakness in auto output, rising

imports, and inventory liquidation that will carry at least through the next
few quarters, are expected to cause shipments to fall several percent from
last year.

Lower volume and further declines in steel prices will reduce

profitability from last year.

Capital spending, however, is expected to

increase again because of the need for more efficient equipment.

A smaller

steel producer has cut back operations to about 70% of capacity because of
reduced auto schedules and inventory correction.
Orders for small electric motors and equipment last month and for the
fourth quarter were stronger than expected by some producers, and orders in
January continue better-than-expected from a variety of markets.
centered in automotive and nonferrous industries.

Weakness is

A larger increase in

capital spending this year than last is being planned because of the need for
additional capacity to accommodate the next peak.
Ball bearing orders have eased from the peak in 1989:IIIQ when the
industry was confronted with long lead times, capacity shortages, and
double orders.

High inventories are now being liquidated, but the recent

order level is still higher than a year earlier.

Plans call for a larger

increase in capital spending in 1990 than in 1989 for cost and quality
improvement.

IV - 4

Some high-tech producers expect further cutbacks in orders and output
this year from last.

Communication equipment is expected to soften further

this quarter before reviving next quarter.

Softness in computer machinery,

automotive and defense industries has slowed growth of semiconductor demand,
although orders in December spurted.
Financial Developments.

The recent reduction in the prime rate to 10% is

expected to be followed by another one-half point reduction, possibly by
spring, according to some bank economists.

The latest reduction in interest

rates, however, is not expected to stimulate much demand for loans, which have
been sluggish for the past several months.

Fixed-rate mortgages on 30-year

loans are common at rates of about 9.5%, and realtors and lenders are
cautiously optimistic over the near-term outlook for housing.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity was mixed in December and early January after
a sluggish November.
good.

Retail sales before and after Christmas were generally

The slowdown in manufacturing, however, became more pronounced.

Activity at District ports was again mixed.

Housing activity rose in December

despite the inclement weather, and business was strong at ski resorts.

In

agriculture, winter wheat suffered some weather-related stress.
Consumer Spending
Our telephone survey of retail associations indicated that merchandise
sales during the Christmas season were above those of a year ago.

Two of the

District states and Washington, D.C., reported sales were up by five percent
or more, while the remaining three states reported increases of less than five
percent.

The associations noted that markdowns on merchandise between

Thanksgiving and Christmas were greater than last year.

In the two weeks

after Christmas, merchandise sales were generally strong, but sales of big
ticket items apparently slowed in the Washington area.
Manufacturing
District manufacturers responding to our regular mail survey in early
January reported that activity declined in recent weeks.

Reports of declines

in shipments, new orders, unfilled orders, employment, and the length of the
workweek outnumbered reports of increases.
most:

Shipments apparently declined the

50 percent of the January respondents reported declines while only 9

percent reported increases.

These percentages indicated broader weakness than

was apparent in our November survey, when 30 percent reported declines in

shipments and 20 percent reported increases.
slightly.

New orders for exports were down

Prices for raw materials rose somewhat faster than the moderate

pace reported in November.

Inventories of materials and finished goods were

largely unchanged.
District manufacturers were more optimistic in January than in November
about prospects for growth in their businesses, and they remained optimistic
about growth in the nation during the next six months.

Respondents who expect

increases in shipments, new orders, employment, and the length of the workweek
outnumbered those who expect decreases.

Most producers continued to project

slow-to-moderate economic growth over the next 18 months.
Ports
Mixed reports were received from the three major District ports--Hampton
Roads (Norfolk), Charleston, and Baltimore.

Imports and exports were higher

in December at Hampton Roads, but lower at Charleston and Baltimore.
Respondents from Charleston and Baltimore attributed the recent decline in
shipments to the temporary closing of the Panama canal.

In the next six

months, export volume is expected to be higher at Charleston, lower at
Baltimore, and about the same at Hampton Roads.
Tourism
A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District
indicated tourist activity was, on balance, little changed from a year ago.
The ski business was especially strong in West Virginia where some resorts
reported that activity was up by as much as 25 percent over last year.

Most

respondents expect increases in tourist activity in their areas in the coming
months, and none expect declines.
Residential Real Estate
According to our telephone survey, District housing activity improved in

V-3
December and early January.

Despite unusually severe December weather, nearly

half of the builders who were surveyed said that they had started as many or
more houses in that month as in November.

Of those who started fewer,

two-thirds attributed the decline to normal seasonal factors and not to bad
weather or a change in underlying economic conditions.

Similarly, almost 50

percent of the surveyed realtors sold as many or more homes in December as in
November, and most of those whose sales were off claimed the decline was
seasonal.

Also, most mortgage lenders who were surveyed reported only the

usual seasonal decline in activity, while one-third indicated that the demand
for mortgage loans remained constant or increased in December.
Agriculture
Inclement weather apparently impacted some crops while leaving others
unharmed.

Despite severe cold and heavy snows, the harvest of soybeans

progressed at a normal pace in December and was almost complete by the first
week of January.
areas.

Weather-related damage to winter wheat was reported in some

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

Contacts in the Southeast indicate that economic activity continues

to expand sluggishly.

Reports of weakness for industries producing goods related to

residential and commercial construction and autos were widespread.
machinery and construction
plans.

Makers of industrial

equipment have reported scaled-down capital spending

At the same time, chemical, paper, apparel, aad natural gas producers report

some increase in capital spending, much of it going :o upgrade equipment.

Retailers

noted modest gains in the dollar value of holiday sales over last year, although they
indicated that price-discounting and heavy advertising had reduced profit margins.
Commercial lending continues to slow; consumers are said to be more cautious in taking
on new debt. Skilled workers are still in short supply in a few locations. Wage increases
are reported as being in line with expectations while input prices were said to be soft
with the exception of fuels.
Prices, Wages and Employment:

Most employers continue to report that wage

increases are about the same as earlier in 1989.

Few labor shortages were noted,

although there is scattered tightness in the supply of skilled workers.

Contacts in

transportation and utilities said that they are still having some trouble attracting
mechanics and skilled craft workers.

However, a Florida contractor pointed out that the

slowdown in construction there had eased markets for unskilled and skilled workers.
Manufacturers of tires and auto components have recently announced that they will be
laying off workers because of falling auto production.
Prices of raw materials are said to be soft with the exception of fuel. A plastics
producer says he expects the prices of bulk chemicals and resins to continue falling.
Metal prices are reported to be stable or, in the case of aluminum, falling slowly.

A

builder reports that the prices of construction materials are generally softer than last
year.

Airlines, trucking firms and energy producers have noted sharply higher fuel

VI-2

prices, although some felt that the increases were the result of the recent cold snap and
therefore, temporary.
Retail Sales:

Most retailers reported that nominal sales in December showed

modest gains over last year.

Widespread price-cutting across the District reportedly

increased the volume of sales but also cut into profits.

Sales of furniture and home

appliances were reported weaker than a year ago, while sales of women's apparel were
notably stronger.

Most retailers said that inventories after the holidays were at planned

levels.
Southeastern auto dealers continue to report that unit sales are down between 10
and 50 percent compared to last year.

Several noted that the greater use of five year

loans to finance cars in recent years has cut into current demand, especially for smaller
models.

They believe that lengthened maturity of these loans has not allowed car owners

to build up enough equity to trade in for a new model.

Other dealers pointed out that

consumers have become accustomed to rebates and are much more price conscious than
in the past.
Construction and Capital Spending:

Reports on residential construction indicate

the general weakness in this sector in the region continues.

In parts of Miami, however,

the demand for expensive homes is holding up as second and third time buyers cash in on
past appreciation

to purchase

larger

homes.

increasing office vacancy rates in Florida.

Several

contacts are now reporting

Warehouse construction shows some strength

in Miami, although some contacts indicate this market may soon be overbuilt.

Pre-

leasing rates for a number of new projects that have recently gotten underway in
downtown Atlanta are lower than was usual in the past.
Industrial construction along the Gulf coast continues to expand.

Several large

natural gas processing plants are reportedly planned for the Mobile area; and several
others are expanding capacity.

Several contacts noted an increase in the number of

active drilling rigs in the Gulf, and they believe that the increase is permanent.

VI-3

Some manufacturers of apparel, paper, and heating equipment report that they
are installing computerized inventory control systems, which they expect to smooth
production runs and control costs.

New or expanded health care facilities have been

announced in northern Florida and in Birmingham, Alabama.

Several producers of heavy

machinery and construction equipment report that they scaled back capital spending in
1989 and have planned no capital expansion for 1990.
Financial Services:

Bankers noted an increase in business loans in December

after several months of decline.

They point out, however, that much of the lending has

been to finance inventories and refinance older loans rather than to finance plant or
capacity expansion.
Many lenders reported slower mortgage growth than at this time a year ago.
Single family mortgage delinquencies are also increasing according to several bankers. In
spite of lower mortgage rates, they do not expect much rebound in extensions in the next
several months.
Commercial real estate loans were also down across the District.

Contacts

reported lenders' pre-lease requirements for new office projects have increased during
the year.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Manufacturing activity in the Seventh District is showing signs of an autorelated slowdown, while other sectors of the District's economy continue to make slight
improvements. Retailers report a high volume of sales in December, particularly in the final
week. Auto sales improved nationally throughout December and into early January, as renewed
promotional activity finally began to influence buyer decisions. Steel producers cited a
stretching out of orders from the auto industry, but most other markets remain firm. Several
reports from equipment producers cite a slowdown in shipments, with growth expected to remain
positive. Although unseasonally cold weather slowed construction activity in December,
backlogs remain relatively strong in the District. A consensus outlook of 24 business economists
shows steady improvement in the economy this year, after a weak fourth quarter last year.
Consumer Spending. General merchandise sales in the District grew slightly faster than
the national average during December, according to several reports. Sales among discount
chains were hampered by heavy discounting at conventional department stores during the last
few weeks of the Christmas shopping season. However, sales at discount chains rebounded
sharply in the week after Christmas. Sales volume at one discount chain was reported to be
better than expected, up slightly from 1988's growth pace. Sales growth was concentrated in
urban areas of the District. Earlier concerns of excess inventories going into 1990 have been
eased by strong sales last month, but inventories are high in some areas, notably apparel and
household goods. Better-than-expected sales overall in early January, along with order
reductions in problem areas, are expected to be sufficient to ease inventory problems early in the
first quarter, according to one industry contact.
Motor Vehicles. Total auto sales nationally hit a 10 million unit annual rate in the last
ten days of December, according to an industry economist, as sales promotions finally began to
boost dealership traffic. Early reports for the first ten days of January suggest a continuation of
sales at near a 10 million unit pace. If this sales pace continues through January, one industry
economist expects that production cutbacks already announced should be sufficient to eliminate

VII-2
the industry's inventory overhang. The effects of worker layoffs in January will have a sizable
impact on District employment, with over half of an expected 115,000 layoffs concentrated in
the District. In addition, a Michigan utility reports that during December electrical power
consumption by industrial customers, led by auto producers, dropped sharply.
Steel. The steel industry shipped 20 million tons of steel in the fourth quarter of last
year, according to an industry economist, pushing shipments for the year about 1 percent above
1988. However, shipments were sliding throughout the fourth quarter, reflecting primarily a
slowing of shipments to the auto industry. Orders for the first quarter of this year indicate a
reversal of this pattern, with shipments starting weak and gradually improving. According to
one respondent, the auto industry has not cut orders, but has spread existing orders over January
and February. Demand for steel from other markets, including machinery, construction, and
steel service centers, is reported to be doing well.
Equipment. Producers of business equipment generally reported continued slowing in
activity, with some segments showing signs of bottoming out last month. A producer of heavy
equipment reports that sales of construction equipment continue to weaken and sales of mining
equipment have started to slow, with the notable exception of coal mining equipment. Strength
in exports is helping to offset a slowing in domestic demand for some types of heavy equipment.
A producer of communications equipment reports that orders at the end of 1989 indicate a
turnaround from the steadily slowing growth of shipments occurring in first quarter of 1990.
Recovery to trend growth rates is expected to take most of this year, reaching trend growth by
early 1991. A maker of electrical controls and supplies sold to other producers of industrial
equipment, however, reports steady growth in sales to its industrial markets and expects demand
for its products to continue to be strong in 1990.
Construction. Several reports indicate that on average construction activity in the District
continues to be stronger than the nation. While demand for concrete in the Chicago area
slumped in December due to unseasonally cold weather, backlogs were up substantially from
year ago levels, according to one supplier. Gypsum board shipments to District states have been

VII-3
rising at twice the national pace, although Michigan continues to lag other District states. A
supplier to the residential construction market reports that contract awards in the year-to-date
through November of last year increased 5 percent in the District states, compared to a 3 percent
decline nationally.
Consensus Outlook. A group of 24 business economists from the Midwest met at the
Bank in mid-December to discuss the economic outlook for 1990. After an expected flat fourth
quarter in 1989, their median forecast shows real GNP rising 1.7 percent in 1990, on a year-overyear basis. Their industrial production forecast shows a 1.2 percent decline for the fourth quarter
of 1989 and only 1.1 percent growth in 1990. However, both forecasted series show marked
improvement over the course of the year, led by consumer spending. In line with the consensus
outlook, the December survey of Chicago purchasing agents showed expanding activity.
Finally, the median forecast for the GNP implicit price deflator indicated an easing in
inflationary pressures, dropping from 4.2 percent in 1989 to 3.9 percent in 1990.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Slow economic growth continues.

Total District job growth has been

sluggish in recent months, with declining manufacturing employment offset
by moderate gains

in other

sectors.

District

retailers

holiday sales generally met or exceeded expectations.

report

that

Record cold weather

in late December drove up energy consumption and, in some areas, energy
prices.

Total loans at the District's largest banks grew

more rapidly in

the fourth quarter than in the same period a year earlier, while deposit
growth slowed.
1990.

Most analysts expect continued slow regional growth in

Contacts do not expect potential changes in defense spending to

have much local impact in the early 1990s.
Manufacturing
Layoffs and production cutbacks continue at the District's vehicle
assembly plants and related firms,
St. Louis

such as tire manufacturers.

All four

area vehicle assembly plants were idle in late December and

three of the four plants will be shut down a week or more in January.

The

auto sales slowdown will also result in flat sales in the first quarter
for

one

major

chemicals

producer,

who

produces

a

plastic

used

in

windshields and a chemical used in tires, among other products.
A large home appliance plant in Arkansas, which laid off most of its
work force in November because of slow sales and production line changes,
is

scheduled to resume production in February.

A company

official

anticipates unit appliance sales in 1990 will be flat or slightly lower
than last year.

A home appliance firm in Louisville expects strengthening

VIII-2

sales

late

in

1990

and plans

to

hire

as

many

as

300

new

production

workers.
Construction and Real Estate
Several homebuilders in
in

single-family

the St.

homebuilding

in

Louis area anticipate

1990,

especially

in

steady growth

more

expensive

"move-up" homes; these builders suggest that relatively low interest rates
will help sales.

Other builders, however, anticipate continued weakening,

since no backlog currently exists for new home construction and the median
price

of

existing

homes

northwest

Arkansas

expects

growth in that area.
expansion

this

is

declining.
continued

A

real

strong

estate

residential

developer

in

construction

A Little Rock developer anticipates some residential

year,

but

notes

that

generally

weak

local

economic

conditions will limit growth.
Retail Spending
District

retailers

report

that

holiday

sales

generally

met

or

exceeded expectations, with most retailers experiencing increases of 4 to
10 percent over last year.

Because of the unseasonable cold snap, winter

apparel sales were unusually strong, which retailers say could mean slower
sales of these items

in

jewelry also sold well.

the first

quarter.

Toys,

leather apparel and

Retailers report that the sales gains this year

were achieved with about the same or less price-cutting than last year.
Most are not concerned with inventories being too high and
zero to moderate sales growth from the first
quarter of 1990.

are expecting

quarter of 1989 to the first

District auto dealers report that sales were down in

December and first-quarter expectations are for sales to remain slow with
imported models selling better than domestic.

VIII-3

Agriculture and Natural Resources
Low water levels and ice caused temporary suspensions
movement in
Warmer

late December on both the Mississippi

temperatures

in

early

Below-normal

resume.

January

allowed

temperatures,

in

of commodity

and Arkansas rivers.

some

barge

conjunction

movement

with

dry

to

soil

conditions and no snow cover in parts of the District, may have damaged
the winter wheat crop.

The unusually cold weather also had a significant

effect on District energy use and prices.

Natural gas prices rose 20

percent or more between October and January in some parts of the District,
while other areas experienced no price increases.
propane prices have doubled since

this summer.

In some rural areas
District gasoline and

diesel fuel prices rose 6 cents to 12 cents per gallon during the last
week of December.

Despite record winter energy demand, electric utilities

are not anticipating large price increases.
Banking
Total loans at the District's 11 largest banks grew at a more rapid
pace

in

the

fourth quarter

than

in

the

same

period one year

earlier.

Consumer lending was up significantly at these banks from a year earlier,
while real estate lending has slowed,
rate and its
in

1988 fourth-quarter

the fourth quarter,

with all

both from its

rate.

1989

Securities holdings

of the

third-quarter
rose sharply

increase coming from increased

holdings of U.S. Treasury and agency issues.

Total deposits increased in

the fourth quarter at about the same rate as total loans, but that rate
was down from the same period last year.
outflows

from thrifts,

Partially because of deposit

money market deposit accounts

three times the rate of a year earlier.

increased at almost

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic conditions have been moderately
good.

The district employment situation has been mixed.

Consumer

spending on general merchandise has been strong, automobile sales
have

continued

automobile

to

show

inventories

large
have

month-to-month
been

at

fluctuations,

unusually

high

and

levels.

Resource-related industries have been doing moderately well.

Employment
The district employment situation has been mixed.

The

unemployment rate in Minnesota in November was 3.5 percent, 0.2
percentage points lower than in October but 0.3 percentage points
higher than in November 1988.

In the rest of the district, unem-

ployment rates rose from October to November and were at slightly
higher levels than in November 1988.
to

decline

in

the

Minneapolis-St. Paul
mainframe

computers

computer

and

Employment levels continued

electronics

industries

in

metropolitan area with one manufacturer
eliminating 2.5

area workforce in December.
brighter district-wide

for

contacted

of

percent of its metropolitan

The labor market situation has been
entry-level

workers,

with

employers

continuing to report difficulty in filling entry-level jobs.
employers

the

expressed

concern

about

rapidly

Most

increasing

costs for health insurance.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending on general merchandise has continued
to be strong.

One retailer reports that, in the five weeks ending

December 30, total sales were 15.1 percent higher than a year ago,

IX-2

and 7.3 percent higher at stores that have been operating for at
least a year.

An appliance retailer reports that total sales in

December were 21 percent higher than a year ago, and 5 percent
higher at stores which were open in December 1988.

The retailers

contacted generally report that Christmas sales were much better
than expected.

Inventories were at acceptable levels.

Automobile sales have continued to show large month-tomonth

fluctuations.

A domestic manufacturer

reports

that

car

sales in the region in December were 8 percent lower than a year
ago, while truck sales were 13 percent higher.

This manufacturer

also reports that regional car sales for all of 1989 were 3 percent higher than

in

1988.

Inventories

of cars and trucks have

continued to be at unusually high levels, but it is anticipated
that by March inventories will return to normal.
Housing activity
year's levels.

has been largely unchanged

from last

The number of new housing permits issued in Minne-

sota rose by 4 percent in November from last year, but the number
of new housing permits issued in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area fell
sales
higher

this

in

by 11

percent over the same period.

metropolitan

than in December

area

in

December were

1988, but sales

levels

were also

roughly

unchanged

7.4 percent

for the entire year of

1989 were roughly unchanged from 1988 levels.
ity

Housing

Construction activ-

from a year

ago.

The

dollar value of contracts for future construction in November was
about 5 percent higher than in November 1988.
Tourist spending has been moderately

strong.

Montana

reports an outstanding year, with reservations at ski resorts up

IX-3

anywhere from 10 to 20 percent over last year.
sula of Michigan also
tourist season.

reports good

Elsewhere

The Upper Penin-

snowfall and an

excellent

in the district, snowfall has been

below normal and ski resorts report a disappointing season.

In

Deadwood, South Dakota, gambling was recently legalized and the
amounts wagered have exceeded all expectations.
Resource-Related Industries
Resource-related industries have been doing moderately
well.

Conditions in agriculture have been fairly good in the
for parts of North Dakota, where a continuing

district except

drought caused declines in the output of wheat.

However,

the

barley and sugar beet crops in North Dakota were reported to be
good.

A director reports that in some parts of North Dakota

farmers' net worth declined by about 10 percent in 1989.

Live-

stock dealers and ranchers throughout the district report to have
had a good year.

The lumber industry in the district has been

doing well, although concerns have continued to be expressed about
the

long-term

restrictions.

outlook

of

the

industry

due

to

environmental

The mining industry reports an exceptionally good

year, particularly in Montana, where several expansion projects of
copper mines are in progress.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to grow modestly.

Christmas sales were near expected levels at most retailers, but continued
sluggishness of auto sales has resulted in an unwanted buildup of dealer
inventories.

With most manufacturing plants operating below capacity, inputs

are generally available with shorter lead times and at only slightly higher
prices.

Housing starts have declined and mortgage loan demand remains weak at

district thrift institutions.

Continued improvement in resource industries is

a bright spot for the district.

Oil and gas drilling activity is increasing,

and agriculture's strong financial performance is encouraging expanded farm
lending activity at commercial banks.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report steady to higher sales over a

year earlier, but sales have been mixed over the last three months.

Demand is

especially strong for women's apparel, while housewares and furniture sales
are somewhat weak.

Christmas sales nearly met expectations and exceeded year-

ago levels for most retailers.

Prices are expected to stabilize in the near

future, and inventory levels appear satisfactory.

Automobile dealers report

sluggish sales of new vehicles during the last month.

Dealers are trying to

trim large inventories in anticipation of slower sales over the coming months.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report input prices unchanged from or

slightly higher than a year ago.

Prices have increased on only a few items

over the last three months, and no price changes are expected over the next
three months.

Inputs are generally available with shorter lead times.

firms are planning to trim inventories in the months ahead.

Many

Most plants are

operating below full capacity, with few reports of skilled labor shortages.
Energy.

Exploration and development for oil and gas in the district

X-2
continues to improve even though the recent increase in oil prices is not
expected to persist.

The average number of active drilling rigs in the

district increased from 326 in November to 336 in December.

Six consecutive

months of increase have boosted drilling activity 25 percent above the level a
year ago.
Housing Activity and Finance.

District housing starts have decreased

slightly from a year ago and from last month.

Homebuilders expect starts and

sales this year to be about the same as last year.

New home sales and prices

have generally been steady, while inventories of unsold homes are down
slightly.

Builders expect no problems obtaining materials.

District savings

and loan institutions report flat or negative net deposit flows over the last
month.
ago.

In almost all cases, net deposit flows were more favorable than a year
Most respondents expect no net change or a slight increase in deposits

in the near term.

District thrift institutions report weak mortgage demand

and steady to slightly lower mortgage rates.

Expectations for future mortgage

rates are mixed.
Banking.

Most district commercial banks report unchanged loan demand

over the last month although some banks note a slight increase in demand.
Increased demand is most apparent for commercial and industrial loans and
consumer loans.

Demand for other types of loans is generally unchanged.

Among responding banks, loan-to-deposit ratios are about the same as a month
ago but somewhat lower than a year ago.

Deposit behavior varies considerably

among responding banks, with slightly more banks reporting increases in
deposits than reporting decreases.

Demand deposits and NOW accounts show the

greatest strength.
Agriculture.

Bitterly cold December temperatures and continued dry

X-3
weather have heightened concerns over the condition of the winter wheat crop
across much of the Tenth District.

Dry growing conditions during the fall and

early winter limited root development of the wheat crop in several states and
left the crop vulnerable to damage by cold temperatures and wind erosion.
Wyoming, however, wheat fields are protected by a deep snow cover.

In

Although

much of the district's wheat crop is under stress, most of the crop should
develop satisfactorily if normal weather conditions return.
Despite severely cold temperatures in late December, most district
cattle feeders marketed cattle on a normal schedule.

Faster weight gains

during unseasonably warm temperatures early in December helped compensate for
the slower weight gains caused by colder temperatures later in the month.
High cattle prices have boosted feeding margins and encouraged some district
producers to feed cattle to heavier weights than usual.
Strong returns from both livestock and crops allowed most district
farmers to pay off 1989 operating loans at a rate similar to that of a year
ago.

In parts of Oklahoma and Kansas, however, continued drought and an early

frost cut crop yields and boosted carry-over farm debt.

Nevertheless, most

district banks have little unwanted carry-over debt and are actively seeking
new farm loan accounts to increase loan-deposit ratios.

In general,

agriculture's strong financial performance in recent years has encouraged
district bankers to expand farm lending activity.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Respondents report that District economic growth has accelerated
since the last Beige Book survey.

Demand for manufactured products is

increasing, after showing some softness in November.

A number of firms report

that retail sales growth in the District is faster than the national average.
Auto sales are weak.
is picking up.

Service industries continue to expand.

Energy activity

A modest recovery is taking place in construction.

Agriculture was hard hit by December's severely cold weather.
District manufacturing has resumed its expansion according to
surveyed firms.

Year-over-year growth in sales of oilfield equipment

accelerated during the fourth quarter, and a significant portion of this
upturn was attributed to increased exports.

Primary metals producers say

demand and prices weakened in November and again in December and that their
product inventories are undesirably high.

Although a number of fabricated

metals manufacturers cite rising sales, those that sell to the construction
industry note that December's extreme cold wave led to a greater-than-normal
falloffs in the season's normally weak demand.

Reports by lumber and wood

products producers vary greatly, but most firms say their sales are increasing
and firms serving the Houston market are particularly positive.

Fourth

quarter demand for paper and board was up over the third quarter but weaker
than a year earlier.
industry.

Several firms noted problems of overcapacity in the

Stone, clay, and glass producers generally cite little recent

change in their demand, although manufacturers of auto glass say their sales
are declining markedly.

Manufacturers of electronics and computer-related

XI-2

products report that demand recently has turned up, following a period of
softness, and they are cautiously optimistic for the rest of 1990.

District

food products respondents note year-over-year growth in sales volume.
for apparel is expanding somewhat.

Demand

Chemicals producers say their selling

prices have stopped falling and demand has leveled off, but December's severe
freeze caused widespread shutdowns along the Gulf Coast.

Respondents in the

chemical industry continue to voice fears about what continued expansions in
capacity will do to product prices.

Demand for petroleum products rose

markedly as a result of December's cold weather but, after adjustment for this
phenomenon, sales are little changed overall.
Retail sales showed strong growth during the holiday shopping season
and a number of national chains said their sales grew more rapidly in the
District than nationally.

Sales expansion in the Dallas/Ft. Worth and Houston

areas was said to be particularly strong, with slower upturns in San Antonio
and Austin and still weaker growth in west Texas.

Retailers expect sales

growth to slow in 1990.
District auto dealers note that sales generally remain weak, despite
the usual surge during the last week of the year.

Profits are said to be

poor, not only because of slow sales, but because of strong discounting, and a
large number of dealers are currently operating at a loss.

Respondents expect

some increase in unit sales in 1990, but they are more cautious in their
expectations about profits.
Most service-related firms in the District report continued
expansion in sales and employment, with data-processing and accounting firms
noting particularly strong growth.

Airlines, however, reported some

XI-3

softening.

Generally, service industry respondents expect slower growth in

1990 than in 1989.
December's severe cold disrupted District construction operations,
but contract values continue to edge up.

Nonresidential building has provided

most of the gains, but nonbuilding construction contract values also have
begun to rise.

Apartment occupancy rates have been climbing, reaching 90

percent in Houston and Dallas, and increased multifamily construction is
widely expected for 1990.

Office building occupancy also is increasing, but

only slight office construction growth is expected this year.
The District oil and gas drilling industry continues to expand
gradually.

The unusually cold weather in December pushed the average price of

West Texas Intermediate crude oil up 7.3 percent to 21.24 dollars per barrel
and prices temporarily jumped to more than $23 per barrel in early January.
Prices have since subsided, but respondents believe that oil prices in 1990
will remain higher than in 1989.
seasonal adjustment.

Drilling activity has been increasing, after

Profits are said to have risen, not only because of

higher oil prices but because of reduced drilling costs.
December's hard freeze caused major disruption to District
agriculture.
destroyed.

In south Texas, about 50 percent of the citrus crop was
The freeze not only destroyed unharvested citrus fruits, but it

also killed or damaged unharvested vegetable crops including broccoli, celery,
lettuce, cabbage, onions, peppers, tomatoes, and sugar cane.
industry has also reported damage.

The nursery

December crop prices were 3 percent above

a year earlier, but further increases in prices have already occurred since
then.

Livestock prices in December were up 6 percent over a year earlier.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions continue to be healthy in the Twelfth Federal Reserve District.
Business leaders continue to expect slow growth nationally, but their outlook has not worsened.
Wage pressure is moderate in most areas of the District, although sharp increases are reported
in parts of Washington. Retail sales were generally strong over the holidays, but heavy
discounting held down profits. Manufacturing remains steady, with strong commercial aircraft
orders offsetting weak electronics orders. Gains also are reported in machinery and food
processing. Resource industries are healthy, with high prices boosting agricultural earnings and
oil drilling. Forest products industries are re-tooling to process smaller logs, because of rapidly
escalating log prices and anticipated additional shortages of old-growth timber. Construction
and real estate activity remains strong in most parts of the District. Banks report generally
good conditions, except for those in areas with serious real estate-related problems.
Business Sentiment
Western business leaders' expectations about the national economy showed little change
in January compared to their previous responses. Three quarters of the respondents continue
to expect GNP growth to be below its historical trend over the next four quarters. More
respondents expected an improvement in housing starts, consumer spending, and the trade
balance, but the general tenor of the responses indicate little fundamental change in outlook.
Wages and prices
Wage and price pressures remain moderate in the District. Materials and labor costs in
construction are reported to be rising, but more slowly than the CPI. Most wage increases are
in the four to five percent range. A notable exception is in Seattle, where managers and

XII - 2

technical workers are receiving 7 to 25 percent increases. Health care costs nationally are
reported to be up about 10.5 percent from a year ago.
Consumer Spending
Holiday retail sales were generally healthy in the District. Most areas reported higher
nominal sales than in 1988, but heavy discounting is expected to suppress profits. Sales were
near expected levels in most parts of the District, although one respondent reported record
sales in parts of Oregon. Heavy discounting was attributed in part to financial problems of
some national chains with large debt burdens. Specialty stores performed especially well,
according to respondents in the Northwest. Sharply higher spending by Asian tourists is
keeping retail sales high in Hawaii.
Auto sales are reported to be down throughout the District. One respondent in Utah
reports that dealers that normally sell 300 to 400 cars in December sold only 40 to 50 cars.
Other areas report auto sales off 10 to 20 percent, with margins cut even further. A
respondent in Oregon reports that auto dealers are cutting advertising budgets to reduce their
costs.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing continues to show little growth in the West. One respondent reports
that electronic component sales in Arizona are unchanged from a year earlier, although some
gains are reported for small computer firms. Equipment orders are mixed. Backlogs are
reported for farm equipment, and some expansion of capacity is reported. In contrast,
construction equipment is readily available, with orders flat compared to a year earlier. Apparel
production continues to rise in Southern California. Food processing also remains healthy, with
strong gains in production and profits reported in Oregon. Electric utilities are not investing in

XII - 3

significant new capacity in the Northwest, which is raising concern at aluminum plants about
potential shortages.
Some labor reductions in defense industries are reported, but the commercial aircraft
sector remains very strong. In addition to increasing orders for commercial aircraft, a
respondent in Southern California reports a major increase in contracts to rehabilitate existing
aircraft. Investment remains strong in aerospace. Boeing has announced planned cutbacks of
2,000 workers at one plant and it has delayed plans to expand production until the middle of
the year, but it is expected to continue expanding and remodeling suburban plants. The
engineers union has rejected a contract offer, but talks are continuing.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agriculture remains healthy in the West, although drought is becoming a major concern
in some areas. Exports continue to increase, although a shortage of grain transport vehicles is
creating a bottleneck in some areas. Fruit and vegetable prices are very high because of freeze
damage in Florida and Texas. Drought continues to plague California and parts of Idaho and
Utah. The dairy industry reports high prices and expanding production. Beef producers report
strong prices because of rising consumption and slightly lower input costs.
Respondents report increased investment in oil exploration in California, and natural gas
deliveries in Utah are up 3.7 percent. Gold mining remains strong in Nevada, despite lower
prices. Lumber mills are facing diminished margins because of rapidly rising log prices.
Respondents report that many mills are investing in new machinery to process smaller trees in
expectation of reduced supplies of old-growth timber in the future.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction remains strong in the District, with the exception of Arizona. Construction

XII - 4

is very strong in Hawaii, with half of the spending in office and non-hotel building. Both
residential and commercial construction are increasing in Utah and Southern California. One
respondent reports increased construction in Sacramento, with old buildings being torn down
and replaced by larger buildings. Prices continue to rise sharply in Washington, with
appreciation of 2 percent per month reported in some areas. Some weakness in home sales
priced above $300,000 is reported in parts of California, but lower priced homes continue to
appreciate.
Financial Sector
Conditions remain healthy for commercial banks in most parts of the District, although
banks in Arizona and Alaska continue to have real estate-related problems. Credit flows are
very strong in the Pacific Northwest, led by 20 percent gains in real estate lending, and central
parts of California. One respondent in Southern California reports strong loan demand and
tightening criteria for making loans.

