SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

April 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY ............

. .. .. .. .. . .. .. . .. .. .. . ... . .. . .. .. .. .. . i

First District - Boston ......................
Second District - New York ..................
Third District - Philadelphia ..................

. 11n-

............

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland ...................

. IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ...................

SV-1

Sixth District - Atlanta .....................
VII-1

Seventh District - Chicago ...................
Eighth District - St Louis ...................

VIII-1

. vn-i
IX-

Ninth District - Minneapolis ..................
Tenth District - Kansas City ..................

SX-1

Eleventh District - Dallas .....................................

SXI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco ...

XII-i

Summary**

Economic activity remained weak in much of the nation, but
there were some indications that the decline may be bottoming
out.

Retail sales were sluggish in most districts, with no

sustained pickup following the end of the Persian Gulf war.
Manufacturing showed indications of stabilizing, with some
districts reporting slightly improved conditions and increased
optimism about future activity.

Other districts, however, report

continued weakness in manufacturing.

Wage increases appear

modest and input prices in manufacturing are reported to be flat
or down.

Larger price increases continue, however, in certain

service industries such as health care.

Residential real estate

activity improved across the nation, while non-residential
construction remained weak.

Loan demand was reported flat or

slightly improving by most districts.

Agricultural conditions

outside of California are reported to be generally good.

Stable

oil prices and low natural gas prices are reducing exploration.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales remained sluggish in most districts, with the
majority reporting no sustained pickup following the end of the
Persian Gulf war.

Districts report that renewed consumer

**Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and
based on information collected before April 22, 1991. This
document summarizes comments received from businesses and other
contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on
the views of Federal Reserve officials.

ii
confidence has yet to be translated into solid sales.
are remaining cautious and traffic is slow.

Shoppers

Some softening of

sales was reported by Philadelphia, Chicago, and Dallas.
Cleveland reported a pickup in activity in areas not affected by
auto layoffs, spurred in part by aggressive promotion.

Increases

also were noted in St. Louis for heavily promoted and discounted
goods.

Increased auto sales were noted by Kansas City,

Cleveland, and Atlanta, but most districts reported little
improvement and Dallas reported sharply reduced auto sales.
Low expectations for a significant improvement in sales are
reported in Philadelphia and New York.

Boston reports that the

prevailing expectation among retailers is that 1991 will continue
to be a tough year.

Atlanta notes that some retailers fear that

increased activity in their district may be "catch up" spending
and not permanent.

San Francisco, however, reports that

expectations for improved consumer spending rose substantially.
Richmond also reports increased optimism among retailers.

Retail

inventories are reported to be lean in most districts.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity showed signs of bottoming out in much
of the nation.

Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland,

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and Kansas City all report stable or
slightly improving conditions.
by Dallas and St. Louis.

Weaker conditions were reported

Most districts report manufacturing

input prices to be flat or down.

iii
Cleveland noted some slow recovery in auto production, while
Chicago reported an increase in orders received by suppliers to
St. Louis, however, reported continued

the auto industry.

layoffs in the auto sector and a plant shutdown expected in May.
Cleveland reports that steel production is expected to remain at
70 to 75 percent of capacity.

Specialty steel and machine tool

producers appear to be doing better than in previous recessions.
Optimism among manufacturers for improvement was reported by
Philadelphia, Richmond, and Cleveland.
Cleveland, Kansas City, and San Francisco reported strength
in export activity.

Richmond indicated that exports at District

ports were higher than in the previous year and are expected to
increase further.
export activity.

Boston, however, indicated disappointing
Contacts in Kansas City, Dallas, and San

Francisco expect orders related to the rebuilding of Kuwait.

Construction and Real Estate
Residential real estate activity improved across the nation,
with most districts noting increased sales of new and existing
single-family homes and modest improvements in residential
construction.

Increased buyer interest was attributed to renewed

confidence following the end of the Persian Gulf war, and to the
decline in mortgage interest rates.

Atlanta, however, reported

that some builders are skeptical whether the increased housing
demand is sustainable.
Nonresidential construction activity remains weak.

Boston

iv

reported that construction of new commercial space has nearly
ground to a halt, but that vacancy rates continue to increase due
to further contraction in the financial services industry.

New

York reported that office leasing activity in midtown Manhattan
declined to its lowest level in three years.

Vacancy rates rose

in downtown Manhattan with the addition of new space.

High

vacancy rates also were reported in Los Angeles and in
Minneapolis/St. Paul.

Dallas reported that construction activity

remains sluggish, with respondents attributing weakness to tight
credit conditions and uncertainty over the actions of the
Resolution Trust Corporation.

Banking and Finance
Loan demand was reported to be flat or improving slightly in
the eight districts reporting on financial developments.
Increases were reported in mortgage lending and refinancings.
Commercial and industrial loan demand was reported weak by
Philadelphia, but slightly increasing by Richmond.

In general,

loan demand was expected to improve with the economy.
Reports on credit availability are mixed.

New York reports

that a majority of their surveyed banks have not changed their
credit standards over the last three months, but a few are more
cautious with respect to land development loans.

Atlanta reports

that most contacts feel that tight lending conditions continue to
restrict loan growth.

Boston indicates that half of their

contacts report that a lack of credit is hampering capital

spending, while the other half report ample credit for projects
such as renovations and computer upgrades.

Agriculture and Natural Resources
Dallas reported that prices for cotton, grain sorghum and
soybeans have increased, and producers are indicating they will
plant more acreage for these crops.

According to Kansas City,

warm weather has resulted in rapid development of the winter
wheat crop, which is in generally good condition.

Kansas City

reports dry soil conditions in the western part of their
district, and Minneapolis reports below normal precipitation in
South Dakota.

Favorable planting weather is reported by St.

Louis and Richmond.

In California, the freeze in late December

cut citrus fruit production and exports in half and destroyed
many fruit and nut trees.

Continued drought conditions have

caused farmers to cut back on acreage planted for many crops,
including a 15 to 20 percent drop in cotton acreage planted in
the San Joaquin valley.
Kansas City reports that stable oil prices since the end of
the Persian Gulf conflict have resulted in continued development
of existing reserves, but current prices are not stimulating much
exploration.

Drilling activity fell in March but remained about

13 percent above its year-ago level.

Dallas reports dampened oil

and gas production and drilling efforts.

While oil prices are

little changed from a year earlier, natural gas prices are the
lowest in several years.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity remains subdued in the First District.

The

retailers contacted report reduced sales in early 1991 compared to a
Although some retailers anticipate modest year-over-year

year earlier.

increases by the third or fourth quarter, most expect slack sales
conditions to continue.

Demand also remains weak for First District

manufacturing contacts; however, a few report signs of a recent
bottoming out.

While commercial and industrial real estate show no

improvement, residential sales have increased.
Retail

Retail contacts in the First District report that February and
March sales were below year-earlier figures.

Declines were clustered

around 4 to 5 percent, although for one-third of the sample the results
were worse.

Some retailers detect a slight improvement in consumer

confidence as a result of the end of the Persian Gulf War, lower
interest rates, and the anticipated resolution of the failure of the
Bank of New England.

However, the prevailing expectation is that 1991

will continue to be a tough year, especially given rising unemployment.
Even the most optimistic retailers are projecting only low single-digit
sales increases for the year as a whole.
Retailers continue to be very conservative in ordering
inventories.

Most contacts have been reducing employment in recent

months, but about half note that it is becoming difficult to implement
further staffing reductions without severely sacrificing customer
service.

About half the contacts feel that a lack of credit is

I-2

hampering their capital spending, while the other half report ample
credit for projects such as renovations and computer upgrades.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing contacts indicate that economic conditions continue
weak; however, a few report signs of a recent pickup.

At two-thirds of

the firms contacted, sales are flat to down from year-ago levels, with
declines reaching 20 percent.
gains of up to 10 percent.

The other third report year-over-year

New orders continue to fall at almost half

the firms contacted, and some express concern about stretch-outs and
dwindling backlogs.

Nevertheless, a slight majority report a possible

bottoming out, with incoming orders equal to or above year-ago levels.
Demand from communications, health and other nonfinancial service
industries is cited as relatively strong.

However, export activity is

termed "sluggish" and "disappointing."
Input and sales prides are generally flat to down.

The few firms

that have raised selling prices on selected items have simultaneously
discounted or lowered prices on other products; thus, their average
price increases are 1 to 2 percent at most.
Almost half the manufacturing contacts have decreased employment
from year-ago levels -- by 5 to 30 percent; however, in contrast to
recent reports, one firm is hiring and fewer than one-quarter plan
additional reductions.

Several contacts noted improvements in labor

productivity.
Most respondents plan capital expenditures equal to last year's
(generally low) levels.

Two will increase capital spending --

case, very significantly because of a new product.

in one

Nevertheless, in the

face of weak demand, a minority now expect to cut planned expenditures
by 5 to 15 percent from budget.

I-3
Respondent expectations range from guarded to fairly confident -with caution prevailing.

A majority believe that the upturn will not

occur before the third quarter, but a few report that the national
recovery has already begun.

Nevertheless, most expect that New England

will lag the nation and that swollen debt levels will weaken the
upswing.
Real Estate
First District realtors are optimistic for the first time in
several months.

Most are reporting increased home sales both from a few

months ago and from this time last year, with low and moderately priced
homes moving the fastest.

One contact reported having the highest

number of sales since 1986.

Realtors attribute the pickup in sales to

lower interest rates, falling prices, and an increase in consumer
confidence.

Thus, they caution that an increase in interest rates or a

sharp drop in consumer confidence could have a negative effect on home
sales.
Commercial and industrial real estate, by contrast, show no
improvement.

Construction of new commercial space has nearly ground to

a halt in the First District.

Nevertheless, with employment in the

region's financial institutions declining, vacancy rates are not likely
to ease.

Instead, office rents, are expected to continue falling.

Vacancy rates are also increasing in the Boston area industrial market.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District economy since the last report
remained soft to mixed.

Sales results at department stores were generally

sluggish during February and March though some improvement occurred as the
period progressed.

Unemployment rose substantially in March and office

leasing slowed during recent weeks.

On the positive side, the latest surveys

of purchasing managers indicate some pickup in business activity among
manufacturers in Buffalo and stabilizing in the Rochester area.

Moreover,

homebuilders noted a substantial increase in traffic though sales remained
soft.

Most senior officers surveyed at small and midsized banks reported that

overall demand for real estate loans in mid-April was the same as a year ago
with the majority noting moderate growth in residential real estate loans.
Consumer Spending
Sales results at District department stores were generally sluggish
during February and March, but in some cases where stores had been planning
for sizable over-the-year declines, March results were actually better than
anticipated.

Year-to-year changes in March ranged from -11 percent to +6.8

percent and in February from -16 percent to +1.5 percent.

The only contact

with a worse performance in March than in February attributed it to the fact
that a major promotional campaign that occurred in March 1990 is scheduled for
April this year.
Sales of furniture and other durable goods continued slow though one
respondent saw signs of a bottoming out.

High priced women's apparel also

moved slowly but other types of clothing and cosmetics sold relatively well.
The inventory situation was mixed.

Some were pleased that stocks are below

plan since sales have been sluggish while others reported more of an inventory
buildup than was intended.

All of our contacts were pessimistic about the

outlook until the economy revives.

II-2

Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilders in most of the District have noted a substantial increase in
traffic in recent weeks though sales remained soft.

They attribute the

heightened interest to "the lowest mortgage rates in years", an improved
consumer outlook following the ceasefire in the Gulf, and more resale activity
resulting from lowered prices on existing homes.

Observers varied in their

expectations for the year from those simply hoping for a near-term turnaround
to those who anticipate a pretty good year.

Mortgage money is considered

plentiful in all areas but bank financing for acquisition and site development
continues to be restricted.
Office leasing slowed in the District during recent weeks as activity in
midtown Manhattan declined to its lowest level in three years.

Nonetheless,

the primary vacancy rate in midtown was unchanged because of virtually no new
addition of space.

A sizable amount of newly excess space was marketed in

downtown Manhattan, however, and the primary vacancy rate rose substantially.
Other Business Activity
March unemployment rates rose in New York by 0.6 percentage point and in
New Jersey by 0.5 percentage point to match the national average of
6.8 percent.

This is the highest level in New York since May 1986 and in

New Jersey since January 1984.

The District's employment outlook is dimmed by

several recent announcements of large-scale cutbacks planned by area
companies.

Due in large part to reduced defense spending, Grumman will lay

off 1900 more workers by yearend--three-quarters of them on Long Island--and
Metropolitan Life anticipates the loss of about 1000 jobs as the result of
moving several thousand jobs from its Manhattan headquarters during a
renovation project.

In addition, both New York State and New York City

continue discussing the layoff of large numbers of employees to help close
budget gaps.

More positively, the Pentagon selected Sikorsky Aircraft in

Fairfield County, Connecticutas part of a team to build a new generation of
combat helicopters with six prototypes to be built by 1996.

The latest

surveys of purchasing managers indicate some pickup in business activity among

II-3

manufacturers in Buffalo and stabilizing in the Rochester area.

In March, 48

percent of firms surveyed in Buffalo reported increased production, up from 24
percent in February, and 43 percent reported higher orders, up from 27 percent
in February.

Almost three-quarters of the firms in the Rochester survey

reported unchanged business conditions in February compared with 60 percent in
January.

Both surveys showed a sizable increase in the percentage of firms

with lower input costs.
Financial Developments
Most senior officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second
District reported that overall demand for real estate loans in mid-April was
the same as a year ago.

Although almost all respondents saw no particularly

strong or weak sector of the real estate market, the majority noted moderate
growth in the demand for residential real estate loans, especially among
first-time homebuyers. Of the banks reporting this moderate demand growth,
more than half had an increase in loans for new purchases and the remainder
had an increase in mortgage refinancings. Reasons cited for the growth in
demand were declining home prices and interest rates as well as a recovery of
consumer confidence. When asked about demand for commercial real estate loans
as compared to last year, responses varied from "still down" to "substantially
off".

Bankers cited the soft economy and earlier overbuilding as major

factors behind the current lackluster commercial real estate sector.
Credit standards for real estate loans at the majority of surveyed banks
have not changed over the last three months though a few mentioned lower loan
to value ratios as well as more caution with respect to land development loans
and home equity lines. All respondents stated that over the last three months
their qualifying procedures for real estate loans have not changed and nearly
all said that their interest rates on real estate loans have been "low and
stable" or have declined slightly. Most respondents reported that the ratio of
their real estate loans to total loans has not changed over the last year. The
only one noting an increase stated that this was mainly due to purchases of
RTC assets.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications of economic activity in the Third District in mid-April were
mixed, but suggest conditions overall may be stabilizing. The two-year downtrend
in manufacturing showed signs of levelling off as a majority of industrial firms
contacted in April reported steady business compared to March.
some softening in sales

in recent weeks,

Retailers noted

following a pickup in March.

In

general, however, store officials indicated that sales in dollar terms for the
first four months of this year will be even with the same period in 1990 for
stores open at

least a year.

Bankers

described overall lending as

flat.

Although there was a pickup in consumer and mortgage lending in March, new
lending appeared to be easing in April.
The outlook in the Third District business

community is beginning to

brighten although expectations are not strongly optimistic.

Manufacturers are

generally positive: more than half of those contacted for this report expect
business to expand over the next six months.

Retailers anticipate sales in the

second quarter will be flat compared to the year-ago period, but they expect some
improvement in the second half. Bankers foresee a modest economic recovery that
will boost lending slightly as the year progresses.
MANUFACTURING
The Third District manufacturing sector appeared to be stabilizing in
April.

A majority of firms contacted for this report indicated that they were

operating at a steady rate compared to the prior month while the number reporting
slower business was offset by those posting gains.

This is the first indication

that industrial activity might be levelling off since area firms began reporting

III-2
a general downturn two years ago.

On balance, manufacturers noted increases in

shipments and a pickup in orders in recent weeks. However, the rebound in demand
does not appear to be pressing current manufacturing capacity in the region;
overall, managers at area plants said order backlogs were still shrinking and
inventories were holding steady.

Area firms

also reported that

they were

continuing to trim both the number of workers and the length of the workweek.
The outlook among Third District manufacturers is generally positive. More
than half of those queried said they expect business to expand over the next six
months while less than one-in-five anticipate further weakness.

A majority

predict increases in both orders and shipments between now and October, and a
third plan to boost employment over that period.

On balance, area firms are

planning increased outlays for plant and equipment in the next six months.
RETAIL
Third District retailers contacted in mid-April generally said sales had
been slipping in recent weeks.

A pickup in March offset a lackluster February,

according to merchants, but the gain was not carrying through into April.

This

pattern was being reported at most types of stores and for most lines of goods.
Overall, merchants indicated that results for the first four months of this year
will run just even with the year-ago period, on a current dollar, same stores
basis.
Looking ahead, retail executives generally expect little or no improvement
in the second quarter.

They believe sales in the second half of this year will

be greater than they were in the second half of 1990, which was weak, but they
do not foresee strong gains.

Several retailers noted that store traffic was

running below expectations, and they believe shoppers will remain cautious until
the employment situation improves.

III-3
FINANCE
Commercial bankers contacted in mid-April indicated that overall loan
volume was essentially flat compared to the prior month.

Most of those surveyed

said commercial and industrial loan demand was weak and most types of consumer
lending were also soft.

An exception was revolving home equity loans, which had

picked up in response to somewhat lower rates and bank promotions; however,
bankers indicated that this increase was beginning to wane.

Some bankers also

said residential mortgage activity for both home acquisitions and refinancings
picked up in March but had slowed since.
Commercial bank lending officers said lending will grow as an economic
recovery gets under way, but they do not expect the rebound to be strong.

A slow

expansion of business activity will restrain growth in all categories of lending,
according to bankers.

In particular, they predict that consumer and residential

real estate lending will not pick up vigorously until employment starts to trend
up.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Signs of bottoming out are apparent in the Fourth District,

even though the unemployment rate rose and manufacturing production fell more
than nationally in recent months.

However, the worst of the cutbacks in

output and employment appear to be over, and District respondents report some
signs of revival in activity.

Auto output and sales apparently are recovering

slowly from their depressed levels.

Retail sales strengthened in April, and

real consumer spending is expected to pick up this quarter.
demand and housing sales have strengthened.

Mortgage loan

Depositories report an ample

supply of funds, but loans are still generally weak, except for mortgages.
Regional Economy.

The unemployment rate in Ohio rose half a percentage

point above the national rate in both February and March, after six months
when performance was better than in the nation.

However, the latest spread

between Ohio and the nation was small relative to previous recessions.
Moreover, total employment rose in Ohio, but the increase was more than offset
by a jump in the labor force.

Nonfarm payroll employment has been relatively

unchanged since last fall, in contrast to the nation.
Other information suggests an early end to the recession.

The leading

economic indicators for Ohio held steady for the third straight month in
February, following a five-month decline.

Moreover, the March survey of 450

CPAs in Ohio reported that business in the State is close to a trough and is
"poised for recovery."

IV-2

Manufacturing.

Cutbacks in manufacturing production in recent months have

been sharper in the District than nationally.

Industry sources believe,

however, that the worst of the reductions were in the first quarter.
Auto production has already begun a slow recovery from recent depressed
levels, and industry analysts expect gradual improvements in both output and
sales through the balance of this year.

According to one estimate, weak auto

production last quarter trimmed the real GNP growth rate by about one
percentage point, and auto output this quarter will contribute either no
change or a slight gain to overall output this quarter.

Scattered recalls of

production workers are also reported, although layoffs of white-collar workers
continue.

Auto production remains at a pace below sales, but dealers are

reported to be satisfied with a smaller-than-usual 60-day supply of
inventories.
Steel producers operated at about 70% of capacity in the first quarter,
and expect operations in a 70% to 75% range this quarter.

Steel inventory

liquidation is likely to be somewhat larger than last quarter, according to
some industry sources.

Some specialty steel producers report that

their operations have been faring better than the overall industry, and better
than in past recessions.
Producers of traditional capital goods report that contraction in most
industry groups has been less than in past recessions.

Machine tool business

has been holding up better than in previous recessions, but largely because of
strong demand from the aerospace industry and exports that have masked
weakness in some standard products.

IV-3

A slide in industrial equipment shipments that began last fall appears to
have leveled out in the first quarter, but the increase in April is less than
seasonal, according to one producer.

Also, heavy-duty truck output now

appears to be bottoming out at extremely low levels, but is expected to
gradually revive in the second half of 1991 as the pace of industrial
activity quickens.
Construction machinery sales continue to decline and have not yet reached
their trough, according to some industry sources.

The weakness has been

centered in domestic markets, especially in commercial and residential
construction.
Most respondents expect a smaller decline in real producers' equipment
output in the second quarter than in the first, especially if motor vehicle
output increases enough to offset further expected declines in the information
processing and industrial machinery industries.
Consumer Spending.

District respondents are encouraged by the

strengthening in retail sales in April, except in those areas affected by auto
layoffs.

They expect a revival in real consumer spending this quarter,

supported especially by a higher volume of car sales than last quarter.

One

retailer reports a double-digit year-to-year increase in sales in the last two
months, apparently because of its more aggressive advertising and sales
promotions.

Sales of appliances have picked up, according to a major

retailer and a producer.

Some also cite a step-up in use of consumer credit

since March, which one retailer attributed to a no-interest-charge promotion.

IV-4

New car dealers report that sales have been strengthening slowly over the
past several weeks, and they expect continued but slow growth through the
year.

Dealers believe that new car sales have been dampened by increased

credit tightening by banks and auto finance companies in recent months.

They

also believe that sales of "nearly new" cars purchased at auction from
national car rental companies have dampened new car sales.
Credit Market Developments.

Banks and thrifts generally report that an

ample supply of credit is available, but that loan demand is still weak.
Thrifts in Ohio are said to be highly liquid and are anticipating a
better-than-seasonal pickup in housing sales this spring.

Some report a

significant revival in home sales since late March, especially in Cincinnati
and Columbus.

Mortgage loan activity has picked up in recent weeks, but a

large volume is for refinancing, as mortgage holders substitute fixed-rate
mortgages for adjustable-rate mortgages.

Some thrifts also report deposits

have risen each month this year.
Banks report ample funds for lending, and note a pickup in mortgage loans
in the last two months.

So far, the rise has been less than seasonal in

Cleveland, but more than seasonal in Pittsburgh.
are still scrutinized by lenders.

Commercial real estate loans

Some developers and builders of strip

shopping malls claim that tight credit standards since early last summer have
choked commercial construction, but acknowledge that financing is available
for commercial buildings that are nearly pre-leased to creditworthy tenants,
and when developers have an equity interest.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District business and financial conditions apparently improved in March
and early April.

Commercial and industrial loan demand, housing starts and

sales, and tourist activity all rose.

Consumer spending and manufacturing

activity were steady, after several months of decline, and export activity
outpaced import activity at District ports.

The return of military personnel

boosted some local economies, and agricultural conditions remained strong.
Consumer Spending
Responses to our regular survey of retailers suggested that retail
activity was steady in recent weeks.

Retailers reported little change in sales

and shopper traffic, although over half believed that the end of the Gulf War
benefited sales.

Employment apparently decreased slightly, while wholesale and

retail prices evidently increased somewhat.
Retailers expressed optimism about their prospects in coming months.
three-fourths expected their traffic and sales to rise.

Over

On balance, survey

respondents expected retail employment to increase in the months ahead.
Manufacturing
Our survey of manufacturers indicated that District factory activity
remained stable in past weeks.

Respondents reported little change in

shipments, orders, and order backlogs but noted increases in export orders.
One-fourth said the conclusion of the Gulf war had led to improved sales, while
most of the rest indicated that the war's end had had no effect on their
businesses.

Most manufacturers noted no change in the costs of their raw

V-2
materials or in the prices of their finished products.

Manufacturers'

inventories of raw materials and finished goods and manufacturing employment
apparently declined over the survey period.
Manufacturers' forecasts for the coming months were quite optimistic.
Nearly three-fourths believed shipments and new orders would increase over the
next six months; only a few foresaw a decline.

Similarly, three-fourths of the

respondents expected conditions in their local areas and in the nation to
improve in the next six months.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, Hampton Roads
(Norfolk)--indicated that exports were generally unchanged in March from
February and that imports were generally lower.

Compared with a year ago,

export activity was higher and import activity was lower.

Port representatives

expected exports to increase faster than imports throughout the spring and
summer.
Real Estate
A telephone survey of residential home builders and realtors suggested
that housing activity rose moderately in recent weeks.
builders reported increased customer interest.

Over two-thirds of the

Most of these builders

attributed the heightened interest to greater consumer confidence and to the
return of U.S. military personnel.

A few builders said that lower interest

rates contributed to the rise in shopper interest.
Half of the builders reported that housing starts increased in the last
month; only a few said that starts declined.

Builders noted that almost all

homes were built under contract rather than for speculative purposes and that
most of these homes were in the middle price range.
A majority of realtors indicated that home sales in their local areas

V-3
increased in the last month, while the remainder noted no change.

Realtors

commented that sales of owner-occupied homes exceeded sales of new homes.
Almost half of the realtors said that middle-priced homes sold most readily,
while slightly fewer said that lower-priced homes had been the easiest to sell.
Home prices appeared to be stable across all price ranges.
Tourism
A telephone survey of District hotels, motels, and resorts indicated that
tourist activity improved in March from February and was better than in recent
springs.

Most respondents experienced increased bookings and attributed them

to the end of the Gulf war, good weather, and returning customers.

A majority

of tourist industry representatives expected tourist activity to increase in
coming months.

Other District contacts confirmed this upbeat picture.

Finance
A telephone survey of District financial institutions suggested no change
in commercial and industrial loans closed compared with recent weeks.
for new loans, however, apparently picked up.

Demand

Half of the lenders reported

flat loan demand, but most of the rest reported an increase.

Lenders

attributed the increase to "bottled-up demand," the resolution of the Gulf war,
and prospects for improved economic conditions.

Respondents reported that

borrowers were primarily larger, established customers rather than smaller, new
businesses.

Interest rates on loans apparently changed little over the survey

period.
Most financial institutions reported that the delinquency rate on their
loans stayed about the same or decreased in recent weeks.

Lenders cautioned,

however, that the improvement in delinquency rates may have reflected stronger
collection efforts rather than improved economic conditions.

Return of Troops
The return of military personnel from the Gulf boosted economic activity,
especially in areas near military bases.

Business leaders indicated that

economic activity--particularly sales of homes, cars, and other big-ticket
items--in military-dependent areas had not yet returned to pre-conflict levels,
but that retail traffic was up sharply.

One respondent reported that

apartments in his area were fully occupied in contrast to the 30 percent
vacancy rate in early March.

Other contacts reported a pickup in hiring

activity and a drop in unemployment insurance claims.
Agriculture
Generally favorable weather led to active planting in early April
according to District farm analysts.

Corn planting was ahead of a year ago in

most parts of the District, and vegetable and melon crops were on schedule in
the Carolinas.

Small grains were in good condition because of favorable

temperatures and moisture, but some areas reported powdery mildew in wheat.
Peaches and apples were i.n bloom, and no substantial frost damage was reported.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

Although the positive signs observed last month have been reinforced,

reports from businesses contacted in April continue to give a mixed picture of the southeastern
economy. Retailers and realtors report that the post-war sales pickup has been maintained, but
most are concerned that recent improvements are linked more to "catch up" spending and good
spring weather rather than to any sustainable improvement in the economy.

Sales of homes

continued to improve, but builders are skeptical about whether the recovery is sustainable. While
manufacturing levels were, on balance, below or barely equal to those seen a year ago, most
producers of home furnishings have seen a recent pickup in orders. Freight haulers say that
April shipments are up across-the-board,

suggesting evidence of a possible turnaround.

Meanwhile, reports from bankers mirror those of businesses, indicating a slight increase in credit
demand and some easing of credit conditions in recent weeks.

Reports on prices indicated

declines in several categories of materials.
Retail Sales: Retailers reported a significant improvement in March and early April
sales from earlier this year, although volume remained below or only equalled year-ago levels.
However, they attributed much of the improvement to normal seasonal patterns. Several contacts
also expressed fear that the sales improvement during recent weeks may be only "catch up"
spending without any permanence.

Most merchants continue to keep inventories lean, waiting

until there are further signs that recent improvements will be sustained.

However, bankers

indicate that some retailers, acting on sales expectations, are requesting a temporary increase in
their lines of credit for planned additions to inventory. Auto dealers reported that the sharp postwar sales pickup has been maintained through March and early April, although units sold were
still below year-ago levels.

On a brighter note, the tourism and convention businesses have

shown signs of a rebound with foreign visitors returning after a war-related reduction.

VI-2
Manufacturing: Although construction materials manufacturing has continued to slip,
home furnishings producers have seen significant improvements from their depressed orders of
recent months.

The household fabrics segment of the textile industry has reportedly posted

increased orders that have resulted in extended mill operating schedules over the past few weeks.
A manufacturer of replacement air conditioners and parts has received several sizable orders as
distributors rebuild inventories depleted in recent days. Indicative of a more general turnaround,
a packaging manufacturer reports a slight increase in orders recently and has responded by
rebuilding inventory levels. Reports from truck and rail transporters give further evidence of an
upturn, showing a recent pickup in total shipment volume and noting that industrial chemicals
are especially strong. However, this increase was, in part, attributed to stock building because
of railroad strike worries.
Other producers, however, report continued declining or flat sales and persistent soft
orders for March and early April. A telecommunications company reports no letup in its overall
business decline and anticipates additional layoffs of a work force already reduced by 20 percent
over the past nine months.

Steel producers, auto-related manufacturers, apparel, and some

apparel fabric producers have also responded to continuing bleak sales with further layoffs and
have indicated there are no plans to step up output at this time. Paper, pulp, and linerboard
producers also report continuing slow sales and are delaying capital expansions until economic
conditions improve. A slowdown is reported in exports of poultry, grain, and coal, although
phosphate exports show strength. District banks verify that current production levels in several
industries are flat to down. However, bankers report that most manufacturers have dropped their
"doomsday" scenarios, and, as a result, have stabilized or slightly increased inventory levels in
recent months.

VI-3

Financial Services: Business and consumer loan demand is reported by bankers to
remain weak, although some observed improvements recently. One banker reported a slight
pickup in overall loan demand while another reports that retail business loan demand has
improved as a result of retailers' increased sales expectations. Some contacts report easing of
credit standards, particularly for small businesses with good track records, but most feel that tight
lending conditions continue to restrict loan growth.

Business contacts confirm this result,

reporting that a number of large suppliers continue to serve as a "credit line" for customers by
extending accounts receivables maturities and cosigning bank loans for clients.
Construction: Realtors indicate that the rise in both existing and new home sales
reported earlier this year has continued through March and early April. Although builders that
were contacted have responded with modest increases in residential building, they remain
skeptical about the strength and sustainability of the housing recovery.

This skepticism is

reflected in reports from building materials suppliers and manufacturers whose sales continue to
decline.
Wages and Prices:

Most contacts reported subdued wage increases.

However,

shortages and wage increases in markets for certain types of workers in oil producing areas and
health services are said to continue. Businesses report lower input prices for linerboard, boxes,
and newsprint, while steel prices have dropped dramatically in response to the reduced demand
from building and auto industries. Natural gas prices have plummeted to a five-year low causing
some producers to scale back production and to review exploration plans.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Contacts indicate the rate of contraction in the Seventh District economy slowed in
March and early April. Reports from District retailers suggest that consumer spending remained sluggish,
although customer traffic gains continued. Residential real estate activity improved significantly. District
auto dealers reported higher traffic levels, but new auto sales remained soft. At the same time, new orders
received by District suppliers to the auto industry improved, brightening the outlook for production gains
in the second quarter. Other District manufacturers report continued slow but stabilizing levels of
activity, in line with results posted by purchasing managers' surveys. The financial condition of the
District's banking sector is generally in better shape than the nation on average, and one large bank
indicated a shift in April towards a more aggressive lending posture.
Retail Sales. Several District retailers indicated that real consumer spending may have declined
slightly in March and early April, as improved consumer confidence has yet to translate into solid sales
gains for retailers. District consumer spending no longer shows as much strength, relative to the national
average, as it did through 1990. A large general merchandise retailer reported continued improvement in
traffic and customer attitudes. However, sales continued to run below year-earlier levels. Consumer
buying is increasingly sophisticated, according to this contact, leading to a more competitive pricing
environment. A large discount chain, previously reporting consistent sales gains, revealed that sales in
March fell below year-earlier levels. A contact with this firm stated that gardening equipment sales in
early April were showing solid growth, however, and these sales have tended to be a good leading
indicator of overall Spring spending.
Residential Real Estate. While household durable goods spending remained weak, residential
real estate activity improved appreciably in March. Higher levels of inquiries reported by District realtors
in the past few months have been followed by significant sales gains. Improved affordability, lower
interest rates, and new governmental assistance programs for first-time home buyers contributed to the
turnaround. A large realtor in the Chicago area reported that March residential sales were the highest for
that month in the past ten years.
Autos. New motor vehicle sales remained slow in March and early April. District dealers
continued to speak of improved traffic and customer attitudes, while new car sales gains continue to be
limited. Several contacts indicated that new car sales were being constrained by tight financing from both
bank and non-bank lenders. Down payment requirements have risen sharply in recent months, in many

VII-2
cases posting a three-fold increase from last year. Efforts to shorten loan maturities also have impacted
sales. Some lenders are putting increasing pressure on dealers to share in losses generated by higher
defaults on previous loans, according to an industry source, causing some dealers to pass along fewer new
loan applications. Several lenders also reported cutting back on the number of dealers from whom they
accept loan applications.
Several dealers expected improved traffic to translate into sales gains soon, and contribute to
some improvement in their orders to automakers. Auto production is being spread around to more lines
operating at slower rates, according to one industry source, which could indicate that overall capacity is
being prepared for stepped-up production. Assembly schedules for the second quarter were left unrevised
in early April, marking the first time since last July that planners did not cut schedules from levels
announced a month earlier. One auto industry analyst contended that the announced 5.5 million unit
annual rate for second quarter production (still a low rate, but above that for the first quarter) could well
be exceeded. A firm providing metal painting services for new auto parts reported that orders "bounced
back" in early April. The firm's production is now running only 5 percent below year-ago sales, after
experiencing production runs 40 percent below last year as late as mid-March. Steel producers also
reported new improvement in orders from automakers in recent weeks.
Manufacturing. Reports by non-auto manufacturers generally indicate continued weakness in
shipments and production. A large manufacturer of electrical equipment reported that sales declined
significantly in the first quarter from a strong year-earlier period. After plunging in February, District
steel production improved in the month of March, then flattened out in early April, at a level nearly 20
percent below year-earlier levels. A District steel manufacturer reported that industry shipments
generally remained firm relative to production, as steel producers worked to reduce inventory built in
advance of a threatened yet unrealized steelworker strike. A large capital goods manufacturer reported
that machinery orders were "still on the weak side," but the overall impact of the recession remained mild.
However, this contact stated that overseas revenues declined significantly in the first quarter, as slower
growth in Western Europe and increased political uncertainty in the Soviet Union began to impact sales.
A large manufacturer of a wide variety of specialty materials and office supplies, citing weaker foreign
economies and the strength of the dollar, expects to export fewer goods in 1991.
Employment data and purchasing managers' surveys support producers' reports suggesting that
the District manufacturing sector remains weak, but that the rate of decline has slowed since February.

VII-3
District manufacturing employment continued to decline in February (the latest month available), but
recent job losses have been in line with the results posted in the nation as a whole. Excluding Michigan,
District manufacturing employment has been relatively stable in recent months. District purchasing
managers' surveys indicate slowing rates of contraction. The index produced by the Chicago survey
bottomed out in January. While the index continued to indicate contraction in March, some of the best
improvement from January to March was evident in the new orders component. The Detroit index also
improved from January to March, yet remained at a low level relative to the Chicago results. Most of the
improvement in Detroit in March came from the automotive sector, described in the survey report as
"desperately weak" earlier in the year.
Credit Developments. Reports from District bankers indicate that new lending activity is still
weak, but at least one banker anticipates improvement in the near future. District banks are generally
healthier than the national average, with lower exposure to losses on real estate and merger lending than
those incurred by some banks in other regions. Several large District banks reported no further tightening
in credit standards since January for nonmerger business, commercial real estate, or consumer lending.
One major bank recently completed a bond issue for the purpose of expanding lending activity over the
next few months.
Several reports by nonfinancial corporations indicated increasing difficulty in collecting
receivables and financing inventory, but several small manufacturers reported continued access to bank
credit. A large diversified manufacturer reported that a growing number of customers are slowing their
payments, in response to slower payments customers themselves are experiencing. A District auto-parts
manufacturer reported that most customers continue to pay reliably, including one distributor who
recently reorganized in a leveraged buy-out. However, payments from several leveraged auto-parts
retailers recently slowed, according to this source. Outside of commercial real estate, difficulty obtaining
credit appears to be concentrated in retailing. A large national discount chain reported that a growing
number of suppliers are having difficulty obtaining short-term credit, especially for inventory. However,
several small manufacturers in Wisconsin, Illinois and Indiana reported continued access to bank funding,
despite weak sales so far this year. One small machining shop recently was able to obtain a bank loan for
the purchase of a tool costing one-third of its expected sales this year, in advance of a yet-to-be released
customer order.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Economic
durables

in

the

are

present

retail,

District

Some

manufacturing.

conclusive,
estate,

activity

in

tourism

remains

signs

many

of

recovery,

sectors

and natural

weak,

including

resources.

especially

though

far

residential

in

from
real

Loan growth

at large

sales

general

District banks is flat.
Consumer Spending
Some

contacts

report

merchandise--particularly

that

retail
or

promoted

heavily

of

goods--have

discounted

picked up slightly.

Others note

that while

their

sales

declines

stopped and consumer

traffic

increased,

there

is

evidence of a

sales upturn.

has

no

have

Sales tax revenue data indicate that sales in Missouri

have stabilized after declining for most of 1990.

No noticeable increase

in

sales have

new car sales was reported,

although used car

improved in

several areas.
Manufacturing
Overall
activity
Missouri

in

manufacturing
some

conditions

industries

purchasing managers

and

firms

report

sectors

is

flat

or

has

to

weaken,

stabilized

that vendor

of new orders received have declined.
manufacturing

continue

although

or

lead times

expanded.

and the rate

Production in most major durables

declining.

Several

car

and

truck

assembly plants have continued to experience intermittent layoffs, but
production

at

plants

making

vans

and

sports/utility

vehicles

has

stabilized.

The national

auto sales

decline has

reduction in

Missouri

the mining

and smelting of lead used in

auto

batteries.

An

close

May,

in

automaker

plans

to

one

contributed

assembly

to a

plant

in

sharp

VIII-2

eliminating 1,700 jobs, but expects to add a third shift of 1,000 workers
in

in

early 1992

facing

steelmakers,
inventories,

a second plant,
declining

a pickup

pending

orders

have ordered layoffs.

and,

in

in

some

demand.
cases,

Some
rising

One large appliance factory has cut

production sharply while another,

having cut production

sharply last

year, has avoided further cutbacks.
Nondurables
producers

manufacturing

of textile

and apparel

conditions

also

are

mixed.

Many

face weak market conditions,

and a

chemicals producer reports no increased demand from the homebuilding or
auto sectors.
reportedly

On the other hand, poultry and other food processors are

doing

well.

Demand

for

paper

used

by

advertisers

has

softened, but orders of paper products for food packaging and foreign
markets are rising; paper mills are being built and expanded in Kentucky
and Arkansas.
Services and Tourism
While job

growth is

sluggish in

most services

industries,

the

number of health services workers continues to increase moderately, with
gains reported in all major metropolitan areas.
has

accelerated

in

Missouri.

Because

of

Hospital construction
the

expansion

of

its

international operations, one overnight express shipping firm has avoided
any substantial declines in its operations.

An airport expansion in the

Evansville, Indiana, area is expected to generate many new service jobs.
Tourism

activity

is

stronger than, last year.

expected

to be

as

strong

as,

or

slightly

Contacts believe that many cautious consumers

will shun overseas travel and spend their money closer to home, boosting
domestic

tourism.

year-earlier levels.
mixed.

While

more

Hotel

occupancy

rates

in

Arkansas

are

above

Reports regarding tourism in Missouri, however, are
inquiries

regarding

tourist

activities

have

been

VIII-3

received, a theme park reports that some corporations have been hesitant
to commit to bookings, given weak economic conditions.
Construction, Real Estate and Finance
Contacts

in

St.

Louis

and Little

Rock

report

increased buyer

interest in recent months, primarily because of the end of the Persian
single-family

Nonetheless,

Gulf war and the decline in mortgage rates.

housing starts are well below their year-earlier levels and construction
especially in

employment remains weak,
market,

in

and

employment

doing well in

is

contrast,

St.

sales.

Some

Louis.

The western Kentucky

terms of starts,

builders

report

construction
obtaining

difficulty

financing from banks and thrifts for pre-sold as well as "spec" homes.
Contacts report that the lower-end/first-time homebuyer segment of the
market is

the strongest,

with the upper-end/move-up

segment still

fairly

weak.
Total loans on the books of large District banks showed no change
in

March

after a slight February decline.

Real estate

loans rose 1.8

Commercial and consumer

percent after declining 4.7 percent in February.
loans both were down slightly in March.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
District

coal

production

declined moderately

reflecting mild weather conditions.
weaker output than a year earlier,
anticipated rebound
expectations

of

in

the U.S.

increased

as well as rising inventories.

consumption

conditions are generally good to excellent.
schedule

in

most

areas.

Farmers

recent months,

Likewise, lumber producers report

housing market,

lumber

in

the

has

led to

future.

Crop

Spring planting is ahead of

continue

livestock prices relative to grain prices.

in

however,

An

to

benefit

from

strong

The outlook for cotton is

favorable because of increased world demand and rising prices.

IX- 1
NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
Ninth District economic conditions have been uneven. Labor market conditions have declined
in much of the District with the only bright spots being North and South Dakota. Automobile sales
continue to be depressed relative to a year ago, though there are signs of improvement. Housing
sales have rebounded, but housing construction remains below its 1980's levels. Conditions in
manufacturing and resource-related industries have been mixed.
Employment

Labor market conditions were mixed in the District, with North and South Dakota continuing
to buck the national trend, while the rest of the District generally deteriorated. Unemployment rates
in North Dakota fell to 4.6 per cent in February from 5.0 per cent a year ago, while in South Dakota
they went to 3.9 from 4.1 per cent over the same period. North and South Dakota's strength was
mirrored in job creation, with February's number of employed rising 2.4 and 3.3 per cent,
respectively, relative to a year ago.

This job growth in North Dakota occurred primarily in

manufacturing and trade, with employment growing 7.3 and 2.5 per cent, respectively, in February
over their year ago levels. South Dakota also showed growth in the trade sector, but additionally
construction employment was up by 13.5 per cent in February relative to the same time last year.
The unemployment rate in Minnesota rose to 6.6 per cent in February, up from 5.3 per cent a year
ago, while employment was essentially unchanged in March from its level of a year ago.
Additionally, the Minneapolis--St. Paul help-wanted advertising index was also down 30.1 per cent
in February relative to a year ago. Unemployment rates were also up in Montana and the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan in February relative to their year ago levels--7.5 per cent from 5.9, and 12.3
per cent from 9.9, respectively.

This is somewhat surprising in the case of Montana since

IX-2
employment rose 2.4 per cent over this same period.

Labor market conditions were mixed in

western Wisconsin.
Consumer Spending
District retailers of general merchandise report sharply higher sales figures in March as
opposed to a year ago, but this was caused in large part by the fact that Easter fell in March this year
and April last year.

In February retailers had reported lower sales relative to a year ago in

comparable stores, though Minnesota state sales tax receipts were almost 2 per cent higher relative
to a year ago. The situation will not become clear until April figures become available, though some
retailers have expressed optimism about the summer and fall.
New car and truck sales generally have been weak so far this year, in some cases year-to-date
sales were down as much as 25 to 30 per cent relative to a year ago. As a result, several dealerships
in the District have gone out of business. There have been some positive reports for the first 10
days of April, with one dealer reporting new car sales 10 per cent higher than a year ago, and there
is guarded optimism about the rest of the year.
Housing has been depressed in the District due in large part to the depressed market in the
Minneapolis--St. Paul area, with permits down 14 per cent in February relative to a year ago. (A
recent HUD study foresees demand for new housing in the Twin Cities area falling by 2 or 3 per
cent over the next two years.) However, housing sales in the District were higher in March, with
sales in Minneapolis--St. Paul 12 per cent higher in March relative to a year ago.
Tourism activity has generally been moderate to good. The number of crossings over the
Mackinac Bridge onto the Upper Peninsula of Michigan set a new record in January, up 1.2 per cent
from a year ago.

Tourism has been strong in South Dakota, especially in the Black Hills and

Badlands areas. The popularity of the movie, "Dances With Wolves," which was filmed in South

IX-3
Dakota, and the fiftieth anniversary of Mount Rushmore in July are expected to have a positive
impact. The outlook for the summer season is positive, especially with gas prices staying low.
Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the District's construction industry have been mixed. The continuing overhang
of office space in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area has depressed local construction activity.
Overall conditions in the District's manufacturing industries have been poor of late. An index
of Minnesota economic indicators declined only slightly from its year ago level in January, however
manufacturing employment in the state was down almost 3 per cent in March from its year ago level.
Resource-Related Industries
Ninth District conditions of resource-related industries have been mixed. The Minnesota
index of prices received by farmers rose by almost 2 per cent during the first 15 days of March, but
was still 5.6 per cent below its year ago level, due in large part to the fall in dairy and crop prices.
However, cattle and hog prices are at record levels. Precipitation has been below normal in most
of the District. South Dakota, in particular, has had between 40 and 60 per cent of normal rainfall
thus far this year.
The District's mining industry conditions have been fairly good. However, the oil business
continues to decline with employment the lowest in years and drilling only in proven fields.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Growth in the Tenth District economy has increased slightly,

due to modest improvements in retail sales and housing activity.

Continued

strength in manufacturers' export sales and in livestock prices has also
helped the district economy.

The advance in growth, however, has been limited

by sluggish capital spending on district farms and slower drilling activity in
district oil fields.
Retail Sales.
months.

Retail sales have improved slightly over the past three

Most of the gain has occurred in apparel sales, while home

furnishings sales continue to languish.

Most retailers are satisfied with

inventory levels and are continuing to keep them low.

Because retailers

expect no further improvement in sales, prices and inventories are expected to
remain flat.
Auto sales have improved slightly in most district states over the last
Although adequate dealer financing is available, some potential buyers

month.

are having difficulty getting loans.

Most dealers have been trimming

inventories, but expected sales increases could soon lead to rising
inventories.
Manufacturing.
prices.

Purchasing agents report moderate increases in input

Agents expect prices to continue rising even though materials are

readily available.

Manufacturers generally continue to trim inventories and

operate below capacity.

Export sales have picked up in recent months, and

some exporters expect further increases during the remainder of year.
Energy.

Stable oil prices since the end of the Persian Gulf conflict

are fostering continued development of existing reserves but are not
stimulating much exploration.

The average number of operating drilling rigs

X-2
in district states fell from 263 in February to 256 in March.

Nonetheless,

the district rig count remained about 13 percent above its year-ago level.
Some district oil field supply firms expect to benefit from the rebuilding of
Kuwait.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Housing starts over most of the district

were up from the previous month due in part to warmer weather.

Starts are

above year-ago levels for most builders in the district and are expected to
end the year slightly higher than last year.
readily available, and prices are steady.
prices remain stable.

Construction materials are

New home sales are improving, but

Builders expect small gains in sales for this year

compared with last year.
Reflecting the pickup in home sales, mortgage demand has increased in
the district.
increasing.

Commitments have increased recently and should continue
Mortgage rates have stabilized and are expected to remain flat

over the next several months.
Banking.
month.

Loan demand at district banks was unchanged or higher last

Demand for commercial and industrial loans, consumer loans, home

mortgage loans, and home equity loans was higher at several banks.
contrast, demand for construction loans continued to fall.

In

Demand for

commercial real estate loans and agricultural loans was mixed.

Most banks

report unchanged loan-deposit ratios during the past month.
The prime rate and consumer lending rates are unchanged, and banks do
not expect a near-term change in lending rates.
lending unchanged from last month.

All banks reported terms of

Deposit behavior varied across reporting

banks, but the largest number of banks reported no change in total deposits
during the past month.

Demand deposits and large CDs were down slightly.

In

X-3
contrast, NOW accounts, MMDAs, IRA and Keogh accounts, and small time and
savings deposits were up.
Agriculture.

Warm weather has encouraged rapid development of the

district's winter wheat crop.

The crop is generally in good condition in most

areas, although dry growing conditions are beginning to affect the crop in
parts of Kansas and Oklahoma.
the district.

Tillage for spring crops is underway throughout

Corn planting has begun in Missouri, but planting of corn and

milo in the western parts of the district has been delayed by dry soil
conditions.
Despite the continued strength in cattle prices, little expansion in
district breeding herds is occurring.

Many young cattle that might otherwise

be added to breeding herds are being fattened for slaughter in feedlots.
district lenders are not encouraging ranchers to expand their herds.

Most

Instead,

lenders are encouraging ranchers to maintain the size of their herds by
balancing the number of cattle held for herd replacement with the number sold
for slaughter.
The pace of capital spending by district farmers has increased only
slightly from the sluggish pace last fall.

Spending by crop producers is

somewhat more restrained than spending by livestock producers, reflecting the
continued divergence in crop and livestock incomes.

Low crop prices and

smaller government payments are holding down crop incomes.
prices, however, continue to buoy livestock incomes.

Strong livestock

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

District industries are feeling the negative effects of a slowing
national economy and are no longer benefitting from the positive effects of
higher oil prices.
to slightly down.

Compared with the last survey, overall output is unchanged
Service

Manufacturing orders have decreased a little.

sector growth is positive but weak.

Retail sales have been flat to down.

Auto sales have fallen and sales are now well below last year's level.
oil and gas prices have dampened production and drilling efforts.

Low

Growth

continues in Houston, but at a slower rate than during recent surveys.
Respondents in construction and in some manufacturing industries expect
positive effects from Kuwait's rebuilding.
Industries that serve the

Manufacturing orders have declined slightly.

entire nation have seen a drop in orders from outside the District, but orders
within the District are edging up.

Demand for construction-related products

such as lumber, stone, shell, clay, glass, primary metals and some fabricated
metals are below a year earlier.

The demand for glass and primary metals has
Orders for chemicals have

also been reduced by weakness in the auto industry.
declined and respondents have excess inventories.
to have reduced the demand for plastics.

The U.S. slowdown is said

Petroleum refiners say that product

prices and sales volumes are stable, and that low oil prices have raised
margins to their highest levels since 1980.

Although reduced drilling

activity and low natural gas prices are said to have caused sales of oil field
machinery to drop recently, demand remains unchanged or slightly up from a
year earlier.

Paper producers note that, while sales volumes have increased,

profits have been squeezed because of heavy price competition.
continue to rise and demand is above a year earlier.

Apparel orders

Demand for electronics

XI-2

is flat to slightly up.

Sales of high-end microprocessors are strong while

orders for low-end microprocessors are sluggish.

Food products sales have

shown little change.
Growth in business services has been slow but positive, and most
respondents do not expect expansion to return to robust rates in the near
future.

Prices are stable but few firms expect to be hiring much in 1991.

Demand has weakened at some temporary firms.
advertising and law firms.
District airlines.

Demand is flat for accounting,

Lower fuel costs and fuller planes have benefitted

Houston is reporting more strength in services than most

areas of the District.
Retail sales are flat to down, and sales of consumer durables have been
particularly sluggish.

Retailers continue to mark down selling prices, but

say that inventories are at acceptable levels.

Sales in the Houston area have

slowed but remain positive and continue to outperformed those in the rest of
the District.
District motor vehicle sales are markedly below a year earlier.
Fort Worth metropolitan area sales dipped 5 percent in March.
flat while truck sales dropped 19 percent.

Auto sales were

Overall, year-to-date sales in the

Dallas-Fort Worth area are now 10 percent below last year.
Houston fell 26 percent in March.

Dallas-

Auto sales in

Year-to-date sales in Houston are 14

percent below last year.
Energy extraction has slowed.

Respondents say that low oil and gas

prices are dampening production and drilling efforts.

The end of the Middle

East crisis has brought stability to the oil market, albeit at lower prices.
Oil prices have settled around $20 per barrel.

Although this price is

XI-3

considerably less than oil prices during the crisis, it is little changed from
a year ago.

Natural gas prices, however, are the lowest they have been in

several years.
Construction activity in the Eleventh District remains very sluggish.
Growth has been slight to zero since last year and some respondents say that
tight credit and uncertainty over the future effects of RTC behavior are
significant reasons.

Nevertheless, construction has been performing more

positively in the District than in the nation.

Single-family residential

building has lately increased a little, but remains below a year earlier.
Multi-family building has also recently turned up somewhat.
construction has shown little recent change.

Nonresidential

Nonbuilding construction

activity is also slow, but is slightly above last year's level.
District agricultural producers have begun to plant their crops.

Prices

for cotton, grain sorghum and soybeans have increased and producers are
indicating that they intend to plant more acres of these crops.

If full

acreage intentions are planted, this will be the largest upland acreage for
Texas since 1981.

Planting intentions for corn, soybeans and sunflowers are

down from last year.
ago.

Texas winter wheat acreage is 7 percent less than a year

Overall crop prices remain 2 percent below last year's level.

Livestock

prices continue to increase, up 2 percent from last year and up 3 percent from
February's level.

XII-1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO
Summary
Economic conditions in the Twelfth District are characterized by continued weakness in
California offset partly by relatively strong activity in other states. The outlook of western business
leaders, however, continues to improve. Materials prices are reported unchanged or down slightly, and
wage increases remain moderate. Consumer spending continues to be sluggish, with little pick-up
noted since the end of the Gulf War. Agriculture is hindered by drought conditions in some parts of
the District. Construction and real estate markets remain soft, but some improvement has appeared in
sales and prices in California. District financial institutions report generally slow conditions, although
lower interest rates have spurred mortgage refinancing activity.
Business Sentiment
The economic expectations of western business leaders continued to improve in April. Fortyseven percent of those sampled expect improvement in housing starts in the coming four quarters, and
a similar percentage expect increased consumer spending. This is a strong pick-up from the end of
1990 when over 90 percent of respondents expected conditions to worsen in these sectors. Over 50
percent of business leaders continue to project improvement in the foreign trade balance and inflation
during the next four quarters. Even with the more positive outlook, over 65 percent of respondents
still expect unemployment to increase and over 75 percent continue to foresee GNP growth of less
than 2.5 percent in the coming four quarters.
Wages and Prices
Prices for many Twelfth District products and services are reported to be unchanged or down
slightly. Many reports suggest that declines in fuel prices have helped to bring down overall prices.
The Salt Lake City and Boise area CPIs declined in the first quarter of 1991. In Southern California,
one report indicates that the price of newsprint is 2 percent below last year's level. Wage increases

XII - 2

remain moderate. Most respondents report wage gains of only 3 to 4 percent, with minimal wage
pressure on large employers currently involved in labor negotiations. Increases of as much as 10
percent continue to be reported for health care and tuition costs, however.
Retail Trade and Services
Consumer spending in the Twelfth District remains sluggish, with only a few reports indicating
a significant pick-up since the end of the Gulf War. A food and drug retailer notes some improvement
in sales around Easter, especially outside of California. Auto sales continue weak in the District,
although showroom traffic is reported to have increased steadily since the end of the war. Hawaii's
tourism industry is just beginning to recover from the sharp drop in Japanese visitors earlier this year.
Advertising at television stations in the Pacific Northwest has increased since the end of the war, but
newspaper advertising volume in Southern California remains off 20 percent.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the Twelfth District is relatively solid outside of defense-related
industries. Conditions in the aerospace industry continue to be split, with commercial aerospace
growing while defense-related activity slows. In the Pacific Northwest, shipyards are reporting solid
growth. In Oregon, a helicopter supply firm and a heavy equipment supplier are reported to be
expecting orders associated with the rebuilding of Kuwait. Export demand has boosted sales of
agricultural machinery to Mexico and Brazil.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural and resource industries in the Twelfth District continue to report weak conditions.
In California, the freeze in late December cut citrus fruit production and exports in half and destroyed
many fruit and nut trees. Continued drought conditions in California have caused farmers to cut back
on acreage planted for many crops, including a 15 to 20 percent drop in cotton acreage planted in the
San Joaquin Valley. Prices for many crops affected by the drought are expected to rise, which will

XII - 3
help to offset the impact of the reduced plantings on cash receipts. Grain prices are well below last
year's levels. The cattle industry remains in good shape, but higher commodity costs are reported to
be tightening profit margins.
Forest product industries in the District continue to be hampered by court actions which are
halting federal timber sales. Some pick-up in lumber sales and prices is noted in recent months.
Copper and aluminum prices have fallen recently.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity show signs of improvement in California, and remain
relatively healthy in the Pacific Northwest and Intermountain areas. In California, reports suggest that
home prices are stabilizing. Moreover, sales activity has increased in recent months. Single-family
and condominium sales in Los Angeles are reported to have doubled between February and March.
Home prices are rising moderately in the Pacific Northwest, Idaho, and Utah. Commercial markets are
weak in California as vacancy rates increased in Los Angeles and remained high in other markets.
Some reports suggest that over-capacity will continue to depress commercial construction in Los
Angeles for two to five years. Conversely, reports from Salt Lake City note low vacancy rates and
rising rents.
Financial Institutions
Financial institutions in the Twelfth District report generally sluggish conditions. In Southern
California, loan demand remains slow, while a Silicon Valley banker reports that loan demand is
strong, but deposit growth has fallen off. The decline in interest rates has caused a flood of mortgage
refinancing in the Pacific Northwest. One report indicates that 35 to 40 percent of recent real estate
loan originations have been refinancings.

