SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT
NOVEMBER 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY
First District--Boston

i
I-1

Second District--New York

II-1

Third District--Philadelphia

III-1

Fourth District--Cleveland

IV-1

Fifth District--Richmond
Sixth District--Atlanta

V-1
VI-1

Seventh District--Chicago

VII-1

Eight District--St. Louis

VI-1

Ninth District--Minneapolis

IX-1

Tenth District--Kansas City

X-1

Eleventh District--Dallas
Twelfth District--San Francisco

XI-1
XII-1

i

Summary*
Reports compiled by the Federal Reserve Banks generally suggested flagging momentum in
the economic recovery in October and early November, with most Districts in the middle of the
country indicating continued but slower growth and most other Districts reporting stable to slightly
weaker conditions. Retail sales generally remained sluggish, with several Districts noting that gains
were concentrated in nondurable goods. After improving in September, manufacturing activity
levelled out in most Districts in October and early November. Housing activity expanded, albeit
slowly, in most regions, while commercial construction remained weak. Demand for commercial and
industrial loans remained soft, according to most bankers, while credit standards were generally
unchanged. Most agricultural sources reported higher crop yields and lower prices for both crops and
livestock. Reports on price trends suggested steady to diminished inflation, and discounting was
widely reported in the retail sector. Several Districts stated that contacts remain optimistic about
business conditions in 1992.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales generally remained sluggish in October and early
November. Sources in Atlanta and Cleveland noted that sales gains were concentrated in nondurable
goods, while Dallas, Boston and Kansas City each reported weakness in sales of big-ticket items.
Minneapolis indicated that retail sales have generally been stagnant except for areas close to the
Canadian border, which have benefitted from a surge in cross-border shopping. Minneapolis also
reported a strong tourism season. Richmond noted continued softening in sales. Inventories were
said to be above plan by sources in Chicago, Cleveland, and San Francisco, while contacts in New
York, Atlanta, and Kansas City expressed satisfaction with recent levels. Active discounting was
widely noted, and several reports indicated that discounting was necessary to achieve sales gains.
Reports on new car sales were uniformly weak, with several sources indicating slower showroom
traffic and lower buying interest expressed by customers who do enter the showroom.
*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and based on information collected before
November 25, 1991. This document summarizes comments received from businesses and other
contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

Manufacturing. Manufacturing activity was mixed, with some loss of momentum noted in
regions that reported strengthening in the summer and early fall After rising modestly in the past
several months, manufacturing activity in Philadelphia edged down slightly in recent weeks. About
half of the manufacturing contacts in Boston reported that orders have softened recently, after some
improvement in the summer or early fall. Conditions in the auto industry contributed to some
slowing in the growth expected in the Cleveland and Chicago Districts. Reports received in Atlanta,
Kansas City, and San Francisco generally indicated continued sluggishness. Manufacturing activity
continued to slip in Richmond, according to the bank's survey of local firms, and excess capacity was
most frequently cited as the most important current problem. Reports on conditions in capital goods
industries were mixed in Cleveland and Chicago. Recent layoffs and plant closings in the defense,
computer and consumer electronics industries were noted in St. Louis, although solid demand was
reported for motor vehicles produced in that region (which include minivans). New orders received
by a commercial aircraft producer have softened, according to San Francisco. Continued
sluggishness was noted in industries linked to construction activity by Boston, Philadelphia, Atlanta,
Chicago, and St. Louis, while firms producing goods for housing construction in Dallas reported
some improvement. Purchasing managers' surveys in Buffalo and Rochester revealed mixed but
generally stable conditions in October.
Real Estate/Construction. Housing activity continued to expand at a slow pace. Demand
for existing homes picked up in the New York metropolitan area, particularly among first time home
buyers attracted by lower mortgage interest rates and lower home prices. Reports received by Kansas
City indicate that home sales remain well above year-earlier levels. Several banks noted that
improved sales activity is concentrated in the lower end of the market. Modest improvement in
residential construction was noted in St. Louis and Kansas City, although St. Louis also noted that
weak demand from the housing sector has depressed prices received by a metals producer. Housing
starts remained weak in several markets covered by San Francisco and New York, while Atlanta
noted small increases in activity among home builders. Sales of existing homes softened in parts of

iii
the Chicago District, and home remodelers in the Chicago metropolitan area reported sluggish
demand. Sources generally noted little change in commercial construction among Districts.
Banking. Reports from bankers generally indicated that lending standards for approving
commercial and industrial loan applications remained unchanged in recent months. Demand for
commercial and industrial loans was generally reported to be stable but weak in Richmond,
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago, St. Louis, and Dallas. Bankers contacted by Kansas City stated
that lending demand was steady to slightly higher, improved demand was concentrated in
construction, agriculture, and home mortgage loans, while demand for commercial and industrial
loans decreased. A small pickup in demand for commercial and industrial loans was reported in
Atlanta, although demand still remained well below year-earlier levels. Bankers in Atlanta, New
York, and Dallas stated that high quality loan applications remain difficult to obtain. Chicago noted
that when good loan prospects do appear, competition between lenders has been intense, with the
borrower benefitting from lower rates. Some reports cited instances of borrower difficulty in
obtaining credit. Kansas City stated that some car buyers are finding it difficult to qualify for loans.
Several of San Francisco's respondents cited tight credit as one reason for slow construction activity.
Atlanta noted that auto dealers and construction contractors report continued difficulty obtaining
credit. St. Louis noted that first-time home buyers in one market have found it difficult to qualify for
mortgage loans, in part because of a lack of savings for a downpayment.
Agriculture. Most reports indicated larger-than-expected harvests and high levels of
livestock production, coincident with weaker commodity prices. Chicago reported upward revisions
in estimates for corn and soybean production, and noted that the improved harvest and weakness in
exports have weighed on crop prices. Both Chicago and Kansas City noted weaker livestock prices,
and farm bankers in the Kansas City District expect an increase in the number of problem loans over
the coming year. Weaker livestock and cotton prices led sources in Dallas to revise farm income
projections downward. San Francisco reported that agricultural conditions were generally
satisfactory, although an infestation by the poinsettia whitefly has harmed the winter vegetable crop.

Heavy snowstorms hurt the corn harvest in Minnesota. Above-average yields were reported by St.
Louis and Richmond, although Richmond stated that dry weather has affected recent plantings.
Outlook. Several District reports on business expectations revealed continued optimism for
economic conditions in 1992. Most manufacturing sources in Philadelphia continue to anticipate
growth over the next six months, despite some recent softening. Philadelphia also reported that
bankers' forecasts of commercial and industrial lending growth have increased since earlier in the fall.
Richmond noted that retailers anticipate sales and their own capital expenditures to rise over the next
six months, although some softening was indicated in expectations for holiday season sales. Most
manufacturers contacted by Dallas expect stronger growth in orders next year. However, weaker
sales expectations were indicated by auto industry suppliers in both Cleveland and Chicago, and a
survey conducted by San Francisco showed a moderate increase in the percentage of business leaders
expecting a renewed recession. Sources in Boston expect some pickup in economic activity around
mid-year, but still anticipate a "long, slow haul." A large group of economists who attended a recent
roundtable in Cleveland uniformly expected the recovery to continue through 1992.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity has not revived in the First District, but

results are more varied than in recent months.

A majority of retail

contacts describe sales as level or rising slightly, but some report
continued deterioration.

Retailers foresee consumer skittishness and

bargain-hunting combining to make the Christmas season very competitive.
Manufacturing contacts also report mixed signals.

At least half see

recurring weakness in new orders and further cuts in employment.

Yet,

several describe new initiatives and plan increased capital spending.
They expect no upturn in economic activity until mid-1992.

Retail
The majority of First District retail contacts report flat to
slightly increasing sales in October and early November as compared to a
year ago.

However, one respondent suffered continued declines in sales,

while another entered bankruptcy.

Retailers who have experienced

improvements attribute sales strength to consumers' long-delayed
purchases of necessities and to an early start of the Christmas season.

Several retailers note that stimulating consumer demand now
requires discounts.

The cautious buying pace is attributed to concerns

about employment stability as well as to consumers' expectations that
anxious retailers will cut prices further.

This downward pressure on

prices has meant that margins remain thin despite the minor uptick in
sales.

Thus, profits are unchanged, and retailers complain that they

will increase only with further cost reductions.

I-2

Most retailers see few remaining opportunities for cost cutting.
In all but one case, capital budgets are slim to nonexistent.
exceptions, wages are not increasing.

With few

Most retailers will conduct

typical seasonal hiring, although one plans further staff reductions.
All expect an extremely competitive Christmas.

Manufacturing
First District manufacturers give mixed reports on sales and
orders in the third quarter, October, and early November.

Contacts are

almost evenly divided between those with sales and orders unchanged from
year-ago levels, those with slight increases, and those with (sometimes
sizable) declines.

Nevertheless, half the contacts say that incoming

orders have softened recently after improving in the summer or early
fall.

Government demand is described as weakening and construction-

related business as dormant.

By contrast, retail, service, biotech and

environmental customers are said to be perking up.

Demand from the

computer, telecommunication, and aircraft industries reportedly varies.
Views on foreign demand are also mixed.

Some contacts see signs of

recent upturns in the United Kingdom and Canada and continuing strength
in Europe and the Pacific.

Others see growing weakness in Europe and

Japan and no improvement elsewhere.
Most contacts report that employment is below year-ago levels; in
a few cases it has been stable since summer.

Several firms have used

part-time schedules, furloughs, salary cuts, and delayed pay increases
to reduce labor costs.
employment reductions

Over half of those surveyed expect further
-- in two cases in response to unwelcome

increases in inventories.

Two firms plan modest hiring.

I-3

At half of the manufacturing firms surveyed, capital spending is
currently below budget, in some cases by as much as 30 to 50 percent.
Next year, however, half expect to increase investment from its 1991
Some of the plans involve new or replacement facilities and

level.

require substantial increases in spending.

A few firms are introducing

new products; others are trying new marketing efforts.
Input prices are generally described as steady or mixed.

Prices

for steel, some types of paper, and standardized products are declining.
Prices for proprietary products and for services, such as advertising,
are up.

Sales prices are flat to down at more than half of the firms

surveyed, but a sizable minority have raised prices on some products by
as much as 5 percent.
First District manufacturing contacts have budgeted 1992 sales
growth at the current or a slightly improved pace.

They expect some

pickup in economic activity around mid-year, but, over the medium term,
foresee a long, slow haul.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports on District developments remained mixed.

October sales results

at department stores were fairly evenly divided between those with sales above
and below year-ago levels.

District unemployment rates rose in October

reversing September declines.

The October purchasing managers' surveys

indicated that business conditions stabilized in Rochester while deteriorating
somewhat in Buffalo.

Although residential construction continues sluggish,

there has been some increased demand for existing homes and office space in
several areas.

Senior loan officers at small and midsized banks said their

willingness to lend was unchanged from three months earlier.
Consumer Sector
October sales results at District department stores were divided fairly
evenly between those with higher and lower sales compared to a year earlier.
Over-the-year changes ranged from -2.5 percent to +4.6 percent and for the
most part fell short of plans.

Responses varied concerning best selling items

with some citing women's and men's apparel and others noting a pickup in home
furnishings.

Contacts stated that they have not had any extra promotional

activity compared with last year but that this could change if competitive
preasures increase during the holiday season.
Inventories are reported to be in good shape and intentionally below
year-earlier levels in some cases.

District retailers do not anticipate large

year-to-year gains for the rest of the fourth quarter in light of the sluggish
economy and surveys showing continued reluctance to spend on the part of
consumers.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
While residential construction remains sluggish in the District, some
increase in demand for existing homes has been noted.

In the New York

metropolitan area, for example, homeownership is reportedly the most

II-2
affordable it has been in years as a result of reductions in existing home
prices and lower mortgage rates.

First-time homebuyers in particular are said

to be taking advantage of the improved situation.

In the Buffalo area, the

volume of resales increased 9.5 percent in October from a year earlier despite
a recent rise in the median price of such houses.

More generally, a recent

study found that resales in both New York and New Jersey have been increasing
this year after declining steadily from 1988-1990.
Office leasing activity improved in parts of the District but vacancy
rates moved in varying directions.

Vacancy rates moved up in midtown

Manhattan and Westchester County, largely as a result of corporate relocations
and restructuring, while northern New Jersey's rate increased due to the
completion of several new office buildings.

By contrast, Fairfield County,

Connecticut recently experienced a decline of almost a percentage point in its
vacancy rate as a result of strong leasing activity and rates in downtown
Manhattan and on Long Island showed virtually no change.

Overall, office

vacancy rates remain at high levels in much of the District.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates rose in October after declining in
September.

New York's rate increased to 7.2 percent from 6.8 percent in

September while New Jersey's rate rose to 6.8 percent from 6.2 percent.

The

District's employment outlook is dimmed by several recent developments.

New

York and Connecticut are now confronting sizable current fiscal year budget
gaps only months after struggling to bring those budgets into balance.
York City is attempting to close a large budget gap as well.
could mean the elimination of many additional government jobs.

New

These shortfalls
In preparation

for their planned merger, Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover have
reportedly eliminated close to 1000 positions since last summer and are
expected to eliminate several thousand more over time.

In addition, a

recently announced restructuring at Warner-Lambert will result in the loss of

II-3
340 jobs at its New Jersey headquarters.

In upstate New York Crucible

Materials plans to close a major part of its steel plant, eliminating 250 jobs
in early 1992 and Niagara Mohawk Power will cut 400 jobs from its nuclear
operations.

On a positive note, a consortium of Lufthansa, JAL and Air France

has proposed the first new terminal in 30 years to be built at Kennedy
International Airport.
The Rochester and Buffalo surveys of purchasing managers showed
differing results in October.

General business conditions stabilized in

Rochester where surveyed firms reported business conditions similar to those
in September.

The 32 percent of firms reporting an improvement was double the

number reporting a worsening.

In Buffalo, however, some deterioration

occurred as the percentages with lower production and fewer new orders more
than doubled.

Nonetheless, by far the majority of firms in both areas

reported stable to improved conditions.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the
Second District reported that their willingness to lend remains unchanged from
three months ago.

However, while they are "actively and aggressively seeking

high quality loans", demand remains weak.

Those respondents noting an actual

decrease in overall loan demand are using advertising campaigns as part of a
marketing approach for new loans.
Nearly all loan officers are now charging lower loan rates than they
were three months ago, reflecting decreases in the prime rate.

With the

decline in interest rates has come an increase in mortgage refinancing.
Credit standards at all banks surveyed have not changed over the past three
months.

Although delinquency rates in general have increased over recent

months, delinquencies on commercial and industrial loans and on nonresidential
mortgages have remained stable.

Slightly less than half of surveyed officers

reported a rise in consumer loan delinquencies.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

According to most indications, economic activity in the Third District was
in

easing

early November,

although

there were

some positive

developments.

Manufacturers reported a dip in business and continuing reductions in employment.
Retailers noted an upturn in sales, but they said extensive discounting was
necessary to prompt the improvement. Bankers said the downward trend in overall
loan volume

was

continuing

although

they reported

a recent

increase

in

residential mortgage lending for both home purchases and refinancings.
Recent developments have not altered the outlook among most contacts in the
Third District business community.

Manufacturers are still optimistic that

business will improve over the next six months.

Retailers forecast only slim

year-over-year gains in the dollar value of sales for the Christmas shopping
season.

Several commercial bankers said they believe commercial and industrial

lending may pick up by the middle of next year.

This represents a more

optimistic view for this lending category than the forecasts bankers made earlier
this fall. For consumer lending, bankers expect some modest gains as the economy
recovers; but they plan to maintain limits on commercial real estate lending.

MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District was edging down in early
November, according to reports from industrial firms in the region.
slightly slower business are common from most industries.

Reports of

On balance, producers

of nondurable goods note some improvement while producers of durable goods
generally are experiencing weakening conditions.

This is especially true among

III-2
makers

of

building products

and

construction-related

goods.

While many

manufacturing companies reported steady demand, the number noting recent drops
in shipments exceeded the number posting gains. On balance, new orders and order
backlogs were also declining slightly.

Although more than two-thirds of the

firms contacted for this report indicated that the prices they were receiving for
their products were stable, nearly one-fifth were reducing prices while only onetenth were raising prices.

Apparently in response to slackening activity, more

firms have been laying off workers and cutting hours than have been hiring or
lengthening the workweek.
Despite the dip in activity in November, most manufacturers in the Third
District are optimistic that business will pick up over the next six months.

A

majority of those polled for this report forecast increases in shipments and
orders by next spring. While most intend to hold the line on employment over the
period, more than one-fourth plan to add to their work forces.

RETAIL
Most retailers contacted in mid-November said the pace of sales had picked
up in recent weeks, but they also said that extensive price reductions were
necessary to generate the increased business.

Merchants expect year-to-year

comparisons for the month as a whole to be good, but they point out that the
year-ago results were very poor. Specialty stores appeared to be faring somewhat
better than general merchandisers.
Most of the store executives contacted for this report were holding to
their earlier forecasts for the Christmas shopping season despite the recent
upturn in sales.

These forecasts call for gains in the range of 3 to 5 percent

over last year in dollar sales.

With most merchants concerned that extensive

discounting will have to be maintained through the end of the year, few expect
operating profits to improve significantly.

III-3
FINANCE
Reports

from

Third

District bankers

in mid-November

indicate

outstanding loan volume continues to slip in most credit categories.

that

Commercial

and industrial loan volume at major Third District banks in the first week in
November was 14 percent below the level at the start of the year, and bank
lending officers generally said the runoff was continuing as current borrowers
pay down debt and demand for credit from potential customers remains weak.
Consumer lending is also slipping, according to bankers as declining auto loan
volume offsets increases in credit card and home equity lending. Several bankers
noted that, in response to lower mortgage rates, residential real estate lending
had increased in recent weeks, for both purchase mortgages and refinancings.
Several bankers said that discussions with their business customers lead
them to believe that commercial and industrial lending will increase near the end
of the second quarter of next year as area businesses step up capital spending.
For other credit categories, bankers generally see slow growth in consumer
lending next year as confidence in a recovery gradually increases, but they
expect to maintain limits on commercial real estate lending.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

District respondents revised downward their expectations for

growth this quarter and next, but still do not expect a double-dip recession.

Retail sales continue to be mixed and generally flat, and retailers remain
cautious about sales, inventory, and employment prospects for the holiday
season.

Growth in manufacturing in the District may slow, as a result of

trimmed auto production schedules, but capital goods producers note an
increase in orders in October.

Bank loans continue to be sluggish, except for

mortgage refinancing and home equity loans, despite lower lending rates.
The Economy.

The Fourth District panel of economists from

manufacturing, trade, and financial services remains cautiously optimistic
that the national economy will continue on a slow growth path, despite an
apparent stalling in recent months.

The panel of 25 economists who met at

this Bank on October 25 predicted a 3 percent real GNP growth between 1991:IVQ
and 1992:IVQ, and an inflation rate of 3.1 percent.
A telephone survey of most of the Roundtable members in late November
shows a downward revision to real GNP growth to about a 1 percent annual rate
this quarter, and to about a 2 percent rate next quarter; however, but growth
in the second half of 1992 has been revised upward to a 3 percent to 4 percent
range.

None of the respondents expects a double-dip recession, although a few

acknowledge that growth in a zero to 1 percent range this quarter is possible.
Several respondents cite a slower-than-expected recovery, and a common
perception that the economy is still in recession, as causes for the
deterioration in business and consumer sentiment in recent months.
Latest information for the Fourth District is somewhat more encouraging
han for the nation.

Industrial production in Ohio rose again in September.

IV-2

In October, employment held steady, and the unemployment rate was again below
Purchasing managers in Cleveland and Cincinnati report

the national average.

that orders and production strengthened in October.
Consumer Spending.

Retailers continue to cite a relatively flat level

of sales over the past several weeks, with some department stores reporting
somewhat better sales in October than in the summer, but others posting
declines.

Sales of major appliances, furniture, and home electronics products

fell in October and early November, but sales of soft goods strengthened,
according to several sources.
Retailers remain cautious in their outlook for sales during the
Christmas season.

The expected improvement in sales ranges from zero to about

4 percent higher than a year earlier, with most of the strength in soft goods.
A retail economist estimates that real consumer spending this quarter will
increase at about a 1 percent rate from last quarter, with all of the increase
in services.
Retailers have been cautious about inventories, but less-than-expected
sales growth, or even declines in some cases, have apparently resulted in
larger-than-desired stocks, especially for hard goods and apparently for
apparel.

Consequently, retailers expect aggressive price promotions

throughout the holiday season.

Part-time hirings for the season are said to

be much fewer than usual, which analysts warn will depress employment in
November and December.
New car dealers in the District report that November sales were slower
than a year ago.

As a result, most dealers have higher than desired

inventories, and have cut factory orders for the balance of the year.
Manufacturing.

The pace of manufacturing activity in the District,

which has been stronger than in the nation since the recovery began, is likely

IV-3

to abate, according to some forecasters.

Auto production schedules are being

trimmed, capital goods revival is still uneven, and businesses will keep
inventory building below levels that are usual for this stage of recovery.
The revival in auto sales and production that began early this year has
lost momentum in recent months.

Automotive economists have lowered their

estimates for both sales and output this quarter, and next, because the recent
flattening in new car sales has left larger-than-desired inventories.

Auto

producers now forecast output at about 1.5 million cars this quarter and next.
Total automobile and light truck sales this quarter are now estimated to fall
a few percent from 1991:IIQ.

Auto sources believe that significantly larger

price incentives will be needed than at present in order to stimulate sales.
Bank lending rates are reported to have been lowered in recent weeks, but with
little effect on sales.
The surge in real producers' durable equipment output last quarter was
unexpected by capital goods respondents, who look for a much reduced pace this
quarter.

Orders for recently introduced new computer machinery were

disappointing, according to a producer.

Some believe that a strike in the

construction machinery industry will dampen output for the next few months.

A

large parts supplier for heavy-duty trucks reports that new orders rose
strongly in October, following a mixed but slowly rising trend since early
this year.

Several small business equipment producers in northern Ohio note a

marked pickup in business in both September and October.

A hand tool producer

reports that October was the second best shipment month in recent history.
supplier of plastic parts for commercial aircraft and a small machine tool
builder also report that October orders were the best in several months.
Steel operations have been reviving gradually to about 80 percent of
capacity from 70 percent earlier in the year.

Order books for flat-rolled

A

IV-4

steel products are full through 1992:IQ, and operations are virtually at
capacity, according to some sources.

Output has been rising gradually,

especially because of increased orders from the auto and appliance industries
and from steel warehouses.

Some rebuilding of steel inventories is occurring,

but steel sources are apprehensive about how long the present level of
operations will be sustained because orders appear to have leveled out.

They

are also concerned about whether the auto industry will take delivery of all
of the orders now on the books in view of the trimming of auto production
schedules.
Financial Developments.

Large and small commercial banks in the

District report no pickup in new loans in recent weeks, either for commercial
and industrial loans or for total loans.

A large bank notes that loan

activity, while little changed from September, was better than during the
summer months.

Large and small banks have had a surge in mortgage

refinancing, which one lender described as being at capacity, and home equity
loans have also been rising sharply.

Recent declines in mortgage interest

rates, to about an 8 percent to 8-1/2 percent range for 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage, are believed to have come too late in the season to strengthen
housing sales, but some thrifts report a burst in new loan activity in recent
weeks.
Most bankers contend that credit remains available to creditworthy
borrowers, and that lending standards have neither tightened nor eased in
recent months.

Some large banks are still restricting loan growth because of

possible losses that would affect their capital.

Several small banks report

constraint in lending, especially to gasoline stations, dry cleaning
establishments, and auto garages because EPA and OSHA regulations place
lenders at risk for compliance.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity weakened somewhat in late October and early
November, but respondents continued to be optimistic about business prospects
for the next six months.

Retail sales and shopper traffic were lower as were

most indicators of District factory activity.

Loan demand remained sluggish

at District financial institutions and few commercial construction projects
were underway.

On a brighter note, activity was up at District ports and area

farmers harvested bumper crops this fall, although the outlook for agriculture
was tempered by concern about the effects of dry weather currently gripping
the District.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that retail activity fell in the
District in October and early November.

Sales decreased as did shopper

traffic, retail employment and capital expenditures.

Retailers reported that

wholesale prices increased while wages and retail prices rose only slightly.
Almost half of the retailers surveyed believed that the recession had
not yet bottomed out in their areas; however, they remained optimistic about
retail activity for the next six months.

Respondents expected sales, capital

expenditures and shopper traffic to rise, employment to be stable, and
inventories to be unchanged.

Most retailers anticipated that wholesale and

retail prices would increase over the period.
In their responses to our special telephone survey, District retailers
expressed less optimism about sales in the weeks immediately ahead.

Most said

they would be pleased if this year's Christmas sales merely matched last

year's.

Several retailers reported that they had started their seasonal sales

promotions about two weeks earlier than usual, and a number indicated that
they might offer discounts for the first time.

Generally, retailers who

planned to offer discounts were counting on higher sales volumes to offset
lower profit margins.

They indicated that they were trying to limit their

inventories while still offering a wide selection of merchandise.
Manufacturing
Responses to our regular survey of manufacturers suggested that District
factory activity was somewhat lower in October.

Respondents reported declines

in inventories and employment and they cited excess capacity as the most
important problem they were facing currently.

Most other indicators of

factory activity, including shipments and orders, were unchanged.
Manufacturers indicated that general business conditions had worsened, and
many felt that their local areas were still in recession.
Looking ahead, however, manufacturers remained optimistic about general
business conditions and about their prospects for the next six months.

Almost

half foresaw increases in shipments and new orders, and few expected
decreases.

A majority of respondents also anticipated increases in most other

production indicators except inventories.
Port Activity
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that exports and imports increased in October from
September.

Compared with a year ago, export volume was higher and import

volume was mixed.

Exports were expected to increase faster than imports

during the next six months.

Tourism
A telephone survey of hotels, motels and resorts in the District
indicated that tourist activity was unchanged in October when compared to
September and a year ago.

Over half the respondents reported that fall

bookings were about the same as last year's and all respondents expected
tourist activity to remain flat in the months ahead.
Commercial Construction
Commercial construction remained weak across the District, according to
a telephone survey of lenders and contractors.

Although some nonspeculative

retail construction was proceeding, vacancy rates remained high, and some
respondents said it would take several years to absorb the existing vacant
space.

Although public works projects were responsible for much of the

ongoing construction, some large private projects were still underway.

No new

major commercial construction starts were reported.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
lending activity was lackluster.

Most of those surveyed reported that their

non-price lending standards had not changed over the last six weeks.

With

regard to pricing, all of the contacted banks indicated that they had lowered
their prime rates recently, and most reported that other interest rates they
charged their customers also had decreased over the period.

Despite lower

rates, banks reported that the demand for consumer and business loans remained
weak, although the demand for home mortgage refinancings continued to
increase.
Agriculture
District agricultural analysts reported that crop yields generally were

V-4
above average, but they said that dry weather may have damaged recently
planted crops and reduced winter hay supplies.

With harvesting almost

complete, analysts reported that District farmers had produced large crops of
corn, peanuts, tobacco and sweet potatoes.

The analysts cautioned, however,

that very dry weather conditions over much of the District were slowing the
emergence of fall-planted small grains.

Also, dry weather has left District

pastures in poor condition and caused concern about the adequacy of forage
supplies for the approaching winter.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: In early November, reports on the District economy indicated that activity
was again sluggish and showed the same uneven pattern that has persisted since last spring.
Retailers saw relatively good sales in the past month, but they reported that they are concerned
about the shorter-than-usual shopping season.

Auto sales were generally unchanged from

previous months' and year-ago levels. Manufacturing activity has been slow in constructionrelated industries, but has shown positive signs in food processing and packaging. Banking
contacts report only slight increases in loan demand over the past month and add that credit
standards remain unchanged.

Residential real estate activity is strong only for homes in the

lower price ranges.
Retail Sales:

After accounting for normal seasonal patterns, most retail contacts

reported an increase in nondurable goods sales, adjusted for price increases, during the first half
of November, partly as a result of early discounting. They see little evidence of overall sales
gains in consumer durables. Retailers retain cautious expectations for the holiday season and are
concerned about the sustainability of recent sales growth. At present, they do not expect holiday
sales in real terms to exceed weak year-ago levels despite active discounting. Contacts cite both
the shorter holiday shopping season and anemic consumer confidence as reasons for this
pessimistic outlook. Inventories remain lean and could become a constraint if early November's
sales growth is sustained.
None of the auto dealers contacted reported improvement in sales from previous
months' or year-ago levels even with the arrival of new 1992 models. Most saw flat year-overyear sales.
Manufacturing: Reports on factory activity pointed to softness. Weakness persists in
construction-related industries where export orders are typically not significant.

Carpet mill

VI-2

contacts say that slow commercial construction continues to depress the industry, and add that
further layoffs are possible in the near future. Weak demand for consumer durables continues
to hurt a regional producer of steel for appliances. Furniture manufacturers also report declining
shipments in recent months. Consistent with these reports, transport companies have seen weak
lumber, gypsum, and appliance shipments. Apparel producers characterize current orders as
sluggish and report concerns that a poor Christmas buying season will increase retail inventories
and cause them to reduce orders in the first quarter of next year. A contact in a printing and
publishing firm noted that corporate cost cutting and reductions in magazine advertising continue
to affect adversely the industry.
More positively, a producer of printed materials for food packaging has seen strength
in new orders and production over year-ago levels and is currently planning a major capital
expansion project. Several food processors also report increased new orders and shipments.
Another producer of paper products and boxes expects currently slowing orders to stabilize in
the first quarter of next year. Most contacts continue to carry lean inventories, and have no
plans for additional inventory accumulation.
Financial Services: According to most banking contacts, loan demand increased only
slightly in the past month and remains below year-ago levels. They complain that it is difficult
to obtain high quality loan applications. Much of the reported increase in demand was attributed
to market share gains by the reporting banks as borrowers moved from troubled or merged
institutions.
On the other hand, one banker said that his institution may have tightened credit
standards too much and was losing market share as a result. Auto dealers and construction
contractors continue to report that credit is difficult to obtain.

VI-3

Construction: Most realtor contacts had seen home sales levelling in their typical
seasonal pattern in October and early November. Homes in the lower price range continued to
report the most sales activity as lower mortgage interest rates stimulated first-time home buyers.
Sales of higher priced homes remained sluggish, forcing sellers to reduce prices. Some contacts
noted a strengthening in multifamily leasing and rental rates; however, they saw little new
construction of multifamily residences. Meanwhile, several contacts report small gains in the
activity of surviving home builders in the past several months.
The commercial real estate market has shown little change in this reporting period.
Commercial office space remains overbuilt in many cities, with effective rental rates depressed,
and little or no improvement in absorption. Corporate consolidations and mergers continue to
put additional supply on the market and our contacts are generally unsure whether it has hit
bottom.
Wages and Prices:

For the most part, wage costs and materials prices remain

relatively stable with adequate supplies of labor, especially in the service sector. Recently
reduced raw materials prices are helping cut the cost of production for textile and apparel firms,
but contacts do not expect these savings to be passed on to consumers. Instead, they plan to use
these savings to offset increases in other costs of production, particularly health care benefits.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. The recovery in the Seventh District economy has slowed, with contacts
revealing slowing momentum in auto production and housing activity. Consumer spending gains
remained sluggish, although most District retail contacts still expect holiday sales to be even with or
slightly above last year. Auto sales remained weak, prompting further cuts in fourth quarter
production schedules. Overall manufacturing activity generally continued to contribute to relative
strength in the District economy, but smaller increases in orders and production were recorded by
many manufacturers. Housing activity also softened in recent months. Most large District banks
reported little change in lending standards, while lower borrower demand was noted by some banks.
Consumer Spending. District consumer spending gains remain sluggish, according to most
contacts, although one large retailer reported significant sales improvement in early November.
Surveys conducted for District state retailers' associations generally indicated that sales gains are still
expected during the holiday season, but at a somewhat slower pace than last year. A large discount
retailer reported that sales in Detroit and Chicago continued to run below year-earlier levels, in part
due to increased competition. A large general merchandise chain reported improved year-over-year
sales gains in early November, with increases well distributed across product lines and across regions.
New credit usage at this chain was reported to be above a year ago for the first time in 1991. This
contact also indicated that inventories remain higher than desired, particularly for some durable
goods.
New car sales remained depressed. A District supplier of financial services to car dealers
reported that business at most dealerships has continually slowed in recent months. Floor traffic
weakened further and was joined by a new softening in the interest level of potential buyers. Car
sales in the Midwest have been hit almost as hard as the national average, according to this contact.
One of the largest auto dealers in the District reported that sales have been running at half the rate
experienced during the summer and early fall, and stated that his experience was repeated for most
dealerships in his market area. Another dealer reported that leasing as well as sales have softened in
recent weeks, noting that "used car sales are keeping us afloat." A dealer of a relatively strongselling model indicated that new business has been softer than projected.
Manufacturing. Purchasing managers' surveys supported by contact reports indicate that
manufacturing activity continued to bolster the regional economy modestly, although momentum

VII-2
slowed in motor vehicle production. Car and truck assembly schedules continued to be trimmed in
recent weeks. The number of plants idled by domestic automakers in mid-November was the highest
since March. Underlying demand from consumers remains at recessionary levels, according to this
contact Heavy-duty truck sales and production remain "very depressed," according to an industry
consultant, and new softening was reported in demand from agricultural markets. A parts supplier to
truck manufacturers doesn't see any rebound signals. District producers of farm and construction
machinery have also been trimming production schedules recently.
Purchasing manager surveys have been indicating continued expansion by a slimming
majority of District manufacturers in the past two months. The overall index produced by the
Chicago survey dropped from a seasonally adjusted 56.2 percent in October to 52.7 percent in
November. The picture of slowing but continued growth was generally echoed in recent results for
Detroit, Indianapolis, and Southwest Michigan, while the October results for Milwaukee showed
conditions improving. Reports from individual manufacturers were mixed. A steel manufacturer
reported that industry shipments are now expected to decline from the third quarter to the fourth
quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis. A manufacturer of electronic connectors stated that the firm
continues to cut costs, because the U.S. market remains sluggish. A brighter picture was offered by a
large manufacturer of industrial machinery, who reported that domestic orders have begun to show
some improvement on a month-to-month basis, after consistently reporting sluggish conditions during
the summer and early fall. Several contacts report that exports and sales by foreign subsidiaries
continued to outperform domestic sales.
Real Estate/Construction. District housing activity generally softened in recent months,
although some individual markets continued to hold up relatively well. Recently released state level
data show that seasonally adjusted existing home sales declined in four of the five District states from
the second quarter to the third quarter, although most of them at a somewhat slower pace than the
national average. Sales in Iowa showed a small increase, and one realtor stated that press reports of
waning optimism in the Midwest "were written by people who haven't been to Cedar Rapids." Sales
in Illinois have softened since June, but prices are holding, according to the state realtors' association.
Sales in Wisconsin fell slightly, yet remain well above year-earlier levels, and the state's realtor
association stated that sales are still on track for a record year. Statements by individual realtors
generally were consistent with state-level data, although one large realtor reported the best October in

VII-3
their history, in large part due to gains in market share. The pace of the recovery in housing starts in
the District has slowed along with new and existing home sales. A home remodelers' association
reported that a seasonal surge in business failed to materialize, with business well below year-earlier
levels. Several reports suggested little change in the weak commercial real estate market. A supplier
of construction materials used in both residential and commercial construction in the Chicago
metropolitan area reported that shipments continued to fall in October, and estimated that 1992
shipments will be as much as 25 percent lower than in 1991.
Banking. Credit standards for approving commercial and industrial loans essentially were
unchanged over the past few months. Some of the respondents reported increased loan rate spreads
and/or increased credit line costs, with increases more frequently reported for large and medium-sized
borrowers than for small firms. At the same time, borrowing demand was generally reported to be
little changed over recent months, with softer demand from smaller businesses reported more
frequently than from medium-sized or large firms. Where weaker demand was reported, banks most
often cited lower customer needs for inventory and capital investment. One banker stated that credit
standards consistent with recessionary conditions still hold, but that when "good prospects" for loans
appear, competition has intensified, with the borrower benefitting from lower loan rates.
Agriculture. Heavy rains in recent weeks slowed the wind-up of the fall harvest but helped
recharge subsoil moisture. Corn and soybean production estimates for this District, and nationwide,
were revised upward again in November. A better than expected harvest and prospects for continued
weakness in exports have weighed on crop prices this fall. Corn exports, which declined 27 percent
during the year ending with August, are projected to decline an additional 9 percent during the current
crop marketing year.
Livestock prices have weakened considerably this fall due to evidence of an upturn in red
meat production. The expansion now underway among hog farmers in District states and nationwide
suggests that per capita pork production in 1991 will be up 7 percent and the largest since 1981. On a
more positive note for farm earnings, the distressed conditions among dairy farmers over the past year
have eased somewhat as production has leveled-off and milk prices have moved back up above the
retreating levels of a year ago.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Consumer

spending

continues to be weak.

on

general

merchandise

and

automobiles

Local retailers are generally optimistic, however,

about sales prospects

for the holiday season.

Additional layoffs at

District durable goods manufacturers have been announced in recent weeks.
Overall

conditions

in

the District's manufacturing

mixed.

Residential construction and existing home sales have picked up.

Loan demand remains weak.

sector are decidedly

Favorable cotton, rice and soybean harvests

have boosted District agricultural prospects.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales of general merchandise in the Eighth District are
reported to be up a modest 2 to 3 percent, although in real terms, sales
are believed to be nearly flat.
reports the largest gains.
consumer confidence was

Among major District cities, Louisville

In most other regions of the District, low

identified as playing a significant role in

continuing weakness of retail sales.
report

higher-than-normal

price-cutting
concerned
optimistic;

to attract

about

the

and

hesitant consumers.

contacts report,

holiday

however,

delay their Christmas purchases,
goods.

In the Louisville area, retailers

advertising

shortened

the

season,

a

sharp

increase

in

Although retailers are
most

that consumers

are

generally

seem inclined to

few of which are likely to be luxury

VIII-2

New vehicle sales continue to decline and lower-priced models
Used car sales are stronger than

are selling better than luxury cars.
those of new cars.

Some dealers expect no significant increase in sales

until mid-1992.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity continues to be mixed.

A number of large

layoffs and plant closings have been announced in recent weeks, with the
biggest

job

electronics

losses

occurring

industries.

in

the

defense,

The planned

computer

and

consumer

closing of a major Mississippi

apparel plant with 600 employees, however, has been averted because of a
management buyout.

Weak demand in the housing and automobile sectors has

depressed the price received by a major District metals producer, but
capital spending plans and employment have remained stable.

A chemical

manufacturer in the District attributes a recent leveling off of sales to
the

lull

in

A pulp and paper manufacturer

the national economy.

Arkansas reports weak demand for paper used in

advertisements.

in

Two St.

Louis area firms report that demand for their food and beverage products
has declined.
Strong demand for some vehicles produced at Louisville and St.
Louis plants has stabilized employment in
Production at footwear manufacturer in
in several years.

the District's auto

Arkansas is

at its

industry.

highest level

A cosmetics maker reports increased sales and has

begun to add employees.

Likewise,

a heavy equipment

distributor

in

Memphis reports strong demand.
Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilders report a modest improvement in single-family home
starts over the previous year,
substantially below 1990 levels.

although year-to-date

starts are still

New home prices are flat to declining.

VIII-3

One Little Rock contact noted that, despite lower interest rates, many
first-time homebuyers were being kept out of the market because of a lack
of savings for a downpayment and difficulty qualifying for loans.

The

average prices of existing homes sold recently have risen slightly in
most parts of the District.
Banking and Finance
Total loans outstanding at large District banks declined less in
the last two months than they had in the prior two months, with all major
categories except consumer loans showing improvement.

Continued weakness

in new car sales and a reluctance to incur additional debt are blamed for
soft consumer loan demand.
Louis is

A large residential mortgage operation in St.

laying off about 700 workers,

one-third of its

staff,

over the

next several months.
Agriculture
Contacts

in

Arkansas

and Mississippi

cotton crops;

some of the cotton

exceptionally

high

recently,

quality.

mill demand is

in

report

Mississippi is

Although

cotton

reported as strong.

bumper

report

that

mild

fall

weather

and

and

reported to be of

prices

have

declined

Soybean yields throughout

the District states have improved from mid-summer estimates.
farmers

rice

late

significantly helped their cotton and soybean crops.

season

Tennessee
rains

have

The fall apple crop

in the District is reported to be abundant, but concerns about quality
persist.
their

Catfish prices at the farm level continue to tumble, reaching

lowest

level

in

several

report reduced profit margins.

years.

Poultry producers

in

Arkansas

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

Labor market conditions in the District were mixed, with the western states showing signs of
strength, while the rest of the District continued to be depressed. Retail sales in areas which
haven't benefited from the continuing influx of Canadian shoppers stayed stagnant, while new
car sales remained in the doldrums. Tourism has generally been excellent this year and looks
promising for the winter as well. Crop yields in the District, with the exception of Minnesota,
have been generally good, though farm prices have been mixed.

Employment, Wages, and Prices
Continuing its recent negative trend, Minnesota's unemployment rate in September, at
5.2 percent, was higher than both its year ago (4.7 percent) and month ago (4.8 percent) levels.
State unemployment insurance claims for September were at their highest level since 1983, up
15 percent from a year-ago. The weakness in the Minnesota labor market was also reflected in
the growth rate of nonagricultural employment, which in October was up only 0.5 percent from
its year-ago level, with substantial declines being registered in manufacturing (down 1.3
percent), and construction (down 4.3 percent). September unemployment rates were also higher
in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (9.0 percent from 7.8 percent a year ago) and generally
higher in western Wisconsin. Unemployment rates were unchanged from their year-ago levels
in North and South Dakota (3.5 and 3.2 percent, respectively), and slightly lower in Montana
(down to 5.8 percent from 5.9 percent). These states also exhibited robust rates of growth in
nonagricultural employment, with September's level up 2.4 and 3.1 percent in North and South
Dakota respectively, and up 1.9 percent in Montana.

IX-2
Consumer Spending
Retail sales have been stagnant in those parts of the District which aren't near the
Canadian border, with major retailers reporting October sales figures generally only moderately
higher than the level of a year ago.

Retailers attributed the weak sales to consumer caution,

and expectations for the holiday season range from flat to 3 percent growth over last year.
Retail sales are strong in those parts of Montana, North and South Dakota, and the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan within a reasonable drive from the border, due to the continuing influx
of Canadian shoppers. Hotel occupancy rates in these areas are quite high. Canadiancurrency
transactions in northwestern Montana are reported to be up more than 20 percent over last year.
The recent World Series generated approximately $25 million of business in the downtown
Minneapolis-St. Paul area.
New car sales in the District continue to be weak, with local dealers reporting substantial
declines. Even floor traffic on dealer showrooms remains slow. Truck sales have not fallen off
as much as car sales, and have enjoyed a recent surge, although year-to-date sales figures are
still below that of one year ago. Used car sales remain strong.
Housing sales have been mixed in the District. In the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, housing
sales dropped 13.4 percent in September relative to a year ago, after rising in August, while
median single-family home prices, "failed to keep pace with inflation."

However, there are

some recent indications of an improvement.
Tourist activity has generally been excellent in the District. Yellowstone National Park
had its best tourism year ever. Bridge crossings onto the Upper Peninsula of Michigan have
been up substantially this year, with crossings over the Mackinac bridge in October 4.7 percent

IX-3
above their year-ago level. Late fall traffic to view the autumn colors on Minnesota's North
Shore is down slightly from a year ago, due to weather conditions in October.

Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the District's construction industry have been mixed. The September level
of new housing permits in Minnesota was down 10.3 percent relative to a year ago. Commercial
construction in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area continue to be depressed. Elsewhere, construction
is reported to be particularly strong in North and South Dakota, and holding its own in Montana.
Conditions were mixed in the District's manufacturing industries, with a number of firms
reporting layoffs.

In Minnesota, average weekly hours at 40.4 in October were essentially

unchanged from a year ago, and down only slightly relative to 40.9 in September.

Resource-Related Industries
Crop yields in the District with the exception of Minnesota were generally good, while
crop prices improved and livestock prices declined relative to year-ago levels. North Dakota's
mid-October index of farm prices was 2 percent below its year-ago level, with the All Crop
index up 1 percent and the All Livestock index down 8 percent from their year-ago levels.
Montana's October price index for all farm products, all crops, and all livestock was up 1
percent, up 14 percent, and down 4 percent respectively over year-ago levels. The recent 30
inch snowstorm coupled with spring floods resulted in a 7 percent decline in the Minnesota corn
crop and an anticipated 50 percent decline in the wheat harvest relative to year ago levels.
However the state's soybean, sugar beet, potato, and dry bean crops are projected to be
substantially above year-ago levels.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to grow slowly overall,

but business conditions vary from industry to industry.
housing starts are up somewhat, but auto sales are down.
activity remains sluggish, and farm incomes are off.
better Christmas sales this year than last year.

Retail sales and
Energy industry

Most retailers expect

Prices remain generally

steady for both manufacturers' inputs and for consumer goods.

While retailers

are satisfied with current inventory levels, manufacturers continue to trim
their inventories.
Retail sales.

Sales were generally higher than last year and higher

than the previous month, with apparel sales leading the way.

District

retailers report stable prices for last month and expect prices to remain
steady over the near term.

Satisfied with their inventory levels, most

retailers plan to keep purchases low.
three months are mixed.
better than last year.

Expectations about sales in the next

However, most retailers expect Christmas sales to be
Expectations are weaker among sellers of high-end

goods than among other retailers.
Auto sales declined in most district states over the last month, but
most dealers expect sales to improve slightly in the next few months.

While

financing is available for floorplanning, many potential buyers are finding it
difficult to obtain loans.

Dealers are still striving to trim their already-

low inventories.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents experienced no price changes last

month and expect no significant changes in the month ahead.
readily available, with few changes in lead times.

Materials are

Nearly all firms have been

trimming inventories because of weak sales and plan to continue trimming for

X-2
the remainder of the year.

Plants are generally operating below

capacity.
Energy.

Energy industry activity in the district remains sluggish.

Drilling has picked up somewhat, however, due mainly to increased drilling of
new horizontal wells in the Rocky Mountain states.

The average number of

operating drilling rigs in district states increased from 232 in September to
250 in October.

Nonetheless, the October rig count was 23 percent below a

year earlier.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Housing starts across the district were

up slightly from the previous month and significantly higher than a year ago.
Builders expect moderate growth in housing starts through early 1992.

While

new home sales were generally flat last month, sales were up significantly
from a year ago.

Prices for new homes are slightly higher.

Builders report

no problems acquiring materials and generally expect none through early 1992.
Most savings and loan respondents report net deposit outflows last
month.

Deposits are expected to remain flat or to decrease in the period

ahead, especially if rates on savings deposits continue to decline.
mortgage demand is for refinancing.

Most

Rates are expected to continue to decline

in the coming months.
Banking.

District bankers report that loan demand was steady to

slightly higher last month.

Demand increased for home mortgages, construction

loans, and agricultural loans, but decreased for commercial and industrial
loans and commercial real estate loans.

The loan-to-deposit ratio for

district banks was steady last month but lower than a year ago.
District bankers reduced their prime lending rates last month, but most

expect to leave these rates unchanged in the near future.

About half of the

X-3
respondents also lowered their consumer lending rates in the last month, and
several anticipate further cuts of consumer rates in the near future.
Respondents report no changes in their other loan terms.
A majority of the respondents experienced deposit inflows last month.
The growth in deposits was primarily in demand deposits, NOW accounts, and
savings deposits.

Large certificates of deposit declined slightly, and MMDAs

were unchanged.
Agriculture.

Dry weather cut nonirrigated fall crop yields up to 70

percent in parts of the district and delayed development of much of the
district's winter wheat crop.

Yields of the district's corn, milo, and

soybean crops, however, were normal to slightly above normal in most parts of
the district.

Recent rainfall improved the condition of the wheat crop, but

the crop's late start has left it vulnerable to freezing temperatures this
winter.
District feedlot operators are feeding about the same number of cattle
as a year ago.

The backlog of heavy cattle that pushed down cattle prices

last summer has gone to slaughter, enabling a partial recovery in cattle
prices and cattle feeding profits.
Fall credit reviews for district farm borrowers showed little change in
the number of problem loans since last year.

Livestock profits were strong

during the first half of the year and bolstered meager crop profits on
diversified farms.

Livestock prices fell in the second half of the year,

however, and are expected to remain weak in 1992.

Thus, farm bankers expect

the number of problem farm loans to increase during the coming year, but the
extent of the increase remains uncertain.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic activity in the District remains stagnant.

Respondents report

that a sluggish national economy and declines in the military equipment and
energy industries continue to hold down economic growth.
growth has slowed, it remains positive.

While construction

Business services are flat due to

weak growth in new business formation and cost cutting measures by clients.
Retailers say that sales were flat in October but improved slightly in early
November.

Agricultural conditions have worsened in recent months.

District manufacturing performance has been mixed, but generally orders
appear to have increased slightly.

Most manufacturers say that inventories

are at desired levels and that they expect stronger growth in orders in 1992.
Brick and lumber producers say that a moderate improvement in single family
building has increased the demand for their products.

Producers of electric

and electronic equipment say that lower prices and the introduction of new
products have increased their orders and market share.
that sales have been flat.

Petroleum refiners say

Although respondents in the petrochemical industry

say that orders are unchanged, recent plant completions in the District
indicate that overall production has increased.
sales growth has slowed but remains positive.

Apparel producers note that
Responses from the paper

industry were mixed with sales declines reported for newsprint and increases
reported for corrugated boxes.
declined recently.

Orders for primary and fabricated metals have

Production and employment continue to shrink for defense-

related manufacturers.

The recently passed defense budget, however, should

provide some stability to District defense contractors.

XI-2

Demand for District services has shown little change since the last
survey.

Competition and cost-conscious clients are putting downward pressure

on service fees.

Consulting and legal firms note continued weakness in the

demand for services that typically stems from business expansion.

Demand for

controversy areas such as lawsuits, bankruptcy, and labor disputes remain
strong.

One consulting firm responded that an area of growth is advising

clients how to streamline their business and downsize their work force to gain
efficiency.

Many respondents noted that an abundance of skilled workers is

putting downward pressure on wages.
District construction growth has slowed but remains positive.
Residential building continues to increase in Austin and San Antonio but has
recently flattened in Dallas/Ft. Worth and Houston.
lean in most areas of the District.

New home inventories are

Nonresidential construction continues to

grow partly due to the expansions of refineries along the Gulf Coast, public
school construction in Houston, and several public and corporate projects in
Austin.
Retail sales improved slightly in early November although growth
remained slow.

Respondents say that store traffic is moderately high and that

consumers are responding to discounts.

Apparel sales have improved.

big ticket items such as appliances remain weak.

Sales of

October auto sales declined

four percent over last year in the Dallas/Ft. Worth area and rose four percent
in Houston.

Year-to-date auto sales are still well below last year in both

areas.
The District energy sector continues to decline but several respondents
say that drilling appears to be bottoming out.

The seasonally-adjusted rig

XI-3

count in the District declined only slightly in the first half of November.
One reason for the improvement in the rig count is that natural gas prices
have increased moderately.

In the second week of November the wellhead price

of natural gas was only 7.5 percent lower than a year earlier.

In July, the

price of natural gas was about 24 percent lower than its year-earlier level.
The outlook for natural gas prices has also improved in recent months.

The

futures price of natural gas to be delivered in the spring of 1992 has
stabilized at about 17 percent higher than it was trading at this summer.
Respondents report that sales of drilling rigs and equipment in the third
quarter were the lowest in two years.
bleak.

The outlook for drilling equipment is

Although the rig count is stabilizing, respondents say that the low

number of rigs in use should reduce the demand for equipment throughout much
of next year.
District commercial banks report that loan demand remains sluggish.
Respondent say that they have plenty of liquidity but that they are having
trouble finding good loans.

Some respondents are expecting a modest increase

in loan demand over the next six months.
Agricultural conditions have weakened in recent months.
have reduced their income projections for this year.

Respondents

Much of the weakness is

centered in recent declines in prices for livestock and cotton.

A recent

increase of cattle on feed reduces the likelihood that livestock prices will
rebound this year.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic activity remains slow in most parts of the Twelfth District, and the economic
expectations of District business leaders deteriorated further in November. Continued sluggish sales
have kept most wage and price increases modest, and concern about the holiday shopping season is
widespread. Weakness in District manufacturing activity continues. Agricultural conditions remain
satisfactory overall, despite several problems including the recent whitefly invasion. Construction and
real estate activity remains slow in most parts of the District. With the exception of mortgage
refinancing, lending is still weak in most parts of the District.
Business Sentiment
The economic expectations of business leaders in the Twelfth District deteriorated in
November. Eighty-nine percent of business leaders now foresee GNP growth of less than 2.5 percent
during the next four quarters, with 25 percent expecting recession. The share of business leaders
expecting recession has increased from 7 percent in September and 17 percent in October. The
majority of western business leaders now foresee weaker business investment and increasing
unemployment during the next four quarters. Expectations of consumer spending also have worsened,
with 31 percent of business leaders now projecting improved spending, down from 50 percent in
September and 37 percent in October.
Wages and Prices
Wages and prices are reported stable or increasing only modestly in most parts of the District.
Continued sluggish consumer demand is keeping downward pressure on soft goods prices. Prices of
many food products are reported below year earlier levels, but the whitefly infestation has led to
higher prices for several winter crops, including lettuce, broccoli, and cauliflower. Consumer prices

XII-2
in southern California in October were up 3 percent from a year ago. Wage increases for District
firms cluster in the 3 to 4 1/2 percent range, with several firms reporting that wage increases will be
lower in 1992 than they were in 1991. Benefits costs continue to rise faster than wages, led by
increases in health care plan premiums of 10 to 25 percent.
Retail Trade and Services
Consumer spending in the District remains sluggish. Department store retailers report
continued slow sales. Concern about the holiday shopping season is widespread, although some
western retailers feel that the worst is behind them. New-car sales also are reported weak, with little
enthusiasm for 1992 models. In contrast, used car sales continue strong, and prices are holding up
well. Most retailers report tightly controlled inventories, but a few firms note that sluggish sales have
caused some recent increases in inventories. Slow economic activity also is reported at law firms,
newspapers, state and local governments, and research and development laboratories.
Manufacturing
Weakness in District manufacturing activity continues. Layoffs and cutbacks continue at some
Oregon high-tech and metals manufacturers.

Aluminum manufacturers continue to face low prices

and over-capacity. Despite reports of high aluminum inventories, one manufacturer reports that his
inventories are "manageable."

At Boeing, commercial aircraft production continues strong, but the

pace of new orders has slowed considerably from last year. Previously announced layoffs at Boeing
in response to Stealth Bomber cutbacks probably will be avoided.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
District agricultural conditions are generally satisfactory. In Washington, apple production
fell 5 percent from last year, but prices currently are up 20 percent from a year ago. Prices for
potatoes and soybeans are down from a year ago, but wheat prices have strengthened recently in
response to the extension of grain credits to Russia. However, beef and dairy prices and demand

XII -3

remain low. In addition, the whitefly infestation in southern California is taking a toll on farmers
already hurting from last winter's freeze and the ongoing drought. The poinsettia whitefly has
destroyed a large part of the winter vegetable crop, pushing up prices for vegetables such as lettuce,
broccoli, and cauliflower.
Conditions in other resource industries are mixed. Sawmills and plywood plants continue to
close in Oregon, reflecting the persistent weakness in the lumber industry. Orders for some pulp and
paper products remain relatively strong, however. Oil and gas drilling activity in the District is still
depressed.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate markets remain slow in most parts of the District. In southern
California, both residential and commercial activity is weak. House values and home sales are down
in Silicon Valley, with particular weakness reported at the upper end of the market. Home prices in
Washington are reported flat to down slightly, while the volume of sales is rising slowly after
dropping off earlier this year. Housing starts in Washington are down 25 percent from last year.
Commercial construction in San Francisco remains flat. Several respondents cite tight credit
conditions as a reason for the slow construction activity.
Financial Institutions
Conditions at District financial institutions remain mixed. Banks report relatively healthy
conditions in Idaho and Utah and, to a lesser extent, in the Pacific Northwest. Demand for home
loans in Utah is strong and delinquency rates have fallen to their lowest levels in years. Mortgage
refinancings account for a large share of lending activity throughout the District. Commercial
construction loan balances at some California banks continue to shrink as existing loans are written
off and few new loans are originated.

