FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD

For use at Noon, E.S.T.
Wednesday
March 13, 1991

RESEARCH LIBRARY
Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

March 1991

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

MARCH 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY ..........

.

First District--Boston ....

.

.

.

....

.

..

....

. .

.

..

. .

.

.

. .

. .

.

.

. .

.

.

.

..

.

.

. ..

.

. .

.

......

......................

..

.

i

I1-1

Second District--New York
Third District--Philadelphia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . IV -1
. . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Fourth District--Cleveland
Fifth District--Richmond

..

. . . . . .. . . ... .. V -1

. . . . ... .....
.. . . ... . ... . .
... . . .. . .. .. .. .... .... . .. VVI-1
. .... ....
. . . . ... . ....
-1
. .....

Sixth District--Atlanta ..... .........
Seventh District--Chicago. .................

............
. ... ......

..........
........

VI-1
...

. VII-1

Eighth District--St. Louis .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . V III-1
Ninth District--Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
.. . .. . . .. . .. . .. . . .. . . . ..
Tenth District--Kansas City

IX-1

........................... . ........... X -1

Eleventh District--Dallas . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . .. . . . . . ... . X I-1
Twelfth District--San Francisco ......................................

XII-1

i
Summary*

Economic activity remained soft in much of the nation but there
were some indications that the decline may be slowing.

The pattern of

retail sales varied among districts with the majority reporting either
sluggishness or results below planned levels.

Retail inventories appear

to be at satisfactory levels, except for some excess auto stocks.
Manufacturing was sluggish in most of the country though several
districts noted either a slight improvement or an easing of the downward
trend. While construction activity continued weak, realtors and
homebuilders reported an increase in buyer interest and, in some areas,
purchases in recent weeks.

The pickup was attributed to lower mortgage

interest rates and more attractive home prices.

Loan demand remained

soft although mortgage refinancings have increased.

Farm income

prospects and mining output were mixed.
Consumer Spending
The pattern of retail sales varied among districts with the
majority reporting either sluggishness or results below planned levels.
In several areas such as Atlanta, Cleveland and San Francisco, sales
fell sharply after the Persian Gulf war began and then recovered to
varying degrees.

In some other areas such as Richmond and New York,

sales remained slow.

Some districts with generally sluggish sales noted

pockets of strength.

Thus, in Dallas and Atlanta discount stores

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and based on
information collected before March 4, 1991.
This document summarizes
comments received from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal
Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

ii
exhibited strength as did specialty stores in Philadelphia.

Most

districts reported that auto sales declined though Dallas and Atlanta
noted some recent improvement.

With the exception of some excess auto

stocks, retail inventories generally appear to be at satisfactory
levels.
Retailers in most districts were hopeful that sales would improve
with the cessation of hostilities in the Gulf but most did not
anticipate strong gains until the economy rebounds and consumer
confidence returns.
Manu facturing
Manufacturing activity was sluggish in most of the nation though
several districts noted either a slight improvement or an easing of the
downward trend.

Boston, Chicago, Kansas City, Philadelphia and St.

Louis stated that strength in the export sector was offsetting a part of
the weak domestic demand and Atlanta and San Francisco noted that some
manufacturers' orders had increased as a result of the Gulf war.

Of

the six districts reporting on manufacturing inventories, four mentioned
excess levels and the need for further trimming while in the remaining
two, stocks were generally satisfactory. Atlanta, Boston, Chicago,
Cleveland and St. Louis described a slowdown in motor vehicle
production, and, related to this, Chicago and Cleveland noted a decline
in steel production as well.

Other industries in which activity slowed

were textiles, furniture and construction-related products. On the other
hand, Cleveland noted that capital goods output was holding up fairly
well, though in Chicago the picture was mixed, and Atlanta and St. Louis
noted strength among food processors.

iii
Dallas described the production of oil field equipment as growing
strongly.

With regard to the outlook, contacts in Boston and

Philadelphia anticipate an improvement in three to six months and
manufacturers in the Richmond district are optimistic about the future
for the first time in several months.
Construction and Real Estate
While construction activity continued weak in most of the nation,
eight districts noted that realtors and homebuilders have reported an
increase in buyer interest and, in some areas, purchases in recent
weeks.

The pickup is attributed to lower mortgage interest rates and

more attractive home prices.

Despite the pickup, however, most

districts report that homebuilding activity remains slow and
participants are only cautiously optimistic that some improvement over
last year's slow pace will occur.

Nonresidential construction also

remained weak and with vacancy rates continuing to rise on office and
retail space, contacts in most districts do not anticipate a turnaround.
However, Dallas noted that several large commercial projects have begun
and that petrochemical plant construction is robust.
Banking and Finance
Loan demand continued soft in the nine districts reporting on
financial developments although mortgage refinancing has increased with
the decline in mortgage interest rates.

Both consumer and business loan

demand are weak and lenders do not anticipate a rebound until overall
economic conditions improve.
new

firms

Consumers are reportedly reluctant to add

debt given the uncertainties about the employment situation, and
are maintaining low inventories and reducing capital spending.

iv

However, St. Louis noted that some companies that normally obtain
funding in the commercial paper market have been inquiring about bank
financing.

Meanwhile, lenders in some districts have tightened terms

for borrowers particularly in the construction and real estate sectors.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Dallas reported that agricultural income prospects improved due to
good cotton, rice and peanut harvests and continuing strong beef prices.
Kansas City noted that weak grain prices limited the income of crop
producers but that the income of livestock

producers was bolstered by

low feed prices and continued strength in cattle and hog prices.

The

Minnesota index of prices received by farmers fell for the ninth
consecutive month to the lowest level since 1988.

San Francisco noted

that the fifth year of drought in California will result in reduced
production of field crops and increased production costs.

Moreover,

higher feed prices and a lack of adequate grazing land will force cattle
into feedlots early, thereby lowering livestock prices.
Lower oil prices and uncertainty about the future have caused
drilling activity in Kansas City to subside though the rig count is
still about 3 percent above a year ago.

Energy sector activity remained

strong in Dallas where oil companies expect demand for their services to
increase as Kuwait rebuilds its oil fields.
Atlanta district was stable.

Oil production in the

San Francisco and St. Louis report that

the wood products industry has weakened in response to slow overall
economic activity.

Mining industry conditions have been fairly good in

Minneapolis with 1990 iron ore production up 5 percent, but coal
productionin St. Louis has declined.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District shows signs of
stabilizing, albeit at a low level.

The retailers contacted report

mixed sales results - about half experienced increases while others'
sales declined, some by as much as double-digit percentages.

According

to the consensus, sales conditions will be fairly stable for the rest of
1991, forcing retailers to control costs in order to achieve adequate
profitability.

First District manufacturers generally describe current

business conditions as weak, but half report a slight improvement in
recent weeks.

And most expect a modest recovery toward mid-year.

According to press reports, residential real estate activity has picked
up in response to lower interest rates and asking prices.
Retail
Retailers in the First District report mixed sales results since

Christmas.

For half the sample, sales are up by several percentage

points from a year ago.

For the other half,

some cases, by double-digit percentages.
England is relatively weak;

sales have declined - in

The southern half of New

Maine is relatively strong.

Our

respondents frequently note that consumers are postponing major
purchases whenever possible, but some also express relief that the
economy has not deteriorated further.
The consensus among our retail contacts is that sales conditions
will

he largely unchanged during the remainder of 1991.

To remain

sufficiently profitable, retailers will be forced to keep very tight
controls

on costs.

Some are still

continuing to reduce inventories.

I-2
All are attempting to reduce labor costs through measures such as
layoffs, attrition, reduction of hours, or wage freezes.

(A couple note

that increases in workers' compensation and unemployment insurance make
it difficult to hold the line on labor costs.)

Retailers' capital

spending plans are modest.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturers contacted in late February generally
describe business conditions as very sluggish; half see signs that
demand may be stabilizing.

According to this group, incoming business

has improved slightly in recent weeks.

Nevertheless,

new orders range

widely from 10 percent below to 14 percent above year-ago levels.
Housing, autos and general industry are considered relatively weak
markets; components for commercial aircraft, telecommunications, and
instruments as well as some new products show more strength.
exports are also mixed.

Views on

Contacts are divided as to whether exports to

Europe are picking up after a weak third quarter.

Exports to the

Pacific remain relatively strong.
At half of the manufacturers contacted, inventories are described
as somewhat too high.
next few months.

One-third also expect to reduce employment in the

Three-quarters of the firms have already brought

employment below 1990 levels, with the declines ranging from "slight" to
as much as 12 percent.
Most contacts report that materals prices are stable or
declining.

Three have succeeded in negotiating price reductions for

selected inputs.
only price increase
Japan.

Oil-related prices peaked in the fourth quarter.
mentoned was

The

for specialty steel imported from

A majority of respondents have raised their selling prices on

I-3
selected products, with the greatest increase amounting to 6 percent.
A minority are giving discounts.
Half the manufacturing firms expect capital expenditures to be
unchanged from last year's level.

A few plan increases of 10 to 20

percent; only one anticipates a decline.
state-of-the-art equipment.

Most budgeted spending is for

Only two firms plan to expand capacity.

Most contacts expect prospects for the economy and for their firms
to improve toward mid-year; however, they anticipate a relatively modest
recovery.

Positive developments cited include declining interest rates,

the war's brevity and the need to rebuild Kuwait.

Negative factors

include "continuing financial fragility" and declines in military
spending.
in 1991.

Half expressed optimism concerning company sales or profits
Others express considerable uncertainty; however,

the outlook to clarify shortly,

they expect

since the next four weeks should tell

the tale concerning consumer confidence.
Residential Real Estate
According to press reports,

residential real estate activity has

picked up significantly since the beginning of the year.

In the Greater

Boston area, pending sales are up substantially from the depressed
levels of early 1990.

Realtors

attribute the improvement to declining

interest rates and lower asking prices.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Recent reports on District developments have been soft to mixed.

Sales results at department stores have continued below targeted
levels and District unemployment rates rose substantially in

to levels above the national average.

January

More positively, homebuilders

noted a recent upturn in buyer interest though the market remains
soft, and office leasing activity stepped up.
officers
demand is

The majority of

surveyed at small and medium-size banks reported that loan
generally weak.

Consumer Spending

Sales results at District department stores in January were below
targeted levels though generally somewhat better than parent company's
nationwide averages.

Contacts reported good results early in

January

but a decided slowdown in sales following the start of the Persian
Gulf war.

However, a brief period of cold weather helped to move

items such as outerwear and sweaters.
Most retailers reported over-the-year sales gains in January
ranging from 0.5 percent to 3.5 percent though one chain had a yearto-year decline.

Big ticket items such as furniture, rugs and other

home furnishings continued to be hard hit as they have for several
months.

Fall and winter apparel moved well at most stores after

postholiday markdowns to make room for new spring merchandise.

As a

result, inventories were described as on target and, in one case,
below planned levels.

Retailers were generally cautious about the

near-term outook in view of the recession and consumer concern about
the likelihood of further layoffs.

Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilders in several parts of the District report an upturn in
buyer interest during recent weeks though the market continues to be
described as basically soft.

Potential buyers have been visiting

model homes in greater numbers and prices on existing homes have
fallen sufficiently in some areas to motivate purchases by first-time
homeowners.

Lower mortgage rates and greater optimism about the Gulf

situation were mentioned as contributing factors.

Many participants

are now cautiously optimistic that some improvement over last year
will occur.

Builders continue to report some difficulty in obtaining

adequate financing, however.
While District office leasing activity has recently stepped up,
little or no improvement in office vacancy rates has resulted because
of the continued marketing of new or no longer needed space.

In fact,

in mid-Manhattan, where new office towers are still rising, the
vacancy rate rose by almost a percentage point between November and
January and is now about three percentage points above January 1990.

Vacancy rates on District retail space have also been increasing.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates rose substantially in January to
levels above the national average.

New York's rate increased to 6.5

percent from 5.5 percent in December while New Jersey's rate rose to
6.4 percent from 5.9 percent.

In a separate report, the New York

Department of Labor noted that during 1990, job losses in the state
were greater than in any year since 1975.

Further dampening the

District's labor markets were announcements of yet another round of
large-scale layoffs by three financial firms and the Navy's
cancellation of a contract with Grumman Corporation.

II-3

Both the Buffalo and Rochester surveys of purchasing managers
reported an increase in the percentage of firms with improved business
conditions in January following a large decline during December.

Two-

thirds of the respondents in Rochester anticipate stable business
conditions over the next three months.
Financial Developments
The majority of loan officers surveyed at small and medium-size
banks in the District report that loan demand is generally weak, as
indicated by a decline in loan applications.

Most bankers noted that

consumer credit is the weakest sector although business loan demand
has also declined.

However,

respondents noted that mortgage

refinancing has increased significantly as rates on fixed rate
mortgages have declined relative to those on variable rate mortgages.
While loan inquiries have recently increased, customers reportedly
seem reluctant to take on additional debt, despite generally lower
interest rates, given the uncertain economic conditions.
stimulate loan demand,

all

In order to

the banks surveyed are undertaking more

aggressive advertising campaigns.

However, some officers expressed

doubts that such efforts will stimulate much new demand until
confidence in the economy improves.

Although the majority of

respondents said that their standards for qualified customers have not
changed overthe last year, some have tightened credit requirements,
particularly in evaluating applications for real estate related loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District remained sluggish in February, but
there were some spotty indications of improvement.

Although manufacturers said

the downtrend in that sector continued, they indicated that orders and shipments
have been steady in

recent weeks,

business was picking up.

following a year-long decline,

and export

Realtors reported that sales of both new and existing

homes had increased in February.

Cn the negative side, retailers generally were

experiencing weak sales, and bankers said overall loan demand remained slack
although some noted an increase in lending to middle market companies.
Looking ahead, Third District business contacts generally express guarded
optimism.

Manufacturers expect an increase in activity over the next six months

and they are planning some increases in capital spending.

Retailers anticipate

sales to pick up with the end of hostilities in the Persian Gulf, but they do not
expect strong gains until overall economic activity rebounds.

Realtors believe

the recent improvement in sales should be sustained as long as mortgage rates do
not move up and there is
Bankers,

however,

no substantial decline in employment in

the region.

believe that loan demand will remain only steady,

at best,

until there are clear signs of resurgent economic growth.

MANUFACTURING
Reports

from manufacturers

in

late February

indicated that

although

industrial activity continued to slow, the downward trend appeared to be easing.
Around half of the firms contacted said business was running at a steady pace and
there were some reports of improvement. In particular, manufacturing executives

III-2
indicated that, on balance,

total orders and shipments had been running at a

stable rate in recent weeks after a year-long decline, buoyed by a pickup in
export business. Nevertheless, managers at area plants said they were continuing
to trim employment.
Third District manufacturers apparently see some signs of improvement, and
the consensus outlook is

optimistic.

More than half of the plant managers

late February expect business to pick up over the next six months.

queried in

Although most do not expect the increase in

activity to be large enough to

require hiring more workers, expectations of improving business conditions are
prompting some area firms to schedule increases in capital spending.
RETAIL
Retailers reported that sales were sluggish in January and February.
specialty

stores

have

children's

clothing stores

improvement market;

seen

however,

stronger

sales

and stores
nearly all

recently--notably

catering

women's

Some
and

to the do-it-yourself home

broad-line stores are

experiencing

softness.
Store executives said consumers have been very cautious in their spending
While merchants expect some improvement with the end of hostilities

behavior.
in

the Persian Gulf they believe that consumers will continue

to exercise

restraint until the employment situation improves and family incomes pick up.
Retailers plan to limit expenditures for merchandise and marketing, and they are
stopping up efforts to

Total

control expenses.

loan volume outstanding at major banks in

dropped since the beginning of the year.
demand as

slack for mosy

the Third District has

Bank lending officers describe loan

categories of credit, and the) do not foresee a rebound

III-3
until overall economic conditions improve.
While

some

noted

bankers

an

increase

in

lending

to middle market

businesses, most said total commercial and industrial loan volume continued to
slip.

Consumer loan volume was also down, according to Third District bankers.

Several noted that outstanding installment credit was declining, especially for
Although bankers said consumer loans usually are

auto loans and credit cards.

paid down at this time of year,

some believe the decline in outstandings is

greater than can be attributed to the seasonal factor alone.
Real

estate

loan volume

beginning of the year.

is

outstanding

down only slightly from the

Bankers noted a recent pickup in

new residential

mortgages as well as an increase in refinancings.

Some also indicated that

depository

extending

institutions

outstanding loans

to

and

other

lenders

commercial property

were

owners

financial condition of the borrower remained sound.
little

maturities

and developers

where

on
the

However, bankers said that

new permanent financing was being advanced and that practically no funds

were being provided for speculative projects.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Sales of both new and existing homes have increased in
according to realtors.

recent weeks,

Most of the improvement came in the low- to mid-priced

market, but realtors also noted an increase in inquiries from potential buyers
in

the high end of the market.

Further indications of increasing demand are

reports from some builders that it was becoming easier to obtain asking prices
for

the houses

they build.

continued improvement as long

Realtors

expect residential

business

to

show

as mortgage rates do not move up and the employment

situation does not weaken.

Commercial realtors estimated that office vacancy rates were in a range

III-4
from the mid-teens to low-twenties in business area
and they expect rates to remain at these levels
Vacancy rates for retail space

around the Third District,

through the rest of the year.

were described as high,

and some

real estate

executives said high vacancies at some shopping centers were having a negative
impact on sales at stores operating at those locations.
Realtors

and

executives

involved

in

real

estate

construction activity to continue to decline this year.

financing

expect

They say refurbishing

of older buildings, primarily offices and warehouses, will provide some demand
for construction this year and next, but they are concerned that these buildings
may be

at

a competitive disadvantage

in

amount of recently built space available.

attracting

tenants

due

to the

large

IV - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The end of the Persian Gulf war has not altered the outlook

Summary.

for a brief and mild recession,

although some respondents believe that the

probability of recovery by summer, along with prospects of moderating
inflation, has improved.

Manufacturing conditions in the Fourth District

have deteriorated in recent month,

but the overall unemployment rate in Ohio

in January was stll below the national average.

The worst of the production

cutbacks in manufacturing, especially in autos and steel, appear to be over.
Retailers note a recent pickup in sales.
qualified borrowers

Credit is still available to

in the District, and banks and thrifts report a recent

flurry of activity for mortgage loans.
National Economy.

Respondents have not changed their view that the

recession will last two to three quarters and will be milder than the average
of post World War II recessions.

The end of the the Gulf war, raises the

probability of growth instead of decline in real GNP by 1991:IIIQ, according
to some respondents.

Real GNP is expected to decline by nearly the same rate

this quarter as last, based on the weakness already seen in January.

Also, an

overall annual inflation rate of about 3.5% for the balance of 1991 appears
more probable now that oil prices have fallen to the pre-Kuwait-invasion
level.
Regional

Economy.

slowly in recent

months,

The District's unemployment rate, although rising
remained below the national average again in January.

IV - 2

Manufacturing continues to outperform the nation, but showed some signs of
weakening in late 1990.

This Bank's estimate of industrial production in Ohio

fell in both November and December,

and employment in manufacturing has been

edging downward since late last fall.

Additional layoffs in late January and

February, especially in the auto and steel industries,

suggest that the

unemployment rate in Ohio will rise closer to the national average over the
next few months, according to some analysts.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales in February apparently strengthened from

January, and retailers are encouraged that the pickup in sales will carry
into March and the spring season.

One retailer, who ordered goods

based on his anticipation that weak sales since mid-1990 would continue
through the spring, now believes that the season could be better than he
expected.

Nevertheless real consumer spending this quarter will likely show about a
1% annual rate of decline from last quarter because of the weak January
performance, according to some retail analysts.
Retail inventories are judged to be about in line with desired levels.
There appears to be little concern that retail inventories are excessive,
except for new cars.

A few retailers assert that even a mild pickup in sales

would result in prompt increases in orders and production.
Manufacturing.

Most Fourth District respondents still

believe that the

worst of the slump in industrial production occurred last quarter, and that
production cuts

this quarter will be smaller than last.

IV - 3

Inventory reduction is not expected to be quite as large this quarter.
Auto stocks will be reduced again this quarter, but not as much as last. In
general, the inventory buildup prior to the economic contraction was
relatively small, and manufacturers have been promptly reducing stocks because
of the weakness in sales.
Auto output in 1991:IQ was cut back more than expected as recently as a
month ago, and production this quarter is now estimated at a 5.0 to 5.4
million annual rate compared with a 5.5 million rate last quarter.

Industry

analysts report that auto dealers cut orders below sales because of weak sales
in January.

New car sales strengthened in February,

and dealers apparently

have stepped up orders. As a result of recent production cutbacks, the auto
industry is

operating at slightly less than 60% of capacity. New car

production in 1991:IIQ should be higher than in the current quarter if

orders

are placed at or above sales levels.
Capital goods output has been holding up better than is
business slowdown.

typical for a

However, heavy-duty truck output has slumped more than

expected, although the bulk of that decline reportedly has already occurred.
Some producers of electrical and industrial machinery are encouraged by the
way orders have been holding up relative to past recessions,

apparently

supported by continued strength in exports and closely controlled inventories.
One

analyst expects that a slight reduction in real producers'equipment output

this quarter will be followd by a slight pickup next quarter.
goods

supplier also expects

"average"

recession.

A capital

that its business will not slide as much as in the

IV - 4

Steel operations have fallen to about 65% of capacity this quarter in
response to cutbacks in consumption and steel inventories. Steel exports have
fared relatively well. While the bulk of the inventory correction is expected
to be completed by the end of this quarter, reduction in stocks will continue
into the second quarter, constraining output.
Credit Market Conditions.

There is still little indication that

qualified borrowers in the District are being denied credit, although
borrowers may have to search harder and meet higher terms for loans than they
did last year.
Banks and thrifts report that lower mortgage interest rates have
stimulated activity for home loans, especially for refinancing, in recent
weeks.

Some thrifts report a surge in mortgage loan activity since about

mid-February, and are hoping for at least a seasonal pickup in mortgage loans
this spring. Lenders report that ample funds are available for mortgage loans.
Housing affordability is judged to be the best in several years.
Lower interest rates have not yet stimulated activity for commercial and
industrial loans.

Some banks experienced either a slight decline or a slight

increase in loans in January, because of a weakened economy.
Banks generally are avoiding construction loans, but they are still being
made available to qualified borrowers.

A well-capitalized thrift also reports

making construction loans, including for apartments, industrial warehouses,
and shopping strip malls, to qualified borrowers who were refused loans by
some commercial banks.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District

business and financial activity apparently weakened somewhat in

recent weeks, although there was a noticeable shift toward optimism about
near-term prospects.

Retail sales, manufacturing, real estate, tourism, and

bank lending evidently declined in January and February.
generally unchanged and imports rose at District seaports.

Exports were
Mild weather

conditions likely benefited agriculture.
Survey respondents--even those surveyed before the ceasefire in the Gulf
War--were decidedly more optimistic about the economic outlook than they had
been a few weeks ago.

Further, some who remained pessimistic believed that

the economy would begin to recover when the conflict ended--a condition now
apparently met.
Consumer Spending
Our regular survey of reta i lers suggested that retail activity softened
in late January and early February.

Most of those surveyed reported decreases

in shopper traffic and in total sales, including sales of big ticket items.
Nearly four in five reported that sales had declined since the Allied air
campaign began.

Employment at retail stores decreased, while wholesale and

retail prices increased.
A majority of the retailers expected their sales to rise in coming
months.

This optimism contrasted with retailers' pessimistic survey responses

a few weeks ago.
Manufacturing Our regular mail
of manufacturers
survey
indicated that District
Our regular mail survey of manufacturers indicated that District

manufacturing activity declined slightly in January and early February. Far
more respondents reported decreases than increases in shipments, orders, and
employment.

Over two-thirds said poor sales were their biggest problem.

Nearly half said that sales had declined since the Gulf War began, while only
one in eight said sales had picked up.

Most manufacturers indicated that the

prices and inventories of tneir raw materials and finished products had
remained stable in recent weeks.
Activity in the textile and furniture industries remained depressed.
Several producers have gone out of business in recent months.
manufacturers were operating on reduced workweeks.

Most

One producer expressed

concern over the deteriorating quaiity of manufacturers' accounts receivable.
Looking forward, however, manufacturers were optimistic for the first
time in several months.

One-half believed that orders would increase over the

next six months, while only a few foresaw a decline.

Similarly, one-half

expected conditions in their local areas and in the nation to improve in the
next six months.
Port Activity
District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton Roads (Norfolk)-indicated that exports were generally unchanged while imports were generally
higher in January than in December. Compared with a year ago, export
shipments were higher at all three ports and imports were higher at two.
Authorities at all ports expected exports to rise faster than imports over the
next six months.

Real Estate
Commercial and residential real estate activity apparently remained weak
across

most of the District during late January and early February.

Contractors and real estate analysts reported very little commercial
construction in their areas.

One analyst said that absorption of existing

office space was slowed by the consolidations of many service-producing
firms--primary users of office space.
Buyer interest in houses apparently rose, but home sales remained
sluggish in most urban areas and home prices were reportedly down slightly.
Sales activity was reported weakest in the most expensive segment of the
market and generally stable in the lower-priced segments.
Tourism
A telephone survey of hotels, motels,

and resorts indicated that tourist

Over half the respondents experienced

activity was below average this winter.

declines in room occupancy while one-third noted little change.

The slow

tourist business was attributed to the Gulf War, the general economic
slowdown, and the lack of snow for skiing.

The respondents expected business

to improve, however, in the months ahead.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone reported that
loan volume and interest rates were lower in recent weeks.
also down compared with a year earlier.

Loan demand was

Almost all of those contacted

reported extremely slow commercial real estate loan activity, with little
borrower or banker appetite for loans.

Bankers cited uncertainties related to

the Gulf War and sluggish economic conditions as reasons for the slowdown in
consumer loans.

Several bankers said that the recent economic downturn had

dampened consumers'

willingness to borrow.

One Northern Virginia banker,

however, reported a large increase in residential mortgage applications in the
days leading up to the ceasefire,

and several thought demand would pick up

somewhat in coming months.
Almost all of the bankers expressed a belief that current lending
standards were prudent and, for the most part, not causing creditworthy
borrowers to be refused credit.

Several said, though, that appraisal costs

and the lengthy approval period for mortgage loans may have caused some
potential borrowers to withdraw applications.
Agriculture
Farm analysts reported that mild winter weather had generally benefited
small grains and lessened the drawdown of winter hay stocks.

Mild weather

apparently helped many District farmers begin spring planting preparations
earlier than usual and also may have boosted survival rates of winter calves.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: Reports from businesses contacted in February were more mixed than has
been the case in recent months. While manufacturing activity levels were below or barely equal
to those seen a year ago, several retailers and residential realtors have seen either a bottoming
out or slight pickup in recent weeks.

Producers in construction- and transportation-related

industries reported no signs of improvement.
construction sector

Some current offset in the generally weak

is provided by work on a number of large industrial and government

projects, and rising home sales. Industries related to agriculture and energy are experiencing
growth or remain stable. Oil price declines this year have allowed some firms to restore profit
margins and others to lower prices.

Reports from bankers indicate that consumer and

commercial lending remains sluggish.
Retail Sales: Retailers report that sales dropped dramatically during the first week of
the Gulf war but that they rebounded after that time. Overall, retailers said that January and
early February retail sales fell below or only equalled last year's levels. Contacts reported that
durable goods sales continued to decline, and a few contacts noted a drop in their historically
strong catalog business. Most merchants said they were cautiously ordering durables because
they expected sales to be lackluster at least until spring.

However, discount stores continued

to report strong sales, particularly for nondurables, and were ordering more aggressively than
last year. Auto dealers, meanwhile, have reported improved sales recently following an initial
deep plunge at the beginning of the war. An Atlanta dealer emphatically said "we have seen the
bottom." The convention business in Atlanta and Orlando is reported to be down while New
Orleans' convention attendance levels are up slightly from "solid" year-earlier figures.
Manufacturing: Producers in several important regional industries report declining or
flat sales in January and early February compared to year end; they say that soft orders suggest

VI-2

that improvement is not yet imminent. Declining orders caused a heating and air conditioning
company to reduce its 1991 sales forecast by 5 percent recently, and cut its employment level
by 10 percent.

Home furnishings manufacturers, textile and auto producers, and auto parts

manufacturers say that they are responding to bleak sales with further layoffs and plant closings.
A jet engine parts maker, previously producing near capacity, reports that expected airline and
military spending cuts will result in a significant number of layoffs at its southeastern plants.
Formerly strong exports of pulp, paper, and chemicals now are reported to be softening. This
export slowdown is reflected in a report by a power generation equipment producer which
indicates that new orders from pulp and paper producers are down. Generally, businesses report
cutbacks in capital spending, though a majority say these are temporary.
Other significant industries report stable or growing sales. Producers of military boots
and camouflage apparel say their order backlogs have lengthened and that they are expanding
their work forces in order to fulfill growing military demand. Contacts say that stronger markets
for agricultural products have strengthened sales of fertilizer and other farm supplies. A sugar
processor says that its 1990 sales were up 18 percent from 1989. A poultry-processing firm
reports that stronger demand for its product by fast food stores has bolstered production and

sales. Oil producing activity reportedly has remained stable throughout the steep price swings
of the past half year.
Financial Services: Bankers report flat business and consumer loan demand in January
and early February compared to the last reporting period, and attribute it to a general lack of
confidence in the economy. Contacts say that commercial loans were flat because firms have
maintiined low inventories and reduced capital spending. However, a major regional bank's
working capitail lines are reported to be growing due to its easing of credit terms.

Banking

contacts say that lending conditions still are tight for some borrowers, particularly for real estate

VI-3

development. Borrowers representing stable industries such as utilities report that credit market
conditions are favorable.
Construction: Commercial construction and homebuilding activity across the region
remain at levels well below those of a year ago and of recent months. Commercial construction,
except for a number of industrial projects, was described as "dead" by a large building materials
manufacturing company that has already cut its work force by 30 percent over the past year.
According to other contacts, a number of large highway and other government construction
projects that are underway across the region should offset some of the weakness in commercial
construction. Additionally, realtors report improvements in existing home sales in January and
February, and they indicate that overall home sales probably have bottomed out.
Wages and Prices: Recent oil price declines have been passed through to customers
in industries with automatic adjustment clauses such as utilities and some transportation
companies. Others, however, are still putting through lagged adjustments to earlier increases.
Prices for fertilizers and some other energy-intensive products are even reported to be rising.
Contacts in some transportation companies say they are rebuilding previously squeezed profit
margins.

A refrigeration machinery company contact reports that his suppliers seem to be

benefiting from lower energy costs and are holding prices steady. Business contacts generally
report easing wage pressures. Technical workers such as welders still are reported to be scarce
in Louisiana while there is a growing pool of plumbers, electricians, and other building trades
workers in the region due to construction's decline.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Economic activity in the Seventh District continued to contract in February, but
contacts from several sectors reported that indicators have begun to show signs of bottoming out Retail
sales generally remained soft in February and early March, although several sources stated that the pattern
of sales within the month of February may have hinted at the beginning of a recovery. Sales and
production in the auto industry continued to be depressed, but a turnaround is still expected next quarter.
Reports from capital goods manufacturers were mixed, with weakness in computer-related and heavy
equipment and strength in machine tools. District steel production reflected weakness in construction and
equipment demand, as well as in auto production. Bank reports indicate that both borrowers and lenders
remain reluctant to commit to new lending agreements, despite lower interest rates. However, lower rates
may be sparking new activity in the residential real estate market.
Retail Sales. District retail sales activity remained soft in February and early March. However,
several reports suggest some signs of resilience after the marked weakness experienced in January. One
large department store chain stated that District sales in February continued to show year-over-year
declines, in line with results for the nation as a whole, although the pattern of sales within the month
hinted at a bottoming out. A large catalog retailer stated that orders showed an uptick once hostilities
ended, but it was too early to tell whether this reaction warranted modifying the firm's cautious stance on
orders to manufacurers. Two large general merchandise retailers based in the District reported little sales
improvement immediately after the cease-fire in the Middle East. One major discount retailer reported
that District sales were above inflation rates during February. This retailer's sales gains in the District
were also roughly in line with performance nationwide. Sales improvement may be in partthe result of
bankruptcies at other discount outlets, but sales were still strong enough to suggest that the decline in
consumer spending is bottoming out, according to this retailer.
Autos. Motor vehicle sales in the District remained depressed in both January and February.
Several auto dealerships stated that, following an extremely weak period in early January, sales and traffic
picked up briefly after the United States launched military action. Few dealers contacted reported any
significant sales increases in the brief period since the cease-fire, although several stated that consumer
attitudes andtraffic levels improved measurably, leading to hopes that the month of March will show a
solid turnaround insales. Alarge dealer of cars sold to upper-income customers reported that sales fell

60percent in January and 50 percent in February from the year-earlier periods, in partdue to new taxes.

VII-2
Another dealer, who characterized his customer base as relatively stable, also reported sharply weaker
sales in January, with no sign of a turnaround in February. This contact stated that consumers are
increasingly insensitive to incentives. One dealer argued that the decline in interest rates has not yet
passed through to the auto-buying consumer, as many financially-pressured lenders have simply captured
a higher spread. Still, lower interest rates have helped by lowering inventory financing costs.
Increasingly frequent downward revisicns to announced auto production schedules have hurt
inventory planning for dealers as well as parts suppliers. Car production increased during the month of
January in both 1990 and 1991. However, production in early to mid-February 1991 turned downward
again, in contrast to continued improvement over the same period last year. One industry analyst reported
that current schedules still call for an increased production rate (seasonally adjusted) in the second quarter
over the first quarter, in anticipation of a sales rebound. However, a large dealer expressed concern that
the recent acceleration of fleet sales will provide an overhang of "nearly-new" used cars, dampening a
production turnaround in the event sales rebound soon.
Capital Goods. Reports from capital goods producers are mixed, with some contacts reporting
continued weakness since the beginning of the year and others holding firm. A large manufacturer of
communications equipment stated that new domestic orders began to show year-over-year declines in
January, and the company was starting to experience some order cancellations. Order growth had been
slowing since the latter half of 1990, but the rate of decline in January orders was not as severe as
experienced in early 1987. A manufacturer of a wide variety of capital goods, who had experienced solid
growth through much of 1990, reported a sharp decline in orders for nondefense machinery in January.
However, a small producer of electric engines reported strong export-based orders, resulting from the
relative weakness in the dollar. A District steel producer reported that orders from capital goods
producers, such as farm

equipment and most forms of industrial machinery, remained soft through

February. However, order from machine tool producers were strong, along with orders from those
manufacturers who enjoyed solid export growth potential.
Steel. After holding up relatively well through the end of 1990, steel production fell significantly
in January and early February, and the industry's operating rate fell to about 65 percent in early February
(compared

to 85 percent inthe year-earlier period). A large District steel producer reported that

trailing]
began
[production

shipments, following some inventory building in December. According to

VII-3
this contact, steel suppliers to the auto industry are increasingly cautious about maintaining inventory at
levels sufficient to respond quickly to an auto production turnaround.
Price erosion contributed to poor steel industry profits in 1990 and may continue to hold down
profits this year. One senior executive expressed optimism that the industry would benefit from price
increases, which officially became effective in early 1991. However, partof the proposed increase has
already been rolled back. Some industry analysts are projecting continued price erosion in 1991, citing
increased competition to meet slowing domestic demand.
Credit Developments. Several District loan officers reported further tightening in loan terms for
commercial and industrial customers in early 1991. Tightening most often took the form of higher
spreads, smaller credit lines, and increased credit-line costs. These actions were reported more frequently,
and with greater magnitudes, for lending to large borrowers than to small borrowers. Because the new
tightening in credit-line terms only applies to new lines of credit, the ultimate impact on total credit-line
utilization may not be felt immediately, according to several financial analysts. One District banker, who
reported little change in lending policy, also cited weak demand as contributing to slow lending activity.
However, this contact stated that potential commercial and industrial customers seemed to be "snupping
around" more often for the bank offering the best terms.
Construction and Real Estate. Lower mortgage interest rates may have recently helped to spark
some activity in the residential real estate market. Several District sources reported higher levels of
inquiries in recent weeks, which may translate into increased home resale activity in coming months.
One large District realtor reported that residential transaction volume declines seemed to level off
somewhat in January. The rate of decline in February was at a much slower pace than in late 1990, and
inquiries began to increase. Most new business has been generated by first-time home buyers.
Several contacts noted that interest rate declines are not a key factor in today's commercial
market, as institutional investors remain reluctant to provide capital for new projects. One large retailer
stated that the firm's new store expansion program was being held back, not for strategic reasons or
internal cash flow problems, but by the inability of shopping mall developers to obtain financing for new
projects. A structural steel fabricator stated that architectural firms continue to cut back on employment,
a sign that a turnaround in sales of construction materials is not in sight. Industrial properties remain the
strongest in the commercial market, however, and have recently been viewed more favorably by
investors, according to one commercial realtor.

VII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
District

economic

sharply as indicated in our preceding report. Retail sales,
depressed,

show signs of improvement.

though still

Durables manufacturing activity

continues to weaken, but declines are mitigated by export growth.
for transportation services generally is

weak.

weak, has shown some improvement.

Demand

Declines in residential

construction and sales appear to have bottomed out.
still

as

but not

to contract,

activity continues

Loan growth, while

Activity in natural resource

industries is weak.
Consumer Spending
Recent retail sales are near or slightly below their year-earlier
in

level;

substantial price cuts were used to move goods.

manycases,

Some retailers, however,

report slight sales increases which they feel

reflect rising consumer confidence.
improve,

but only slightly.

vehicle sales were

Many retailars expect March sales to

Typical responses regarding recent motor

"quite poor" and "almost nil."

cutting inventories by reducing orders.

Some dealers

are

Contacts believe sales

are

depressed because many consumers have a "wait and see" attitude.
Manufacturing
Many durables

manufacturers making products

related

to

autos,

construction and appliances continue to receive declining orders.
instance,
Vehicle

Kentucky steel mill is cutting production substantially.
assembly
plants in St. Louis and Louisville ordered temporary

layoffs in response to rising inventories and weak sales.
contacts

For

anticipate

the

motor vehicle producers,

In St. Louis,

elimination of jobs by defense contractors and
layoffs by other manufacturers and the lack of

VIII-2

throughout most of 1991.

levels

declining employment

most other sectors will result in

growth in

While inventories of most manufacturers are

near desired levels, an increasing minority of producers, including those
inventories.

making rubber insulation and copper tubing, report excessive

Recent experiences of nondurables manufacturers have been mixed.
reports that orders have been soft

shoe manufacturer

uncertain because customers

outlook is
making

for

commitments

have been

since

slower

the

than usual in

food

Meanwhile,

the Fall season.

June;

A

processors

continue to receive steady or rising orders.
Exports
For many manufacturers, including those producing boxes, electrical
components,

wire and wood products,

partially offset the loss of domestic

orders.

European markets are especially strong.

Sales to Mexico and some

Contacts believe

of the Persian Gulf war will stimulate exports
level

of

southern

pine

lumber

to foreign markets have

rising sales

exports

is

the resolution

to the Middle East.

reported

as

steady,

The
while

District crop exports, except wheat, have fallen.
Transportation and Distribution
One airline

in

St.

Louis has ordered layoffs,

pulled out of the Memphis market.
to a reduction in

Little Rock and Memphis.

Both actions are partially in response

flat in Louisville and below year-ago levels
Recent

air cargo

shipping

is

down.

Orders

continue to "nose-dive."

for pallets,

up

in

in

both

but bargo traffic

on

shipments are

Louisville and Memphis. compared with a year ago,
rivers

another has

the demand for air service stemming from the Gulf war.

Air passenger traffic is

District

while

a barometer of

future

VIII-3

Construction and Real Estate
family housing

Single

Realtors
interest

in

the

downturn

in

Louisville,

One Memphis

contact

the
St.

were

District

substantially

rates

and a rise

in

buyer

increased

report

and Memphis

out.

bottomed

has

market

residential

Louis

interest

to lower

due

forcing

the

year-ago level in January; however, some District contacts

below their
believe

in

starts

consumer

confidence.

said continued difficulty in obtaining financing was
a

fear

developers

some

and

inventories

reduce

to

developers

shortage of new homes if financing difficulty persists.
Banking and Credit
Total
decline

or

loans

from

the

books

mid-January

previous month.

of large

declines
for the

appear largely responsible

in

real

estate

improvement.

showed a
they

than

mid-February

through

Smaller

District banks

and

Tntal

new

car

sales

mixed activity
of companies

in

for

consumer

commercial

that normally

loan

lending.

softness.
A St.

obtain funding in

for

did

consumer

the
loans

loans for a sample

of small and mid-size District banks show similar trends.
weak

smaller

Contacts blame

Loan officers

Louis banker

said

report

a number

the conmercial paper markets

were making inquiries about bank financing.
Natural Resources
Year-to-date
year

Abnormally

ago.

demand

for

contributed
products
year ago

District

high-sulfur

high

in

part,

report

production
of

stockpiles

coal

to the decrease.

manufacturers
due,

coal

and

slow

is

down

coal

at

growth

11

percent

utilities,
in

electric

from

a

reduced
output

Both southern pine lumber mills and hardwood
that

orders

are

to weak home building.

down

substantially

from

a

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic activity has generally declined, though there are some areas of
strength. Labor market conditions have been mixed. General merchandise sales have ranged from
declines relative to a year ago levels, to slight increases. Automobile sales and housing construction
are down from a year ago.

Conditions in manufacturing, construction, and resource-related

industries have been mixed.

Employment, Wages, and Prices
Labor market conditions have been mixed, with North and South Dakota showing slight
gains, while the rest of the district has generally deteriorated. The unemployment rate has fallen in
North Dakota to 3.8 percent in December from 4.1 percent a year ago, while in South Dakota it fell
to 3.2 percent from 3.7 percent over the same period.

In contrast, the unemployment rate in

Montana rose to 6.8 percent in December as compared to 5.3 percent a year ago, while that in the
Upper Pennisula of Michigan rose to 9.3 percent from 8.8 percent over the same period.

The

unemployment rate continued to rise in Minnesota reaching 5.4 percent in January of 1991, up from
4,9 percent a year ago. Total employment in the district was generally higher than a year ago. In
Minnesota, both total and nonfarm employment was about 1 percent higher in December of 1990 as
compared to a year ago, due in large part to strong growth in the service sector.

However,

employment in construction and manufacturing have declined during the past year. In both North and
South Dakota as well as Montana employment grew in almost all sectors over the past year.

District retailers of general merchandise generally report disappointing sales relative to their
expectations. Retailer reports of January sales in comparable stores ranged from 1.2 percent higher

IX-2
to 6 percent lower than in January 1990. Retailers generally attributed the flat sales to uncertainty
about the economy and the Gulf war. However, some retailers felt that the apparent end of the Gulf
war might have a positive effect on consumer attitudes. North Dakota recently reversed a more than
century-old ban on Sunday retail sales.
New car sales have been mixed in February with most dealers reporting declines, though one
dealer reported a 2 percent increase over the same period a year ago. Dealers expressed optimism
about the near future, but noted a trend towards smaller cars. Used car sales in the district are
reported to be strong. District truck sales have declined sharply with dealers reporting February
declines ranging from 20 to 33 percent relative to a year ago.

Dealers' reports on car and truck

inventory levels range from moderate to high.
Housing has continued to be depressed in the district. In Minnesota housing permits fell to
a six year low in December of 1990, down 13 percent from a year ago, and 43 percent from two
years ago. A recent study of housing in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area predicted that housing sales
willcontinue to be low due to stagnant population growth and an oversupply of existing units.
Tourism activity has been moderate to good, with some signs of weakness. Local tourism
officials have expressed some hope that with the recent reductions in international travel may benefit
the area. Ski resorts in Montana and parts of Wisconsin report fairly good snow conditions, while
those in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan report that insufficient snow has slowed business.
However, general tourist activity in the Upper Peninsula has been fairly good.

The number of

crossings over the Mackinac Bridge onto the Peninsula in 1990 was almost 7 percent higher than the
previous year. Tourism was also up in South Dakota, especially the Black Hills and Badlands areas.

IX-3
Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the district's construction industry have been mined.

The continuing overhang

of office space in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area has depressed construction activity in the area. This
overhang will be increased by the completion of four new office buildings, currently under
constructio .

The status of the district's manufacturing industries has been mixed lately.

An index of

economic activity in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area dropped in December from its November level,
though it ended the year slightly above last year's level.
Resource-Related Industries
Ninth district conditions of resource-related industries have been mixed.

For the ninth

consecutive month, the Minnesota index of prices received by farmers fell. The mid-January level
is the lowest since 1988. Wheat and milk prices accounted for a significant portion of the decline.
Dairy farmers, in particular, are reported to be doing poorly. Cattle prices have remained strong
however, and ranchers in the district report that 1990 was an excellent year. Precipitation in the
district has been below normal, which could adversely affect 1991 crop yields. The district's mining
industry conditions have been fairly good. For example, iron ore production in Minnesota in 1990
was 5.1 percent higher than in 1989.

X-l
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Growth in the Tenth District economy has slowed somewhat,

Overview.

due

in part to weaker performance in the agricultural and energy sectors.
District farmers are cautiously limiting their purchases after making modest

financial gains last year.

And, drilling activity in the district has slipped

in recent weeks due to tumbling oil prices and uncertainty about the future
strength of OPEC.

On the positive side, manufacturers'

export sales are

increasing modestly and retail sales are flat to improving slightly.
Retail Sales.
sales.

Retailers generally report flat to slightly improving

While consumers are still steering clear of big ticket items,

buying more apparel.

Retailers are keeping prices generally stable, except

for special promotions,
retailers

they are

to keep from discouraging customers further.

Most

are generally satisfied with their inventory levels and are

continuing to keep them low even though banking on improved sales after the
Persian Gulf

War.

Auto sales are down in almost all parts of the district.
dealer financing is
getting loans.

Adequate

available, but some potential buyers are having difficulty

Weak sales are frustrating dealer efforts to trim inventories.

Respondents expect auto sales to remain flat over the next two to three months
before gaining strength.
Manufacturing.
inputprices
near term,

Most purchasing agents report moderate

increases in

with only senteced reports of larger price increases.

In the

agents expect prices to be relatively stable as inputs appear to be

readily available.

Most firms continue to trim inventories.

Some firms

report slightly higher export sales and expect further increases during the
1991
of
rest

due to
economic growthabroad and the weaker dollar.

X-2

recent weeks.

in

to subside

rigs in

drilling

the future strength of OPEC have caused district

uncertainty about
activity

prices and

Lower oil

and the winding down of the Gulf War.

supplies

crude oil

due to abundant

Oil prices have tumbled to pre-invasion levels

Energy.

states

district

from 295 in

fell

number of operating drilling

The average
January

to 263

in

Still,

February.

the district rig count remained about 3 percent above its year-ago level.

Housing

Activity and Finance.

were even with the previous month.
levels,

expect an

most builders

Construction materials
increases.

Most district

Mortgage

demand is

declines

in

with last

commercial

and unchanged
agricultural

month.

most

few

the outlook

for new

refinancings

In

due

to recent

to stabilize

after

onths.
report loan demand

and construction

was constant

the reporting banks

lower rates

as is

price

contrast,

lower or unchanged

and industrial

loans,

loans was down at several banks

demand for home mortgages and

or up at most banks.

Demand for

ratios were unchanged

Loan-deposit

consumer
from last

banks.

consumer lending
to

in

Demand for commercial

loans,

Most reporting banks
of

of the year.

few reports of

Respondents expect rates

at most others.
loans

increase

commercial bankers

loans was generally steady.

half

increase during the second half

with some

the next

real estate

below year-ago

are still

readily available with

rates.

over

Most
Banking.

at

starts

the district

thrifts report continued deposit outflows.

weak,

mortgage

Calling slightly

month

While

over most of

starts

New home sales and prices are mixed,

home sales.

compared

are

Housing

rates
in

the

were

lowered prime
expect

further

unchanged at

near term.

interest

Nearly

rates

declines

in

most banks,
all

banks

last

month,

the near

and nearly

term.

While

half of the banks expect

reported

terms

of

lending

X-3
Deposit behavior varied considerably during the

unchanged from last month.

past month, across both reporting banks and categories of deposits.

About

equal numbers of banks reported higher and lower demand depoits, while MMDAs
were up at most banks.
banks.

In contrast, large CDs were constant or down at most

Changes in other kinds of deposits varied widely.
Spring credit reviews show modest financial gains overall

Agriculture.

The results of the reviews,

by district farmers during the past year.
however,

differed markedly for crop and livestock producers.

producers, weak grain prices limited incomes.
feed price

For crop

For livestock producers,

low

and continued strength in cattle and hog prices bolstered incomes.

Although most banks have not changed their credit standards since a year ago,
some banks are examining loan requests from grain producers more closely.
Capital expenditures by farmers in
ago.

Many farmers have limited their spending to necessities and purchases of

used rather than new equipment.
production costs,

and smaller

reining in capital

Prospects of

weak grain prices, higher

government payments are probably responsible for

spending.

The condition of the winter
Cold,

the district are down from a year

wheat crop varies across the district.

dry weather in recent months has left the crop in poor condition in

parts of Oklahoma and Kansas but
are attainable
during the

in

most of

remainder

of

in good condition elsewhere.

the district
the

is

growing season.

sufficient

rainfall

Normal yields

is

received

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

While output in the District remains sluggish, there is little evidence
of recession.

In recent months, however, the national downturn has affected

manufacturing industries in the District, causing a moderate decline in
overall manufacturing output.
Despite falling oil prices,

The service sector continues to grow mildly.

the energy industry is

Construction continues to grow moderately.
Auto sales have recently increased.

growing strongly.

Retail sales are generally down.

Agricultural conditions have improved.

State governments continue to struggle with revenue shortfalls and increased
demand for services.
Manufacturing output has declined moderately since the last survey.

weakness in the national economy has reduced orders for primary metals, paper,
chemicals, refining and construction-related materials.

Despite these

decreases, most respondents say that inventories are at desired levels.
Producers of primary metals note a significant reduction in domestic orders,
although gains in exports have partially offset these declines.
producers

Paper

say that orders for corrugated boxes and printing paper have fallen

noticeably.

Orders for chemicals have edged down from high levels.

Although

prices for refined products have fallen, producers say that demand has
continued to slide due to the gasoline tax and to high inventories held by
customers.

Lumber and wood producers generally note continued sales declines.

Stone, clay and glass prodcers say that construction declines
Northeast and West Coast have reduced their orders.
has declined,
concrete has

in the

While demand for concrete

producers note that the imposition of import fees on Mexican
increased District production.

Orders to electronics

firms

XI-2

continue to grow mildly.

Oil field equipment production is

growing strongly

and producers expect demand to accelerate with the rebuilding of Kuwait.
Apparel producers note slight but unexpected improvement in orders.
Health

Overall, the service sector continues to grow at a mild pace.
care respondents say demand is growing strongly.

Advertising firms say that

orders have gone from increasing to flat due to the war in the Middle East.
Petrochemical plant expansion has increased the orders for architectural and
engineering firms and several firms expect strong increases from the
Business consulting firms note flat overall sales.

rebuilding of Kuwait.
firms note some pick
flat

up in corporate demand, although their employment remains

to slightly down.

in demand.

Law

Temporary employment agencies report steady increases

Hotel occupancy has been flat.

District energy respondents note that the current oil prices are
consistent with supply and demand fundamentals.
energy sector activity in the District is still
extraction and oil

Despite falling oil prices,
strong.

Oil and gas

field service companies expect demand for their services to

increase as Kuwait rebuilds its oil fields.

Respondents in Texas say that

outlays for production will be favored over exploration in 1991.
Construction activity continues to increase moderately.
building has improved.
last 30 day,

Single-family

One respondent notes that sales have increased

after sluggish sales and starts since October 1990.

in the

Multi-

family residential demand remains steady and rents and occupancy rates
continue upward.

The nonresidential

increased slightly,
January.

construction sector recently has

after bad weather and war uncertainties slowed demand in

Several large

commercial projects have began in

the Dallas area,

and

XI-3

petrochemical plant construction is robust in the Houston area.
General merchandise stores report that retail sales have fallen on a
year-over-year basis.

Discount: stores, however, continue to do well although

competition is stiff.

Respondents say that selling prices are not keeping
Retailers are keeping inventories small.

pace with reported inflation rates.

Sales are expected to pick up after a resolution in the Middle East.

Houston

sales have weakened slightly but remain strong.
Auto

sales picked up in February and dealers are optimistic about spring

In January, Dallas-Fort Worth area auto sales fell 20 percent from a

sales.

Sales of both domestic cars and imported autos dropped, but

year earlier.

sales of transplants--Japanese
percent.

cars built in North America--increased 25

Houston area sales were up 5 percent in January.

Agricultural income prospects have improved because of surprisingly good
cotton, rice and peanut harvests.
show strength.

Furthermore, beef prices are continuing to

January crop prices, however, were 5 percent below a year ago.

Lower prices for corn, cottonseed and wheat offset higher prices for cotton,
hay, sorghum and soybeans.
from last year.

The 1991 winter wheat crop will likely decrease

Producers have seeded 10 percent less acres--the smallest

acreage planted since 1979.
State governments report increased fiscal pressures from slow revenue
growth and few areas to cut spending.
budget is

while

the

two-thirds of the state's

dedicated, and higher education and public health make up most of

the other third.
Revenues

In Louisiana,

are

Texas faces

projected

state

a projected $4 billion budget shortfall,

to increase only two to three percent in New Mexico

faceshigher pressure

to hire more teachers and increase

wages.

XII - 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic conditions in the Twelth District are reported to be sluggish, but western business
leaders' outlook for future economic conditions improved for the first time since August 1990. Price
and wage increases remain moderate throughout the District. Retail sales slowed substantially
immediately following the outbreak of the Gulf War, but activity has picked up since then
Manufacturing activity is mixed in the West, with some firms reporting increased orders for warrelated products. The District's agriculture and forest product industries continue to face difficult
conditions. Construction and real estate activity remains slow in much of the West. District financial
institutions report a drop in loan demand in the past several months.
Buisiness Sentiment
The economic outlook of western business leaders improved slightly in February, although
expectations about future economic growth remained pessimistic. Seventy-three percent now foresee a
national recession in the coming year, compared to 81 percent in January and 75 percent in November.
Expecations about business investment, housing starts, and consumer spending improved for the first
time since last August

Business leaders' outlook for inflation continued to improve, with 53 percent

now expecting inflationary pressures to ease in the coming year. Almost 60 percent of respondents

now project improvement in the foreign trade balance during the next twelve months, compared to 29
percent in January.

Reports from throughout the Twelfth District indicate that prices have stabilized recently, and
wage increasces remain moderate. Prices have declined for many agricultural and natural resource
products including

livestock, wheat, timber, natural gas, and oil. Increases in prices for department

store
merchandise remain

in the 3 to 4 percent range. Health care costs, however, continue to rise at a

XII - 2

15 to 20 percent rate. Recent union contracts for a wide range of industries in the Northwest brought
wage increases from 2 to 4 percent. Wages in financial institutions are reported to be rising at or
below last year's rate.
Retail Trade and Services
Twelfth District retail trade activity declined sharply immediately following the outbreak of the
Gulf War in mid-January, but many reports indicate a slight rebound since then. One District auto
dealer reported that sales came to a halt for 3 or 4 days after the start of the war, but that showroom
traffic has picked up recently. Similarly, department store sales softened in mid-January, but also have
improved in recent weeks. The war reportedly further eroded consumer confidence, leaving buyers
more cautious. Reports indicate that Southern California continues to post the weakest retail sales in
the District.
The rise in consumer uncertainty also has affected the tourism industry in some parts of the
West. In Hawaii, tourism has dropped off sharply, leaving the hotel occupancy rate down
approximately 30 percent.
The District's media industry is facing difficulties as a result of weakening economic
conditions and the war. Newspaper advertising, particularly national accounts, continues to fall off
significantly at the same time that costs are rising as a result of expanded Gulf War coverage.
Television advertising also has dropped off, as advertisements were canceled at the start of the war,
and expanded network coverage cut into available advertising spots.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the West is reported to be mixed. Defense-related manufacturing
remains weak overall, although some companies report a pick-up in activity related to the Gulf War.
War-related orders range from engines for missiles to procesed foodproducts. Several District
manufacturers report increasing interest from overseas buyers, including Eastern Europe. Latin and

XII - 3
South America, and the Middle East. Business investment plans for many manufacturing firms in the
District remain cautious.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Difficult conditions continue for the District's agriculture and forest products industries. The
fifth year of drought in California will result in reduced production of field crops and increased
production costs. Higher feed prices and lack of adequate grazing land will force cattle into feedlots
early, lowering livestock prices. California farmers with access to Colorado River or Sacramento
Delta water, or who have their own wells will likely come through the drought in good shape. For
many others, reduced production may be partially offset by rising prices for their products.
The District's wood products industry continues to weaken in response to slow economic
activity. Western lumber production is reported down 24 percent in the first five weeks of 1991 from
the same period a year ago. Orders and shipments of pulp and paper products also are reported off
significantly from last year. Soft demand has left prices lower, with lumber prices down 8 to 12
percent, and pulp and paper prices off 19 percent from a year ago.
Some finns in the Northwest with expertise in oil spill clean-up will be involved in the effort
to handle the spill in the Persian Gulf.
Construction and Real Estate:
Construction and real estate activity remains weak in much of the West. In California and
Washinton, both commercial and residential construction continues to soften. Developers report
increasing difficulty in obtaining financing for realestate projects. Slowing real estate sales have
cooled housing prices in Los Angeles and Seattle. In Salt Lake City, however, home prices and rental
rates continue to rise. New apartment buildings in Oregon report vacancy rates of less than 2 percent.
Financial Institutions
Financial institutions in the District report difficult conditions. Loan demand in much of the

XII - 4

West has slowed significantly. Bankers admit to tightening credit standards, and report that highly
leveraged companies and speculative real estate projects will face difficulty obtaining credit. The
bankers insist that loans are readily available to borrowers with strong balance sheets and solid cash
flow. Many reports suggest that weak economic conditions combined with closer regulatory scrutiny
have caused this tightening of credit standards.

