For use at Noon, E.D.T.
Wednesday
June 19, 1991

Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic

Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

June 1991

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

June 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

SUM MARY ..............................................................
.......

First District - Boston ..................................

............

I1-1

Second District - New York .................................................

II-1

Third District - Philadelphia ................................................

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland .................................................

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond ...................................................

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta ....................................................

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ..................................................

VII-

Eighth District - St. Louis .................................................

VIII-1

Ninth District - M inneapolis ................................................

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City ................................................

X-!

Eleventh District - Dallas ..................................................

XI-i

Twelfth District - San Francisco .................

............................

XII-1

i
SUMMARY*

Economic conditions appear to be improving modestly in much of the
nation.

Retail sales are up moderately in some districts.

Manufacturing is

gaining strength in some regions and industries, although several districts
report weaker foreign demand for some manufactured goods.

Prices are

generally steady to up slightly at both the wholesale and retail levels.

Home

purchases continue to strengthen, but homebuilding has picked up in only a few
regions.
demand.

Mortgage lending continues to be the only source of strength in loan
Delayed planting could reduce production of some crops.

Stable oil

prices and low natural gas prices are keeping oil drilling in check.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales vary across districts.

While there are no reports of

substantial improvement, the overall situation is somewhat brighter than
that described in the last Beige Book.

A few districts describe gains as

slight or moderate, while others report lackluster sales.

Richmond reports a

slight decline in sales, and Atlanta notes that spending increases of recent
months have stalled.

Sales are uneven in several districts, with soft goods

selling better than consumer durables.

But sales advances in the Chicago

district were led by housing-related durable goods.

Unseasonably warm weather

has brought improved sales of summer goods in the Northeast, but skepticism
remains about future gains.

Retailers in several districts are also concerned

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City based on

information collected before June 10, 1991. This document summarizes comments
received from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is
not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

ii
about future sales gains in light of shaky consumer confidence and uncertainty
about the course of the economy.

A few districts, however, report optimism

about future sales, particularly for items related to purchases of both new
and existing houses.

While retailers in some districts are comfortable with

current inventory levels, others continue to emphasize keeping stocks lean and
under tight control.

Only modest increases in retail prices are reported.

Most reporting districts say that new car sales remain weak.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity seems to be improving overall, but several
districts report slower export growth.

Prices of inputs are generally stable.

Philadelphia reports activity picking up in most major industries, and Boston
notes a recent pickup in both sales and orders.

Cleveland says that

manufacturing output appears to have bottomed as capital goods industries near
a trough, but New York and San Francisco report continued slow activity.
Steel industry respondents see little change in production, with gradual
improvement in domestic markets offset by softer export markets.

St. Louis

reports mixed activity with some firms expanding but many still contracting
due to defense cuts spreading to smaller firms.

In the Chicago district,

consumer durables producers are doing better than heavy equipment producers.
Automobile production is improving, as is production of goods going into new
homes.

Weakness continues in the production and sales of capital goods.

Dallas reports that oil field machinery production has declined slightly due
to decreased domestic drilling.
Views of the outlook vary among respondents, with stagnation expected in
the Boston district until early 1992 but healthy gains expected in the

iii
Philadelphia district for the rest of this year.

New York respondents see no

significant turnaround before late summer, while Cleveland and Richmond
respondents are optimistic for the second half of the year.

Construction and Real Estate
The

improvement in home sales reported in the last Beige Book continues

and is being translated into increased construction activity in some areas.
While buyer interest and purchases still are found mainly in the market for
existing homes, reduced inventories of new houses are leading to increases in
starts in several parts of the Midwest.

In the Atlanta district, tight

lending conditions are restricting the rebound in residential sales and
construction.

And in the St. Louis district, new construction remains mixed

in spite of lower inventories of unsold homes.
remains weak.

Nonresidential construction

Little commercial construction appears to be under way, as

vacancy rates are high and leasing activity sluggish.

Construction activity

is being supported by public projects in the Atlanta and Richmond districts,
but Dallas reports a significant slowdown in most types of public
construction.

Banking and Finance
Bank lending continues to be weak in the eight districts reporting on
financial developments, despite a pickup in demand for home mortgage loans.
Much of the strength in mortgage lending stems from refinancing rather than
new purchases.

Demand for business and consumer loans is weak, except for

some modest strength in consumer lending in the Cleveland and Kansas City
districts.

While sluggish growth in business loans in the Richmond district

iv
is attributed mainly to weak loan demand, some supply restraints were also
noted.

Small and midsized banks in the New York district report slower

repayment for all types of consumer loans.

Some respondents expect continued

sluggish growth in lending even after the recession ends.

Agriculture and Natural Resources
Extreme weather conditions in several districts have hampered spring
planting.

Production estimates are being lowered for several crops.

Heavy

rains have delayed spring planting in parts of the Atlanta, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City districts.

Crops affected include cotton,

soybeans, peanuts, rice, corn, and grain sorghum.

Dry conditions in west

Texas and the Texas panhandle have reduced production estimates for the area's
wheat and cotton crops.

Richmond reports generally favorable agricultural

prospects, and Minneapolis notes that conditions are good in the Dakotas.
Kansas City reports a high level of farm income, with strong cattle prices
continuing to reduce the impact of weak crop prices.
Oil drilling in the Dallas and Kansas City districts has declined
despite stable oil prices.

The decline stems partly from low natural gas

prices, which are down 20 percent from a year ago.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic conditions in the First District show some signs of
improvement.

Although a majority of First District manufacturing

contacts continue to report sales and orders below year-ago levels,
almost half saw business pick up in April and May.

Retail reports were

more uniformly positive, with retail contacts indicating that sales in
May were at or above year-ago levels.

Because special factors may

account for the pickup to date, most manufacturers and retailers feel
that an economic recovery has not yet begun -- either in the nation or
in New England.

Nonetheless, retailers anticipate either stable or

improved sales results for the coming year, and one-third of the
manufacturers contacted believe that a national recovery is already
under way.
Retail
Retail contacts in the First District report that May sales were
between zero and 10 percent above year-ago figures, an improvement from
the year-over-year declines seen earlier in 1991.

Respondents are

hesitant to interpret these recent results as an economic turnaround
because the gains may partly reflect weather-related sales, purchases
that could no longer be postponed, and comparisons with unusually poor
figures in May 1990.

However, most retailers also point to selected

positive economic signs, either nationally or locally.

The consensus is

that the New England economy will show modest improvement over the
coming year, and all the contacts anticipate either flat or rising sales
for their company.
Employment levels have now stabilized at the majority of retail

I-2
contacts, after having declined during the previous year.

Some

retailers that had previously frozen wages are beginning to give
selective increases.

Capital budgets remain tight, with most retailers

spending only for replacement and repairs.

About half the sample report

that managing or reducing inventory levels remains a priority.
Manufacturing
A slim majority of First District manufacturing contacts report
that sales and orders are down from year-ago levels.

Sales declines

range from 1 to 6 percent; those for orders from slight to double-digit

percentages.

Elsewhere, sales and orders are steady or rising (in one

case substantially) compared to 1990 figures.

Several firms indicate

that foreign (particularly German) sales have been stronger than
domestic, but most contacts report that overseas demand has weakened
recently.

Despite the slowdown abroad, almost half of the contacts saw

their total business improve in April and May.

New or specialty

products and those related to environmental monitoring, oil,
telecommunications, and aerospace show the most strength.
consumer durables manufacturers have also improved.

Products for

By contrast,

commodity lines, and equipment for the auto, defense, construction, and
retail industries remain relatively weak.
Firms discussing inventories describe them as satisfactory.
Supplies are readily available, and carrying costs have declined with
interest rates.
Input prices are reportedly stable or below 1990 levels, and some
firms continue to achieve negotiated reductions.

Half the respondents

have held selling prices steady or have reduced them through discounts.
The rest are adopting a mixed strategy -- raising prices on selected
products (by as much as 5 percent) where market conditions permit,

lowering them on other items for which competition is severe.
A majority of contacts report that employment levels are below
1990 figures, generally by small percentages.

Half the firms plan

further modest reductions.
This year's capital spending will be below 1990 levels at over
half of the responding firms.
20 percent.

Declines range from small to as much as

On the other hand, one-third of the contacts expect to

increase capital spending substantially with significant expenditures
planned for New England.
According to a two-thirds majority of manufacturers surveyed, an
economic upturn is not yet in sight.

These contacts expect "stagnation"

to persist, in some cases into early 1992.

One observer described the

economy as just "bouncing along" the bottom.

Nevertheless, a third of

the respondents believe a national recovery has already started.
Outlook
The New England Economy Project (NEEP), a nonprofit organization
comprising businesses, government agencies and educational institutions,
released its biannual forecast in early June.

Based on a national

forecast that the recession will end this summer, NEEP expects New
England's recovery to lag, with total nonfarm jobs beginning to grow in
the first quarter of 1992.

The projected regional turnaround reflects a

noticeable slowdown in the rate of manufacturing job loss as well as
gains in nonmanufacturing employment.
quite modest in 1992.

Job growth is expected to be

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports on District developments remain soft to mixed.

Sales results were

very uneven among District department stores during April and May. Homebuilders
are hopeful that an upturn in the existing home market will soon spur increased
demand for new homes.

Office leasing activity remains somewhat sluggish and

vacancy rates have continued to rise.
Jersey but edged down in New York.

The May unemployment rate rose in New

Senior loan officers at small and midsized

banks reported that overall demand for consumer loans is moderate to weak.
Consumer Spending
Sales-results at District department stores were mixed during April and
May.

Some contacts noted an improvement with sales better than planned while

others reported continued sluggishness.

Over-the-year changes in April ranged

from -7.8 percent to +5.0 percent and in May, from -2.0 percent to +6.5 percent
with stores fairly evenly divided as to gains and declines.

Women's clothing

and accessories sold well at most stores in April as did cosmetics and men's
sportswear.

Respondents with better-than-anticipated May sales attributed much

of the gain to unseasonably warm weather, noting that the fastest-selling items
were swimwear, weekend wear, sandals and other summer apparel.

The pattern for

home furnishings was mixed in both April and May, with one chain noting a pickup
after several slow months but others experiencing further slackness.
Due to tight monitoring and, in some cases, to better-than-expected sales,
inventories are generally at comfortable levels, though one chain reported a

level somewhat above plan.

Contacts remain cautious about the outlook for

consumer spending citing the uncertainties about the course of the economy as
well as the possibility that May's strength may represent sales borrowed from
June.

II-2

Residential Construction and Real Estate
Interest on the part of potential buyers is reportedly strong in much of
the District as a result of lower home prices and mortgage rates, but apparently
its initial effect has been primarily on the resale market.

Homebuilders are

hopeful that this upturn in the existing home market will soon spur increased
demand for new homes from sellers wanting to move up.

The New York State

Association of Realtors noted that, for the first time in five years, existing
home sales increased from February to March north of New York City, and the
Buffalo area reported an 11 percent over-the-year increase in April resales.
Recently in Manhattan there were, for the first time, auctions of condominium
and cooperative apartments; in the suburbs, this technique has been used quite
successfully in the past couple of years to reduce surplus stocks of new singlefamily homes.
Office leasing activity has remained somewhat sluggish in recent weeks and
additional space continues to be marketed due to new completions and further
consolidations and restructuring.

As a result, office vacancy rates have been

rising in many parts of the District.

At the end of the first quarter, the

vacancy rate in the 15 northern New Jersey counties, for example, averaged more
than 22 percent, up almost 4 percentage points from a year earlier.

Over-the-

year increases of 2 percentage points or more were common in several other areas
such as Long Island, Westchester County and Manhattan.

Vacancy rates in

Manhattan are reportedly at their highest levels since the 1970s.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing firms contacted in the District report continued weak sales
with none anticipating any significant turnaround until late summer or fall, at
the earliest.

A producer of construction equipment sees the weakness spreading

as the anemic housing and government sectors have been joined in recent months
by a noticeable slowing in demand from the auto industry.

A small producer of

electric machinery was the only firm reporting a jump in sales, but the pickup
has only been enough to bring sales up to year-ago levels.

Exports were

II-3

frequently reported to be growing faster than domestic sales, although more than
half of the firms contacted felt their export growth rate is declining.
Most respondents have lowered their prices in recent months to shore up
sales, but none plan to offer large price discounts in the near furure.

Half of

the firms surveyed have reduced their employment levels significantly in recent
months in the face of weak demand but plan no further significant layoffs over
the coming months.
Other Business Activity
The May unemployment rate rose in New Jersey to 6.8 percent from
6.5 percent in April

(seasonally adjusted), but edged down in New York State to

7.4 percent after a 0.7 percentage point jump in April.

Unemployment rates in

the District are no longer below the national average as they had been for
several years and employment has been growing much more slowly than nationally
in recent years.

This trend primarily reflects layoffs and consolidations in

New York City and on Long Island as well as sluggishness in northern New Jersey.
Upstate New York had been registering sizable employment gains until the
recession began.

Budgetary problems that continue to plague local and state

governments in much of the District cast a shadow on the employment outlook.
Some 8000 New York City workers were recently notified that they may be laid off
by July 1 and both New York State and New Jersey continue to mention the
possibility of cutbacks of state employees.

In an attempt to forestall layoffs

as well as higher taxes, Bridgeport, Connecticut is filing for protection from
creditors under Chapter 9 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The April surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester showed
somewhat conflicting patterns.

In the Buffalo survey, 84 percent of firms

reported stable to improved new orders in April, up from 72 percent in March.
In Rochester, however, although fewer firms noted a worsening in April than in
March, the 26 percent that did see a deterioration was still almost four times
greater than in February.

II-4

Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the
Second District reported that overall demand for consumer loans is moderate to
weak. The majority of respondents also noted that demand for consumer
installment loans is lower than a year ago. Most bank officers characterized the
growth of automobile, credit card, and home equity loans over the last three
months as slow to flat.

Those banks that typically offer lines of credit on

home equity reported that commitment fees have not changed in the last three
months. Most bankers said current home equity lending is mainly to new borrowers
rather than takedowns on existing credit lines.
The majority of respondents noted a slowdown in payment schedules for all
types of consumer loans, though a few stated that the slowing was confined to
automobile loans. However, most officers stated that outstanding balances are
not rising and indicated that delinquencies are unchanged from three months ago.
Several respondents noted some decline in the creditworthiness of borrowers due
to high levels of debt, layoffs, and reductions in salaries. Nonetheless, two
thirds of all respondents stated that, compared to three months ago, their
institution is just as willing to extend credit for consumer installment loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from Third District business contacts in early June indicated that regional
economic activity was essentially steady overall, although conditions varied by sector.
Manufacturers generally noted continuing improvement, while retailers indicated business was
only steady, and bankers reported continuing slackness in loan demand. On balance, industrial
firms in the district were posting gains in shipments and orders in late May, and they were
maintaining steady employment levels. Retailers gave mixed reports: discount stores were
making year-over-year gains and seasonal merchandise was generally selling well, but total
sales in May appeared to just match the May 1990 level, in dollar terms. Bankers said business
and consumer loan volumes outstanding were slipping while residential mortgage lending was
edging up.
Expectations among business contacts arc generally positive although the level of
optimism is not high overall. Manufacturers forecast a relatively solid improvement during the
balance of the year and they are making plans to step up hiring and capital spending.
Retailers, however, anticipate that real sales in the second half will be just even with the yearago period. Bankers generally forecast a slow upturn in loan demand in the second half. They
expect slight gains in consumer and residential lending, and, while they believe an increase in
loans to business may be ahead, they do not foresee a rebound in commercial real estate
lending.
MANUFACTURING
Reports from Third District manufacturers contacted in late May and early June
indicated that activity was picking up in most of the major industries in the region. Although
half of the firms queried said shipments were running at just a steady pace, one-third noted
recent increases. One-third of the manufacturers polled also reported that new orders have

III-2
risen in recent weeks. Although demand for their goods appeared to be growing, most of the
industrial companies in the region were not adding to payrolls or extending the workweek.
Looking ahead, most Third District manufacturers providing information for this report
expect business to continue to improve this year. On the whole, they foresee healthy gains in
orders and shipments. Managers at area plants indicated they intend to act on their optimism;
one-third plan to add to their work forces and nearly half will step up capital spending over
the next two quarters.
RETAIL
Third District retailers generally described May and early June sales as lackluster,
although some said summer clothing and other seasonal goods sold well during a period of
unusually hot weather. Overall, reports from store officials indicated that current dollar sales
in recent weeks were even with the same period a year ago. Several discount and off-price
stores, however, made year-over-year gains.
Most of the merchants contacted for this report believe the sales trend over the summer
will be flat in real terms. They are somewhat apprehensive about the fall, and several voiced
concern that consumers will not step up spending sharply even when the economy moves out
of the current recession.

They point to the possibility of growing restraint in consumer

spending as a negative influence on retail sales growth in the future.
Auto dealers in the Third District reported that new car sales have been declining since
March, both in unit and dollar terms. Some dealers said that potential buyers' reluctance to add
significantly to debt loads while the economic outlook remains uncertain was depressing
demand for new cars. In contrast, used car sales have been relatively healthy.

FINANCE
Third District bankers contacted in early June indicated that lending activity was soft;
most reported that loan demand was weak in all credit categories. On the basis of these reports
it appeared that total loan volume outstanding was declining. Although residential mortgage

III-3
lending was expanding, albeit slowly, business and consumer lending was declining.

In

particular, several bankers noted that auto and credit card loan volumes outstanding were
falling at their institutions.
Most of the bankers who offered forecasts said they expect a slow economic recovery
to start in the third or fourth quarter, setting the stage for an upturn in loan demand.
However, most bankers expect only sluggish growth in lending when the recession ends. They
believe consumers will not increase spending quickly and that residential real estate activity
will not pickup appreciably from the current pace. As for business lending, the general opinion
among Third District bankers is that commercial real estate lending will remain depressed
through this year and next; and, although several bankers noted that their regular business
borrowers are considering requesting additional credit, they said that loan applications have
not increased yet.
Third District bank executives generally indicated that funding was adequate given the
slackness in loan demand. Total deposits at banks in the district have been declining, according
to bankers, as interest rates have eased. Money market deposit account balances have been
steady, however, and bankers believe depositors are favoring these liquid accounts as rates on
time deposits have fallen.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

District respondents believe that the recession in both the

nation and the Fourth District is about over, although they still expect a
slow recovery.

Auto and nonautomotive retailers note a strengthening in sales

during May, but are still cautious about near-term sales prospects.
Manufacturing output also appears to have bottomed, and respondents are
generally more optimistic about second-half prospects than they were earlier
this year.

Demand for and construction of new housing appears to be

increasing slowly this spring.

There are only scattered signs of a step-up in

commercial loans, and banks generally report that mortgage loans, excluding
refinancings, have been increasing only sslowly.
National Economy.

A panel of Fourth District economists expects that

recession will end in the second quarter.

They expect virtually no change in

real GNP from last quarter, with growth at about a 2.5% annual rate in the
second half of 1991 and about 3.5% between 1991:IVQ and 1992:IVQ.
These economists are less optimistic about prospects for inflation now
than they were in January.

Overall prices are expected to increase at an

annual rate of 3.7% in the second half of 1991, and at nearly that rate
through the end of 1992.

These forecasts are about half a percentage point

higher than the panel had anticipated in January.

IV-2

District Economy.

There are mixed signs of recovery from the brief

contraction in the District.

In May, employment in Ohio rose slightly for the

third straight month, and the unemployment rate fell below the national
average for the first time since February.

Also, manufacturing production

declined only slightly more in Ohio than in the nation last quarter, after
having outperformed the nation throughout 1990.
auto and auto-related industries.

Much of the decline was in

District respondents expect that auto

output will gradually strengthen by late this year.
Consumption.

Retailers remain cautious about prospects despite the

generally improved level of sales in May.

Although most report

weather-related increases in sales, they are skeptical that this represents a
rising trend because there was no pickup in household furnishings.

Despite a

mixed pattern of sales so far this year, retailers believe that inventories
are at about desired levels.
Automakers and dealers expect only a gradual improvement in sales
throughout the balance of this year, despite the May increase in sales.
Although inventories are lower than usual for this time of year, orders and
production schedules for 1992 model cars are being held close to actual sales.
Manufacturing.

Fourth District panelists are more optimistic about

prospects for recovery in production than they were earlier in the year.

They

now expect a second-half rebound in production at about a 4.5% annual rate,
led especially by a swing in inventories between the first quarter and fourth
quarter of this year.

IV-3
Auto analysts, however, believe that most of that industry's contribution
to overall output growth will likely occur in the second quarter.

Inventories

of trucks are still reported to be excessive.
Steel respondents also expect little change in production from the recent
70% operating rate.

Some expect a gradual improvement in domestic steel

markets to be offset by softening in export markets.

Correction of steel

inventories is said to be nearly complete, and warehouse centers are
apparently beginning to step up orders, but are hesitant to restock because
prices might continue to slide.

Some respondents note an erratic but small

pickup in orders from auto and appliance producers, but not much change from
capital-goods producers.
Capital goods respondents expect that most of those industries are close
to a trough at present.

Orders for heavy-duty trucks apparently have emerged

from a first-quarter slump, according to a supplier, with successive monthly
increases in April and May.
bottoming.

Orders for industrial controls show signs of

An industrial equipment supplier reports that his order decline

has also leveled out, but no signs of a pickup are yet apparent.

An office

and machinery equipment producer cites a significant upturn in electronic
components, although office computer machinery is still in recession.
Construction and Real Estate.

The flurry of mortgage loan activity and

housing sales earlier this year subsided in May for some mortgage lenders, but
continued strong for others.

Some report that demand for refinancing also

slowed after an unusually strong first quarter.

Mortgage lending terms have

been relatively unchanged for the past several months.

A major lender in the

IV-4

Cleveland market, however, states that May was one of its best months for
mortgage loans, in part because of increases in market share for single-family
home loans.
Several lenders report more activity for existing home sales than for new
homes.

In some parts of the District, lack of demand and builder caution have

dampened a rise in new home starts.
Financial Developments.

Bankers generally report that commercial and

industrial loans have remained flat or have risen only slightly since
the beginning of spring.
picked up in recent weeks.

In some areas, however, small business loans have
Mortgage loans have continued to strengthen, but

some banks report that at least half of the loans have been for refinancing,
and that the spring pickup for new loans so far has not been strong.
installment loans continue to increase irregularly.

Consumer

Bankers report no

important changes in lending terms or in lending standards in recent weeks,
and generally assert that there are ample funds available for creditworthy
borrowers and projects.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity in late May and early June was, on balance,
not much improved from the month before, but the attitude of businesses about
the near-term outlook remained optimistic.
manufacturing activity was Flat.

Retail sales were lower and

Almost no new commercial construction was

started and housing activity was lackluster.

Sluggish growth in the volume of

business loans was attributed primarily to weak loan demand, although some
supply constraints were noted.

On the brighter side, retailers and

manufacturers were optimistic about their prospects, export volume rose at
District ports and the outlook for the District's farming sector appeared
promising.
Consumer Spending
Our regular survey of retailers suggested that retail activity declined
slightly in the past month.

Reports of lower sales--including sales of big-

ticket items--outnumbered reports of higher sales.
slightly lower, as was retail employment.

Shopper traffic was

Retail prices showed little change,

even though wholesale prices were reported to be somewhat higher.
Respondents were optimistic about retail activity over the next six
months.

About half expected shopper traffic and sales to increase, but only a

small percentage anticipated any change in employment.

Prices at the

wholesale and retail levels were expected to rise.
Manufacturing
Responses to our regular survey of manufacturers indicated that District
factory activity remained stable.

Manufacturers reported almost no change in

shipments, prices, export orders, capital expenditures, and employment.

New

orders increased slightly, while inventories and order backlogs decreased
slightly.

About two-thirds of the responding manufacturers viewed poor sales

as their single most important problem.
Manufacturers remained optimistic about business conditions and their
prospects for the next six months, although somewhat less so than in our
previous survey.

About half of the manufacturers foresaw increases in

shipments, new orders, and order backlogs.

Respondents anticipated slight

increases in capital expenditures and export orders, but they expected little
change in inventories and employment.
Port Activity
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that exports were higher and imports were generally
unchanged in May from April.

Compared with a year ago, export activity was

higher and import activity was lower.

Exports are expected to increase faster

than imports ever the next six months.
Tourism
A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the
District indicated that tourist activity increased significantly over the
Memorial Day weekend compared with last year.

Many beach areas were

reportedly booked to capacity while most other beach and mountain areas
experienced increases in bookings which they attributed to the unseasonably
hot weather.

A majority of the respondents expected tourist activity this

summer to be above last year's level.

Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
the demand for commercial and industrial loans remained weak in April and late
May.

Among businesses that requested loans, smaller firms slightly

outnumbered larger ones, and few new businesses sought financing.

Loan

delinquency rates edged down.
We also asked retailers and manufacturers about credit conditions. A
majority indicated that loan activity was sluggish in their respective areas.
Most felt that a moderate number of creditworthy borrowers had been refused
loans recently.

Most also indicated, however, that loan demand was weaker.

Housing
Results from our survey of home builders suggested that housing activity
was mixed in recent weeks.

The number of reports of increases in housing

starts about equaled the number of reports of decreases.

Although some

builders noted an increase in sales, most reported that sales were unchanged
to lower.

Low- and medium-priced homes apparently sold better than high-

priced homes.

Nearly all builders reported that home prices were steady.

A

few indicated that credit conditions were stringent.
Nonresidential Construction
Commercial construction firms contacted by telephone noted few signs of
an upturn in nonresidential building.

These firms reported that little

private commercial construction was underway and indicated that much of their
current work was public projects--bridges, highways, and government buildings.
Some respondents, however, suggested that the decline in activity had bottomed
out, although none expected a strong upturn.

The outlook in the Washington,

D.C. area was said to be especially uncertain.

Several respondents reported

that industry profit margins were extremely thin and that in some cases firms
were bidding jobs at below variable costs.
Agriculture
Despite scarce rainfall and record high temperatures across much of the
District in late May, our contacts in agriculture indicated that prospects
were generally favorable as of the end of the first week of June.

The harvest

of small grains and peaches was in progress, and preliminary assessments
indicated that yields for these crops would be excellent.

The spring planting

of corn, soybeans, and the transplanting of tobacco were nearing completion
and were ahead of last year's pace.

The condition of most crops was good to

excellent with only scattered reports of heat stress and disease damage.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview:

Business contacts in the Southeast indicate a slight improvement in

economic activity in May compared with both year-ago and recently-increasing monthly levels.
Home sales are said to be remaining on an upward trend.

Reports on retail sales and

manufacturing suggested scattered improvements, though the majority of contacts indicated
softness. The export sector, which is comparatively small in the District, displayed continued
strength. Heavy rains in the Southeast have cut into the sales of several agribusinesses and
limited crop plantings of cotton, soybeans and peanuts.
Retail Sales: Reports from most retailers indicate that the consumer spending increases
posted in recent months have stalled, not meeting their previous expectations. Contacts report
that they have seen no real improvement in May sales from recent months and posted only
marginally higher sales from weak year-ago levels. About three out of four retailers reported
that May durable goods sales were at best even with last year's levels, with the exception of
slight increases in appliance and automobile sales. Overall, they still anticipate increases in
activity, although they have become less confident about these expectations. As a result, most
merchants continue to keep inventories lean.
The travel and convention industry is providing some boost to retail and service sales.
Industry contacts in Atlanta, New Orleans, and Orlando all report continued increases in
bookings and visitors from recent months and year-over-year. Increases in the number of tourists
from foreign countries were also noted. A Georgia contact said that restaurant sales and other
travel-related services account for most of a recent slight pickup in retail sales.
Manufacturing:

Over half of District producers contacted in early June indicated

continued flat or declining sales and persistently soft orders. Auto- and auto-related producers,
business supplies manufacturers, poultry processors, and producers of bed and bath fabrics report

VI-2
particular weakness. All have responded with further reductions in inventories, although less
than half report additional layoffs. Excessive rains in the Southeast have exacerbated conditions
for agribusinesses providing farming equipment and supplies, fertilizers, and lawn care. Contacts
do not expect to make up these lost sales later in the season.
Other producers indicate that orders in May picked up from the depressed levels of
recent months. Orders for home-related merchandise remain firm, and according to industry
contacts, apparel and apparel-related textile production and employment levels turned up slightly
in May in response to recently increased orders. Over half the container producers contacted
reported increases in orders for paper and some types of plastic packaging.

Several other

manufacturers have reportedly expanded hiring in response to the improvement in business
volume over recent months. A trailer manufacturer has recently hired additional people in a
move to expand Georgia operations, while a refrigeration unit producer called back laid off
workers during the past two weeks. In addition, lumber contacts said that exports have recently
picked up from their previously depressed levels. Export tonnage of pulp, paper and citrus
products continue to increase in the District.
Financial Services: The majority of bankers report that consumer and business loan
demand remains anemic overall, with the exception of strong residential mortgage lending.
Despite generally weak business loan demand, bankers did note that some service industries such
as health care and telecommunications have shown increased borrowing needs. One also said
that recent gains in tourism in New Orleans are leading to expansion in related service industries.
Bankers report that loan quality is stabilizing or improving slightly.

Although no bankers

indicated changes in credit standards, several business contacts said that their borrowing terms
have become more favorable recently.

VI-3
Construction: According to most realtors, new and existing home sales continued to
rebound in April and May, although about half noted that home sales have fallen back slightly
in recent weeks. Builders reported that improved home sales have led to increased construction
activity, and a few Alabama builders are now even starting to talk about building speculative
homes. However, three out of four homebuilders report that tight lending conditions are still
restricting a rebound. Nonresidential construction remains weak although the pace of decline has
slowed. Contacts attribute this easing to rising public construction and the start of several large
commercial construction projects that had been able to bypass tight lending conditions.
Wages and Prices: Contacts say that they are not having any trouble hiring workers
or recalling laid off employees. Wage demands have subsided considerably in Louisiana's oil
industry. An expected abundant beet crop has depressed sugar prices while high cotton prices
are adversely affecting textile industry profits.

Waterlogged fields have limited planting of

cotton, soybeans and peanuts this spring. Some contacts expect reduced crops and higher prices
to result. Linerboard, pulp and corrugated packaging prices are all currently depressed as a
result of short-term oversupply conditions in the industry.

VII-1
Seventh District - Chicago
Summary. Most sectors of the District economy were flat to slightly expanding in May and
early June, while traditionally lagging industries continued to decline. A solid recovery in residential
real estate activity continued, although commercial construction remained soft. Retailers in the
District reported that consumer spending advanced in recent weeks, with sales gains led by housingrelated spending. Reports from District manufacturers were mixed, with producers of consumer
durable goods generally reporting better results than those posted by producers of heavy equipment.
Capital spending intentions of District businesses indicated continued cutbacks and postponements in
the second quarter of 1991.
Real Estate/Construction. A recovery in District residential real estate activity continued in
recent weeks, helping to bolster construction spending, consumer spending on household durable
goods, and manufacturing activity related to housing. A large District realtor reported continued solid
year-over-year sales gains in May and early June. District housing construction fell off slightly in
April, but only after an unsustainable surge in March. Industry contacts indicated little change in the
weak outlook for commercial construction, however. A large producer of cement reported that
shipments continued to decline in the month of May (from the year-earlier period), but not quite so
severely as in previous months. Cement shipments for commercial construction were decidedly
weaker than those for residential building, and the company's backlog continued to shrink. At the end
of May, this company's backlog was 65 percent below May 1990. A recent study found that the
amount of new office space under construction in the suburban Chicago area declined by over 50
percent from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the first quarter of 1991, reaching the lowest level in ten
years. Labor strikes in Chicago and Detroit have been holding back several large construction
projects. A settlement is expected soon in the Chicago negotiations, while bargaining is in the early
stages in the more recent strikes in Detroit.
Consumer Spending. The strengthening in the housing sector has begun to translate into
gains in other forms of consumer spending, according to several District retailers. A large general
merchandise retailer reported that May and early June sales in the District increased in real terms and

VII-2
outperformed the company's national average. This contact had previously reported relative
weakness in sales in the District in the first quarter of 1991. Appliances and home improvement
poducts provided the largest contributions to sales growth. A large discount chain reported
continued modest sales gains in May, with District sales growth in line with national results despite
an increasingly competitive District environment facing the retailer. This contact stated that sales
growth has not yet been robust enough to translate into improvement of their orders to manufacturers,
however, as efforts to trim inventory continue. Despite the surge in housing, several smaller specialty
furniture retailers in the District continued to experience a very difficult period, with many store
closings reported in the first half of the year. One small District furniture retailer reported that May
and early June sales continued to post year-over-year declines, and noted that credit card sales were
especially weak.
New car sles' trends remain difficult to interpret, according to several industry analysts. The
1990 switch from a two-turn to a three-turn strategy by automakers selling to captive rental fleets
generated distortions to seasonal sales patterns. April sales figures (which under a two-turn strategy
would include some sales to fleets) were understated by using traditional seasonal factors. The higher
level of fleet sales in 1990 provided a second factor helping to understate recent sales strength, as
higher resale levels of nearly-new program cars substituted for new vehicles in early 1991. A major
domestic car manufacturer estimates that after accounting for these effects, total light vehicle sales
(including domestic and imported vehicles) have been essentially flat in recent months. Reports from
several District auto dealers generally support this conclusion. One large District domestic car dealer
reported that sales fell 20 percent in May from a year earlier, in line with declines posted in March
and April. Citing higher auction prices, this dealer ceased selling program cars, which is consistent
with widespread expectations that sales of these "nearly-new" vehicles will lessen in importance in
the months ahead. Sales to first-time car buyers declined significantly, in part because basic demand
was off and in part because first-time buyers fall into stricter credit-quality categories.
Manufacturing. District manufacturers of consumer durable goods generally reported better
results than producers of heavy equipment. A large District appliance manufacturer reported modest

VII-3
improvement in shipments, especially for products going into new homes. Shipments of air
conditioners and microwave ovens remained weak, however, and excess inventories have to be
worked off before shipments at the plant level improve. A large manufacturer of lawn care
equipment reported that its factory sales strengthened from March to April, but remained well below
year-earlier levels. Production in the auto industry (on a seasonally adjusted basis) generally
continued to register the gains recorded early in the second quarter, although some early shutdowns
for new model changeovers have held back overall production. Still, May output exceeded
announced schedules for the first time in almost a year. A steel producer reported that orders from
automakers indicate continued growth (on a seasonally-adjusted basis) in auto production through the
third quarter. This contact stated that summer shutdowns may be shorter than anticipated, as
automakers speed up production of new models. An electronics firm reported that orders rose for the
second consecutive month in May, after experiencing moderate weakening earlier in the year. Orders
received from the auto industry were particularly strong, consistent with other evidence of improved
production levels in this key District industry. The automotive component of the Detroit purchasing
managers' survey index advanced sharply in May, registering its first expansionary month in 1991.
Several capital goods producers, whose sales recoveries tend to lag a turnaround in the
overall economy, reported continued weakness in sales and production. A large District manufacturer
of heavy equipment reported that sales continued to decline at a significant pace in May but the rate
of decline has improved somewhat over the past three months. Orders in-hand remain very weak,
however, off as much as 60 percent from a year earlier. Dealer inventories remain high and are
expected to dampen the production response to an anticipated sales increase in the second half of the
year. Another capital goods producer reported that sales of construction equipment continue to show
sharp year-over-year declines, and sales of agricultural equipment in May turned soft again, after
some improvement in previous months. A large diversified manufacturer reported that orders have
been mixed recently, with weakness concentrated on the capital goods side of the business. A truck
manufacturer reported modest improvement in orders for heavy-duty trucks, but medium-duty truck
orders remained at recessionary levels. This contact noted that medium-duty truck orders usually

VI-4
improve before heavy-duty trucks as an economic recovery asserts itself, and attributed some of the
weakness in medium-duty trucks to financial problems facing small businesses. A manufacturer of
motor vehicle engines also reported that orders for heavy-duty truck engines strengthened in recent
months, but production planning remained cautious.
Capital Spending. A small sampling of District manufacturers indicates that cutbacks and
postponements of capital spending plans may have extended into the second quarter of the year. A
large manufacturer of heavy equipment reported 1991 capital spending plans had recently been cut to
a level 16 percent below last year, after plans at the beginning of the year called for flat spending. A
manufacturer of truck engines reported that 1991 spending plans were cut in the first quarter to a level
30 percent below last year, but have remained in place since then. A large District manufacturer of
paper-based containers reported that 1991 capital spending plans were cut at the end of March to a
level 50 percent below 1990, citing industry overcapacity and a reluctance to borrow. A steel
producer reported that 1991 spending plans, previously scheduled to be 20 percent lower than 1990,
had been newly cut to a level 40 percent below last year. The capital expenditures component of the
Milwaukee purchasing managers' survey fell from 55 percent in April to 48 percent in May, reaching
its lowest level since late 1987. Industry orders for machine tools have weakened in recent months,
after holding up well through the early stages of the recession. An industry participant stated that
sales have become less cyclical, as customers show increased sensitivity to efficiency considerations,
relative to capacity requirements. This company still expected substantial internal capital expenditure
growth this year. A machine tool industry representative reported that companies specializing in
sales to the auto industry have suffered disproportionately in the current downturn.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy
are

evident.

sales

Retail

is

flat,

have

but some signs of strengthening
improved

While some manufacturers are expanding their

continue to add employees.
many

are

remains depressed.
Heavy

rains

have

residential

Most service-producing sectors

construction has rebounded in some areas.

operations,

and

slightly

still

contracting

Lending

activity has

delayed

and

cotton

and

commercial

increased

rice

in

construction

recent months.

plantings.

Electricity

generation for industrial usage is flat to slightly lower.
Consumer Spending
Some contacts
Louisville,

St.

report

Louis

and

strengthening is evident.
dropped

to a

durables

in

1 percent
Arkansas

slight increases

in

Memphis

however,

areas,

retail

sales;

in

the

little

or

no

Nominal retail sales growth in Arkansas has

rate of increase

have

been

in

hindered

recent months.

by

consumer

Sales of

wariness

economic conditions and increases in required down payments.

about

Auto sales

remain well below year-ago levels, though some contacts report increasing
sales

in

May.

Louisville

auto

dealers

describe

spring

sales

as

"acceptable," but still below those of a year earlier.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
manufacturers

conditions

are

report a recent upturn in

expanded their workforce.

mixed.
orders,

In

St.

Louis,

but relatively

some

few have

Approximately'2,000 St. Louis workers were let

go when an automaker closed an assembly plant in late May.
engineering and manufacturing workers have been laid off in

More than 300
recent weeks

VIII-2

Louis defense contractor following the loss of a new

by a major St.

military aircraft contract, and an additional 200 layoffs are expected by
year-end.
well.

Defense cuts have caused layoffs at smaller District firms as

Weak auto and housing sales have led to lower earnings for a major

chemicals manufacturer.
Louisville

home

Almost 1,000 workers have been recalled by a

appliance

manufacturer

in

anticipation

of

increased

demand for refrigerators as the housing industry turns around.
Construction and Real Estate
Single-family
District.

home

sales

to

increase

throughout

the

Contacts in Little Rock and Memphis indicate inventories of

new and existing

homes

are

declining;
New home

steady or rising slightly.
Contacts

continue

in

Memphis,

citing

lower

meanwhile,
construction,

interest

rates

prices

are holding

however,
and

is

drier

mixed.

weather,

report single-family housing starts in May were substantially above their
April and year-earlier levels.
residential

construction

is

Contacts in St. Louis, however, report

still

well below year-earlier

levels and

believe the industry has not bottomed out.
Banking and Finance
Total loans on the books of a sample of 93 small and mid-size
District banks increased slightly in April and May after declining during
Still,

the previous two months.
remains weak.

loan demand

throughout

the District

One St. Louis banker noted his customers--primarily small

and mid-sized companies--were still

concerned about the economic outlook

and were hesitant to borrow for investment purposes.
Agriculture
Cotton
Mississippi,

and

rice

Arkansas

near-record rainfall.

plantings
and

have'been

western

Mississippi

delayed

Tennessee

appears

substantially

because

of

record

in
or

to be the hardest hit of the

VIII-3

as much as 20 percent of the intended cotton acreage

District states:

Many

and 40 percent of the intended rice acreage will not be planted.

areas are reporting wheat crop losses of 50 percent or more because of
moisture-related diseases.

On

the other hand,

soybean and

the corn,

tobacco crops are in good condition.
Energy and Natural Resources
Above-average
A

significantly.
electricity
Generation

in

temperatures
survey

District

of

for

industrial usage,

however,

Year-to-date

Many District utilities

Western coal,

which reduces

boosted

demand

found

the highest

in

coal production is
to

peak

that

several years.

was mostly flat

continue

output

electricity

utilities

generation at many plants was

lower at major utilities.
percent.

May

to slightly
down almost 10

"test-burn"

low-sulfur

for higher-sulfur Midwestern coal.

Production at Southern Pine lumber mills rose in March, but remains below
last year's pace.
Transportation and Distribution
Year-to-date
District

airports.

passenger
Air

cargo

increased more than 15 percent.
fares,

the

end

of

the

traffic

is

shipments

down
in

slightly

Memphis,

at

all

major

however,

have

Airport officials report that lower air

Gulf War

expected to boost airline traffic.

and

lessened

security

Barge activity is mixed.

measures

are

Little Rock

and Louisville report increased movements over last year, while St. Louis
reports a decline.
Louis--a barometer

The rates charged for barge transportation in St.
of river traffic--have

of declining grain shipments.

fallen to record lows

because

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Although the Ninth District has continued to feel the effects of the national recession,
recently there is some evidence that the region is rebounding. Labor market conditions have
improved slightly, while retail sales have exhibited moderate growth.

Conditions in

manufacturing, construction, and resource-related industries have been mixed.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
Labor market conditions improved in most of the District. North and South Dakota have
continued to do well, with their unemployment rates falling in April from a year ago; 3.7 from
4.0, and 3.4 from 3.6 respectively. Minnesota rebounded in April with the unemployment rate
falling to 5.0 from 5.5 a year ago. In Minnesota, however, this strength was a result of fewer
people looking for work rather than more people finding jobs. Total nonagricultural employment
was essentially unchanged in April from a year ago, with a drop in manufacturing, construction,
and trade employment offset by growth in the service, financial, and government sectors. In
North and South Dakota, by contrast, nonagricultural employment was up 1.6 and 3.1 percent
respectively in April from a year ago. A recent survey of hiring activity in the Minneapolis--St.
Paul area contained some grounds for optimism; 20 percent of the companies surveyed reported
that they planned to increase the number of employees, while only 10 percent reported planned
reductions. A Twin Cities help wanted index was 28.6 percent below its year-ago level in April,
though this was better than at the national level where this was 31.7 percent below its year-ago
level. Unemployment rates in Montana and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan were higher in
April than their year-ago levels; 6.7 percent from 5.3, and 12.3 percent from 9.8 respectively;
and were generally higher in western Wisconsin. In Montana, nonagricultural employment rose
by only 0.5 percent in April relative to a year ago.
The state's average weekly hours in manufacturing at 39.7 in March, are still below their
year-ago level of 40.0. However, March new business incorporations were substantially higher
than their year-ago levels. Minnesota's April average weekly earnings in manufacturing was up
4.2 percent from its year-ago level, and up 1.8 percent from March.

Employment in

IX-2
manufacturing in Minnesota and Montana was lower in April than its year-ago level by 2.0 and
2.8 percent respectively. However, it rose in North and South Dakota by 5.4 and 1.5 percent
respectively over the same period.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales in the District exhibited moderate growth, and some retailers expressed
optimism about the future. March retail sales in Minnesota were 4.9 percent higher than a year
ago.

One District retailer reported first quarter sales in comparable stores were 9 percent

higher, and May sales were 16 percent higher than the same periods a year ago. However, a
number of major local retailers reported that sales were flat or only slightly higher in comparable
store sales in May relative to a year ago, though sales in the first week of June are reported to
be stronger.
New car sales in the District continue to be weak with dealers reporting sales declines
of 6 to 11 percent thus far this year, relative to a year ago. Sales in May have continued this
negative trend with dealers reporting new car sales declines of 11 to 20 percent, relative to a
year ago. However, truck and used car sales appear to be picking up.
Housing sales have been weak in the District, due in large part to the depressed market
in the Minneapolis--St. Paul area. However, recently both existing home sales and prices were
up in Minneapolis--St. Paul. Existing home sales were up 13 percent in April relative to a year
ago, posting a three-year high.
Tourism activity throughout the District has been generally good.

The number of

crossings over the Mackinac Bridge onto the Upper Peninsula of Michigan was up 1.2 percent
in the first four months of this year, and 3 percent in May, relative to a year ago. Resort

IX-3
owners in northwestern Wisconsin report that lodging reservations are ahead of last year and
general inquires are 30 percent higher than a year ago. In Minneapolis, the U.S. Open is just
beginning on a local golf course. In addition, the Wally Byam Caravan Club International,
whose Airstream Convention brought in 8 million dollars to the Duluth region in 1983, has
returned to Minnesota this June and July. Also, the International Special Olympic Games will
be held in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area in July.

Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the District's construction industry have been mixed. The overhang of
office space in the Minneapolis--St. Paul metropolitan area is expected to continue to depress
commercial construction activity in the area. The value of future construction contracts in the
Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area remain substantially below year-ago levels. In addition,
Minnesota housing permits were down 17 percent in March from their year-ago level.
Manufacturing conditions in the District have been mixed lately.

An index of

Minnesota's economic indicators rose slightly in March, but is still 0.4 percent below its yearago level.
Resource-Related Industries
Recent high levels of precipitation in the District were a blessing for North and South
Dakota. South Dakota, which had been reporting 40 to 60 percent of normal rainfall this year,
reports that topsoil moisture is now in excellent condition, while planting in North and South
Dakota is ahead of its five year average. However, recent precipitation in southern Minnesota
was so high that parts of the state were flooded, and planting was delayed. Statewide, only 80

IX-4
percent of the normal corn crop and 60 percent of the normal soybean crop has been planted.
For corn, in particular, time is running out. The governor of Minnesota has applied to the
Agriculture Department for disaster relief. To make matters worse, the mid-April index of
prices received by Minnesota farmers was down 12 percent from a year ago.
Conditions in the District's mining industry have been fairly good. Ranchers in the
District have also been doing well due to high cattle prices.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy is growing moderately due to

continued strength in farm incomes and increased housing starts.

Revival of

home construction is reflected in higher demand for home mortgages; demand for
consumer and home equity loans is also up.

Growth in economic activity and in

loan demand has been limited, however, by lackluster retail sales and further
declines in drilling for oil and gas.
Retail Sales.

Retailers report that sales have generally held steady

over the last three months.

Most respondents expect sales to remain flat

through the summer, as consumer confidence remains shaky in some areas.
Appliance and apparel sales are lagging, while seasonal lawn and garden sales
are strong.

Some retailers have raised prices slightly to cover higher

wholesale costs, but prices are expected to change little during the summer.
Respondents are satisfied with inventory levels and plan to continue keeping
tight control over stocks.
Auto sales have been mixed in the last month, but dealers expect sales
to improve during the rest of the year due to lower interest rates and
improved economic conditions.

Dealer financing is available in most district

states, though potential buyers continue to have some difficulty getting
loans.

Dealers are either trimming or maintaining inventories.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report no increase in input prices

over the last three months and expect prices to remain steady over the near
term.

Materials are still readily available, with no problems anticipated for

the rest of the year.
operate below capacity.

Most manufacturers continue to trim inventories and
Export sales are steady for most manufacturers.

few, however, report stronger foreign sales.

A

A maker of buses and ambulances,

X-2
for example, reports booming export sales to Canada, Latin America, and the
Pacific Rim.
Energy.

High OPEC production is keeping oil prices relatively stable.

As a result, producers are developing existing reserves but avoiding
exploration.

The average number of operating drilling rigs in district states

fell from 237 in April to 224 in May.

This dip caused the district rig count

to fall about 16 percent below its year-ago level.
Housing Activity and Finance.
generally higher than a year ago.

Housing starts are up from last month and
Most builders expect starts to rise

somewhat further during the rest of the year.

New home sales continue to

improve, helping reduce inventories of unsold homes.
also up moderately.

Prices for new homes are

Some builders expect higher sales this year than last,

but others are less optimistic.

Construction materials are readily available,

but some builders report problems finding qualified workers.
Deposit flows at thrift institutions have been mixed over the last
month.

Deposits are expected to remain flat or increase moderately over the

near term.

Mortgage demand is generally stronger and commitments are up.

Mortgage rates have been stable to down slightly and are expected to remain
unchanged or drop slightly during the next several months.
Banking.

Loan demand was unchanged at district banks last month, due to

offsetting changes in several loan categories.

Demand for commercial and

industrial loans was unchanged to lower at most banks.

But demand for

consumer loans, home mortgages, and home equity loans increased.
for commercial real estate loans and agricultural loans was mixed.

The demand
Most banks

reported no change in their loan-to-deposit ratios over the last month.
Most banks have not changed their prime rates, but a few cut this key

X-3
lending rate in recent weeks.
future.
terms.

Others expect a prime rate cut in the near

Most banks did not change their consumer loan rates or other lending
Deposits were stable at district banks during the last month.

Agriculture.

The district winter wheat crop is expected to be average,

but conditions vary widely.

Yields are expected to be below normal in parts

of Oklahoma, Kansas, and Missouri but above normal in parts of Nebraska.
Harvest has begun in Oklahoma and southern Kansas and will move north through
the district during the next two months.
Wet weather has hampered the planting of spring crops in the district.
Most of the district's corn crop has been planted, but planting of soybeans
and grain sorghum has been delayed in parts of Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska.
Farm income, while down from last year, remains at a high level.

Strong

cattle prices continue to reduce the impact of weak crop prices on district
farm incomes.

Cattle prices may drop later this summer as an unusually large

number of cattle in district feedlots go to market.

Prices are expected to

rebound quickly, however, as the inventory of cattle on feed returns to a more
normal level.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The 11th District economy has improved since the last survey.
Respondents note a slight pickup in orders and a more optimistic outlook.
Much of the recent improvement stems from a mild pickup in District
residential construction and some recent gains in consumer spending.
Producers of lumber and wood, stone clay and glass, and primary and fabricated
District

metals have noted increased orders from District home builders.

retail sales have increased slightly and many retailers say the outlook has
improved.

Growth in the service sector has increased to a modest pace with

improvement in the hotel, advertising and temporary employment industries.
Extreme weather conditions have slowed planting in some areas and estimates of
crop production have been reduced slightly.
Overall, orders to District manufacturers have improved and are growing
modestly.

A main source of growth has been increased orders from District

home builders.

Demand has increased for brick manufacturers because of

increased residential construction in Houston, Dallas and Austin.

Brick

producers expect demand to continue to grow as credit to builders is loosened.
Lumber and wood producers note a sharp increase in production.

While improved

weather conditions are responsible for much of the recent increase, increases
in Texas home and store construction was responsible for much of the gain.
Most contacts in the lumber industry feel that the U.S recession has finally
bottomed out and demand should improve gradually.

Demand for primary metals

has been steady to up slightly, following a weak January and February.
Ircreases in residential construction in Texas and continued strong exports
have helped this sector.

Orders for chemicals have stabilized following

declines during January and February. Weakness in the auto sector, however,

XI-2

Petroleum

continues to suppress demand for plastics and related industries.
refining has been holding steady.

Oil field machinery production has declined

slightly due to decreased domestic drilling.

Several apparel producers say

that orders have recently jumped.
Although the District's business services are still reporting weak
demand, several other service industries have noted improvement.

The demand

for legal services has been weak, although strength was reported in Houston
and Austin where the Resolution Trust Corporation is now very active.

Temporary employment agencies are seeing increased demand for services, and
one firm noted strength in both the District and the nation.

After declining

dramatically for over a year, national and international demand for
engineering services reportedly has bottomed out and recently has increased
slightly.

Advertising and communications firms noted large increases in

demand from regional customers.

Hotel occupancy rates continue to pick up

slightly and airlines report stable to slightly improved demand.
Retail respondents in the District say that sales have improved and are
now growing slowly.

Sales in Houston are reportedly the strongest, while

sales in Austin and along the Texas Border are also experiencing positive
growth.

Sales are weakest in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex where recent

defense-related layoffs have increased unemployment.
remain positive although very slow.

Dallas-Fort Worth sales

Most retailers are optimistic that sales

growth will improve in the coming months.
District auto sales have increased lately, but year-to-date sales remain
well below last year.

April auto sales in the Dallas/Fort-Worth metroplex

were up 2.4 percent over last year, although year-to-date sales remain nearly

XI-3

7 percent below last year.

Houston sales were up 10 percent year-over-year in

April, but year-to-date sales remained 8 percent below last year.
Oil prices have stabilized around $20 per barrel after the end of the
Middle East war.

Prices should stay stable through the third quarter because

OPEC has decided to hold production at current levels.
declined despite the price stability.

District drilling has

The low drilling activity is partly due

to low natural gas prices which are about 20 percent less than a year ago.
Although domestic drilling activity is weak, foreign drilling by District oil

and gas companies is healthy and is expected to pick up.
District construction activity has increased moderately due to some
recent strength in single-family building.

One respondent thought that the

recent surge may be pent up demand from the Middle East war and may not
continue.

The multi-family sector is weak, but the outlook for this sector

remains positive.

There has been a significant slowdown in demand for civil-

related projects (highways, infrastructure and public buildings) in Texas.
The only area of growth in public structures has been prison building.
Extreme weather conditions have slowed planting in some areas of the
District and agricultural production estimates have been reduced slightly.
Dry conditions in West Texas and the Texas panhandle have reduced production
estimates for wheat and cotton crops.

Louisiana, north central Texas and

portions of the coast have reported problems with excessive moisture.

The

index of agricultural prices received by Texas farmers and ranchers reached a
record high in May, increasing 5 percent from last year.

XII - 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions in much of the Twelfth District are weak, although some bright spots
have emerged recently. Most notably, lower interest rates have stimulated real estate sales
activity in many parts of the District. In addition, some improvement in soft-goods sales has been
noted in recent weeks. Manufacturing activity continues slow, with most firms taking a cautious
approach toward investment plans. Agricultural conditions are mixed in the West, with many
areas affected by drought and low commodity prices. Financial institutions continue to report
weak growth in loan volume, although lower interest rates have spurred mortgage refinancing
activity.
Business Sentiment
The economic outlook of Twelfth District business leaders continued to improve in June.
Three quarters of respondents still expect GNP to grow less than 2.5 percent over the next four
quarters, but the proportion of respondents anticipating slow growth has fallen steadily since the
end of 1990. Expectations improved considerably for investment and spending. Eighty percent of
western business leaders now foresee business investment and consumer spending improving or
staying the same during the next four quarters. The outlook for housing starts also improved,
with 70 percent of respondents projecting better housing starts over the next four quarters.
Wages and Prices
Wage and price increases in the Twelfth District remain modest. First-quarter consumer
prices were only 2.7 percent above their year-earlier level in Phoenix, while consumer prices fell
1.6 percent during the last six months in Salt Lake City. Price increases for retail goods remain
moderate. Food prices have risen at close to a 3 percent rate in recent months, and are expected

XII - 2

to rise less than 3 percent for the remainder of the year. A health-care industry executive expects
the rate of increase in health care costs to moderate slightly in 1991, but still to exceed the
general inflation rate. Most wage increases still are reported in the 3 to 5 percent range.
Retail Trade and Services
Conditions in the Twelfth District's retail sector are mixed. Two soft-goods retailers
report that retail sales have picked up in recent weeks, prompting optimism for a reasonably good
second half of 1991. Retail inventories remain tightly controlled. Many reports suggest that
lower interest rates have not yet bolstered consumer durable goods sales. New-car sales still are
slow in much of the West, although used cars are reported to be selling well. Advertising volume
continues to decline for both television and newspapers.
Manufacturing
Twelfth District manufacturing activity is reported slow in many areas. Most firms are
taking a cautious approach toward investment plans because of continued economic uncertainty.
However, a survey of Puget Sound area businesses suggests that 67 percent anticipate increased
capital spending during the next twelve months, and Boeing is undertaking a major expansion of
its Puget Sound area facilities. Aluminum manufacturers report excess capacity and weak
demand, pushing prices down 35 to 40 percent. Farm machinery sales are slow in Idaho because
of drought and weak commodity prices. Conversely, heavy construction equipment sales are
reported up over a year ago in some parts of the District.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural and resource industry conditions are mixed in the West. Agriculture in
California is in good shape outside of the areas hit hardest by the drought and freeze. Dairy
farmers are facing difficult conditions because of low milk prices. Cattle prices remain at record
levels, which has caused increased costs and reduced profits for feedlot operators. Wood product

XII - 3

prices increased in recent weeks, while log supplies remain tight as a result of strict restrictions on
timber harvests in federal forests.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity in the West is reported to have improved in recent
months. Increased housing sales are attributed at least in part to lower interest rates. Increased
residential activity was reported throughout California. Sales of existing homes in California rose
12 percent between March and April, for the third consecutive monthly increase. The median
home price rose 1.7 percent during the month, to a new record high at a level 4.9 percent above
its year-earlier level. In Oregon, the average home sales price is reported up 22 percent from last
year. Commercial activity is reported to be stable to weak. In Los Angeles, leasing is down 19
percent in the first four months of 1991 compared to the same period in 1990, despite
improvement since the beginning of the year. Several new commercial construction projects have
started in Southern California. Overall construction activity is strong in Idaho and Utah.
Financial Institutions
Twelfth District financial institutions report relatively stable conditions. Loan growth
remains weak in most areas, but lower interest rates are stimulating increased demand for
mortgage refinancing. However, one California banker reports that some of the increased
refinancing activity is substituting for home-equity loans. In California, credit card balances are
reported to be increasing, while in Utah, consumer delinquencies have improved in recent
months. Some banks report high liquidity as a result of strong growth in money market deposit
accounts.

