SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

ON

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

January 1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY
First District -- Boston
Second District -- New York
-1

* .

Third District -- Philadelphia
*

1-1

Fourth District -- Cleveland
Fifth District -- Richmond .
Sixth District -- Atlanta
Seventh District -- Chicago
Eighth District -- St. Louis

VI-l
VII-l
vIII-1
IX-1

Ninth District -- Minneapolis
Tenth District -- Kansas City
Eleventh District -- Dallas
Twelfth District -- San Francisco

*X-1

XI-]

XII-]

SUMMARY*

The

level

districts.

of

economic

activity

appears

The Persian Gulf situation is

to be

declining

frequently

cited as

determinant of both current and future economic activity.
sales

during the holiday season differed little

Inventories

are

near their desired levels.

growth, manufacturing orders,

in

most
a key

Nominal retail

from a year

earlier.

Despite continued export

employment and shipments have weakened.

Construction activity continues

to slow in

most districts,

rate declines have done little

to stimulate residential housing demand.

Inflation does not appear to be accelerating.

and interest

Widespread weakness exists

in home sales and consumer and business loan demand. Some state and local
governments are experiencing revenue

shortfalls.

Farm income prospects

have weakened somewhat, while the mining sector shows strength.
Consumer Spending
Nominal
year-earlier

retail
levels,

sales

during

implying

the

declines

big-ticket items were particularly weak.

holiday

season

in

terms.

real

were

near

Sales

of

Boston, New York, Philadelphia,

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis and Dallas mention that price
discounting was used to move goods.

Despite the reported dampening

effect of the Persian Gulf conflict throughout the holiday

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and based on
This document summarizes
information collected before January 14, 1991.
comments received from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal
Reserve and is
not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

season,

some Districts

noted

improved sales

toward the end of December.

Most districts that mention inventories report they are generally near
The

desired levels.

outlook for retail

sales

in

most districts

is

for

continued sluggishness, with retailers in Philadelphia and Cleveland not
expecting any upturn before the third quarter of this year.
Four districts indicate that car sales are weakening or lower than a
year earlier

while
Auto

Houston area.
district,

while

to their

indicates

inventories

Kansas

City

Cleveland

inventories.
adding

Dallas

increasing

are moderate

reports

indicates

inventories,

in

that

that

sales,

to high
dealers

domestic

contrast

to

their

especially in
in

the Minneapolis

are
car

the

trimming
dealers

Japanese

their

are

not

counterparts

who are increasing inventories in anticipation of higher spring sales.
Manufacturing
Nearly
activity.

districts

all

report

weak

or

declining

manufacturing

While domestic demand is generally weakening, Boston, Atlanta,

Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco indicate that
export growth continues to be strong, or at least stronger than domestic
growth.

Cleveland,

Chicago

and

St.

Louis

note

production that had spread to related sectors.

a

downturn

in

auto

Cleveland and Chicago,

for example, note sharp declines in steel production.

Boston and St.

Louis report that layoffs are expected among defense contractors, and San
Francisco

reports

The outlook

that

defense-related

for the manufacturing

aerospace

sector is

remains weak.

activity

clouded by the Persian Gulf

situation, with some districts indicating that the timing of an upturn is
dependent

on a

Philadelphia,

resolution

of that

Richmond and Dallas

turnaround before the third quarter.

conflict.
districts,

Contacts
however,

in

the Boston,

do not

expect

a

Construction and Real Estate
Despite pockets of strength, most districts describe residential and
nonresidential
time

construction activity

year.

of

Housing

starts

as
are

down more

below

than usual

year-ago

for this

levels

in

most

districts, and high and climbing vacancy rates in many large urban areas
have discouraged commercial office space development.

Contacts in the

Dallas

in

district,

activity,

however,

especially

in

report

a

Houston and

modest

increase

South Texas.

construction

Recent declines

in

interest rates and home prices have done little to buoy demand for new or
existing homes in most districts.
of economic

future course

Contacts cite uncertainty about the
and the

activity

Persian Gulf crisis

as

the

major factors dampening residential housing demand. New York reports that
some district

lenders

and developers have

held auctions

to pare

housing

inventories.
Prices
Several districts report little evidence of increasing inflation.
San Francisco reports that wage and price increases continue to slow, and
Minneapolis notes that they have remained moderate.
expect

the inflation

rate to decline

input and output prices
increased
natural
prices

raw

gas
are

materials

prices,
generally

are generally
prices.

from recent levels.

Districts

while

report
in

beef,

motor
citrus

declining

fuel prices.
and

contacts

Manufacturing

although Richmond

stable,

but mixed movements
falling,

Cleveland

log

reports
oil

and
Grain

prices

are

showing strength.
Banking and Finance
The majority of
loan demand,
Gulf.

districts

report weakness

largely due to the slowdown in

in

business

the economy

and consumer

and the

Persian

Real estate lending is edging downward in many districts, despite

declines

in

mortgage

construction lending
businesses

have

Cleveland

notes

emerging,

as

interest
are

or

delayed

signs
by

evidenced

Commercial

especially weak.

reduced
that

rates.

of

increases

in

estate

and

Atlanta reports that many

planned

consumer

real

capital

financial
auto

expenditures.

difficulties

repossessions

are

and home

foreclosures in some parts of the district.
State and Local Government Finance
State and local governments in the New York, Richmond, St. Louis and
Dallas districts are either expecting or experiencing revenue
because

of weakening economic

conditions.

In

some cases,

shortfalls
increased

government spending was also cited as contributing to the governments'
financial strain.

A variety of measures, including reduced spending and

layoffs, are being taken or are anticipated to avoid budget deficits.
Agriculture and Natural-Resource-Related Industries
Kansas City and Richmond indicate
1991 have

dimmed because

that farm income prospects

of an expected cost-price

squeeze.

for

Chicago

notes that agricultural exports have fallen sharply in recent months.

A

recent freeze and a continuing drought are causing major problems for
California's agricultural sector.

Winter grain crops are reported to be

in good condition, although Minneapolis notes potential problems later
this year because of below-normal precipitation this winter.
Energy

extraction

has

increased

in

the

districts,

while Kansas City indicates that growth in

operating

drilling

rigs

has

leveled

off.

and

Dallas

Minneapolis

Louis and Atlanta report weak or declining activity

products industries.

Louis

the the number of

conditions in the mining industry have been fairly good.
St.

St.

reports

that

San Francisco,
in

the forest

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic conditions continue on a downtrend in the First District.
A majority of manufacturing contacts report dwindling order backlogs and
delivery times.

While planned capital expenditures generally remain

above depreciation, many projects are under review.

According to

respondents and press announcements, further declines in employment are
likely.

Manufacturers hope to see signs of improvement in the second

half of this year.

Retailers typically report declines in Christmas

season sales from a year ago, and they anticipate intense competition
for market share in 1991.

Half express concern about the effect of

banking failures on the availability of credit for inventory financing.
Retail
For the Christmas season, the panel of First District retailers
report that sales typically declined by single-digit percentages from a
year ago.

However, department store results ranged from flat to double-

digit declines, while other contacts whose business is not closely tied
to Christmas report flat to slightly higher sales.

Sales results were

dampened by widespread promotional activity and consumers' preference
for basic, low-priced gift items.
During the last six weeks, one large New England discount chain
has filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy
Code.

Another large department store chain has announced plans to close

three stores in New England and a fourth in New York state.

Half the retail contacts expressed concern that the recent failure
of financial institutions in New England will lead to difficulties in
obtaining inventory financing.

Additional respondents cite lack of

credit as a constraint on expansion.
Retailers are approaching 1991 with great caution, given falling
consumer confidence and rising unemployment.

They anticipate intense

competition for market share and are attempting to control costs by
pursuing conservative policies for spring orders and employment.
Manufacturing
A majority of First District manufacturers contacted report that
sales are flat to down compared with year-ago levels, with declines
ranging from 4 to 8 percent.
sales gains.

A minority continue to see year-over-year

For most respondents, incoming orders are below late 1989

levels (by 7 to 25 percent), and backlogs and delivery times are
dwindling.

For some, the downturn in orders began early in the fall;

for others it began three to four weeks ago.
widespread, by geography and sector.

The slowdown is reportedly

Demand for unique or customized

products and for telecommunication and (some) aerospace equipment
remains relatively robust.

Several respondents also find that demand is

stronger abroad, particularly in Europe, than in the United States, but
economic difficulties continue in Canada, the United Kingdom, and
Australia.
Inventories are at satisfactory levels at almost all manufacturers
contacted; only one firm idled plant to reduce stocks.

Employment is

little changed from year-ago levels at one-half of the respondent
firms; elsewhere layoffs have reduced employment by 6 to 11 percent.
Roughly one-third of the contacts anticipate further layoffs.

Recent

press statements also indicate that the District's computer and defense
industries will see additional cutbacks in employment.
More than half of the manufacturers contacted reduced their 1990
capital expenditures below the amounts originally budgeted.

Respondents

continue to conserve capital, and in 1991 most expect to invest very
little beyond essential amounts.

By exception, two firms plan to

increase capacity for specific products.
Input costs are generally said to be stable.

A few firms

mentioned increases in paper and health insurance costs, modest oilrelated surcharges for transportation services, and the rise in postal
rates slated for February.
chips have fallen.

By contrast, prices for metals and computer

Roughly one-third of the respondents recently raised

their own sales prices by 7 to 8 percent from year-earlier levels,
one firm had to rescind an increase.

but

Several respondents are granting

discounts.
First District manufacturers describe their mood as sober; they
expect a "very difficult" first half to be followed by a "difficult"
second half.

Few anticipate any turnaround before the third quarter.

Several respondents serving the construction industry pointed out that
construction will not buoy the economy any time soon.

By contrast with

1981-82, little pent-up demand for housing exists, and current vacancy
rates are high.

Moreover, just-in-time inventory systems save space and

permit firms to consolidate plants.

Nevertheless, respondents believe

that lean and careful companies will weather the coming storm.

II-I
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District economy since the last report remain
soft to mixed.

Retail contacts reported disappointing sales results on

balance despite some improvement just before and after Christmas.

The

underlying demand for new homes remains weak, and office vacancy rates in
Manhattan rose somewhat further from already high levels.

More positively,

both the Buffalo and Rochester surveys of purchasing managers reported an
increase in firms with improved business conditions in November, though more
recent news from upstate New York suggests some slackening.

Nearly all small

and medium-size banks surveyed reduced their prime rate recently.
Consumer Spending
District retail contacts reported disappointing sales results in both
November and December though several experienced a decided improvement during
the last two weeks of the year.

The sales environment was very competitive

and marked by a high level of price-cutting throughout the period even though
most stores entered the holiday season with inventories substantially reduced
from year-earlier levels.

Retailers cited concerns about impending layoffs

and the Middle East crisis as well as unseasonably warm weather for the
recent consumer apathy.

Over-the-year sales changes at department stores

ranged from -3.5 percent to -13 percent in November and from flat to -14 percent in December.

A survey conducted by the Retail Council of New York State

covering some 200 stores across the state found sales during the preChristmas period to be basically unchanged from a year earlier.
Items which sold well included some women's and children's apparel,
men's shirts and costume jewelry as well as certain toys.

Furniture and rugs

remained weak, however, and sales of cold weather items such as outerwear and
comforters were also slow.

Due in large part to a pickup in sales during the

last two weeks of December, inventories are generally at or slightly below
targeted levels.

II-2
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity is seasonally slow throughout the District.
Moreover, the underlying demand for new homes remains weak.

A glut of homes

for both resale and initial purchase continues to plague most of the New York
metropolitan area and has spread to upstate areas as well.

Sales in some New

York City cooperative and condominium apartment buildings have slowed to such
a point that one realty firm recently announced plans to hold an auction for
individual apartment owners.

Some developers and lenders in the District

have already been holding auctions in order to pare their housing
inventories.
Office vacancy rates in both midtown and downtown Manhattan moved higher
in recent weeks.

In midtown, where an additional 2 million square feet of

space is scheduled for completion in 1991, the higher rate resulted from slow
leasing activity over the past few months.

Although leasing activity has

been more brisk in downtown Manhattan, blocks of excess space continue to be
added to the market in the wake of consolidations and cutbacks in the
financial services sector.

Elsewhere in the District, the recent annual

survey of Buffalo's downtown office space found the vacancy rate there had
jumped to the highest level in more than five years, in part due to
restructuring in the financial services sector.
Other Business Activity
Both the Buffalo and Rochester surveys of purchasing managers reported
an increase in the percentage of firms with improved business conditions in
November.

However, more recent news reports from upstate suggest that some

slackening in economic activity is now occurring.

Several of these

communities are hopeful that Canada's mid-December imposition of a 7 percent
sales tax will bring an increase in Canadian shoppers.
The unemployment rate rose in New Jersey during the last quarter of 1990
but showed little change in New York State.

In December, New Jersey's rate

stood at 5.9 percent, up from 5.2 percent in September while New York's

II-3
December rate of 5.5 percent was unchanged from September.

Although New

York's unemployment rate has remained stable, some observers are concerned
because the number of employed persons has declined.

Both New York City and

State anticipate substantial layoffs more because of their budget gaps, and
several corporations have announced impending cutbacks as further
restructurings occur.

One possible bright spot: the Navy is reportedly

considering modifying an old Grumman jet fighter built on Long Island now
that the Pentagon has canceled further work on the A-12 attack plane.
Financial Developments
Nearly all small and medium-size banks surveyed in the Second District
recently reduced their prime rate.

When asked what factors determined their

bank's decision, most senior loan officers indicated that their banks tend to
follow a particular bank or large money center banks while taking into
account their credit risks, competitive environment, and profitability.
Bankers generally reported that from twenty to thirty-five percent of loans
outstanding are directly tied to the prime.

The vast majority of their loans

are above prime, usually by one or two percentage points.

Most bankers

stated that the reduction in the prime had not affected other lending rates
but some banks did lower rates on other business and commercial real estate
loans.

A few banks also reported a slight easing of rates on some categories

of consumer loans.
Most of the bankers surveyed indicated reduced willingness to make
business and real estate-related loans.

Respondents were evenly divided on

the desirability of making consumer loans between "willing", "less willing",
and "not willing".

Most banks reported some strength in demand for either

consumer or commercial real estate loans, but two noted weak demand in all
sectors.

Half expected loan demand to increase over the next three months,

and half expected loan demand to weaken or stay unchanged.

Factors

contributing to reluctance to lend over the next few months included a
national recession and a worsening of local unemployment and business
failures.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Signs of softening activity were apparent in most sectors of the Third
Manufacturers continued to report declining

District economy in early January.
business

employment.

and

Retailers

generally

industrial

lending was

edging

down

flat

sales

for

the

Bankers indicated that commercial

Christmas shopping season, in dollar terms.
and

reported

and growth

in consumer

lending was

Real estate lending remained curtailed and debt restructurings were

slackening.

beginning to reduce outstanding commercial real estate debt.
The

outlook

is

clouded by potential

crisis, according to business contacts.

developments

in the

Persian Gulf

They are virtually unanimous in citing

the situation, however it is resolved, as a depressing influence on their own
Looking beyond

businesses.
slowdown

will

last

through

the
most

crisis,
of

the

expectations
year

and

are

perhaps

that
into

the

economic

early

1992.

Manufacturers' overall view of the economy is pessimistic, and they plan to make
Retailers generally expect only

more cuts in employment and capital spending.

a slow improvement in sales beginning late in 1991, and then only if there are
clear signs of renewed economic expansion to boost consumer confidence.

Bankers

expect weak loan demand through most of the year as both businesses and consumers
cut

spending

commercial

plans.

real estate

segment of real estate

Bankers
lending;

also

indicated

it appears

they

will

continue

that debt restructurings

to
in

limit
this

lending, combined with slow residential activity, will

result in a reduction in total real estate loan volume outstanding.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District continued to slip as the new
year began.

Nearly half of the industrial firms polled in January indicated that

III-2
business was falling off from December while only one-in-eight noted improvement.
Although nondurable goods producers generally were experiencing relatively weaker
conditions

than durable goods makers, negative reports outnumbered positive

indications in every major industry segment except electrical machinery.
Overall, Third District manufacturers said they were continuing to see
drops

in shipments,

new orders,

and order backlogs.

Employment was

also

softening, on balance. While half of the firms contacted were maintaining steady
employment, one-third were cutting work forces and an equal number were reducing
working hours.

Industrial prices are apparently responding to the slackness in

the manufacturing sector.

While a slight majority of area firms reported that

they were maintaining steady prices for the goods they make, prices were being
reduced by one-out-of-five companies surveyed; and, although nearly one-third
noted rising input costs, more than half indicated that the prices of the goods
they buy were unchanged from a month ago.
Looking ahead, negative expectations edge out positive views among Third
District manufacturers, and the balance of opinion is that the current down trend
in industrial activity will continue to midyear.

Individual forecasts vary

considerably but, overall, managers at area plants expect no growth in either new
orders or shipments over the next six months.

In response to the dim outlook,

local manufacturers plan to trim employment further and they intend to scale back
capital spending slightly between now and midsummer.
RETAIL
Reports from merchants indicate that sales for the Christmas season ran
even with 1989 results, in dollar terms.
fell well

below their

Some stores made slight gains and a few

year-ago performance.

Nearly all

contacted for this report said they made extensive
selling prices in order to meet sales targets.
volume

sales

goals

were

nearly

achieved

and

store

executives

reductions from original

As a result, it appears that
leftover

inventories

are not

III-3
significantly higher than anticipated.
Store officials said they continue to be extremely cautious in planning for
the rest of the year.

In their view, near-term prospects depend on developments

in the Persian Gulf and their effect on consumer sentiment.

Looking somewhat

further out, merchants generally do not expect sales to improve until the second
half, and then only if the overall economy shows signs of renewed vigor and
consumer confidence improves.
FINANCE
Total loan volume at major Third District banks in

late December was

approximately 9 percent above the December 1989 level, with growth largely due
to gains in consumer lending.
slightly, year-over-year,

Commercial and industrial loan volume was down

and bankers

business loans remained weak.

contacted in January said demand for

Real estate loan volume was up from year-earlier

levels, but bankers indicated that outstandings were beginning to decline as a
result of payoffs and commercial real estate loan write-downs while new loan
commitments remain limited.

Personal lending in late December was up, but the

gain appeared to be less than the usual seasonal increase, and bankers indicated
that growth appeared to be easing in early January.
Bankers generally expect weak loan demand throughout the year.

They cite

the Persian Gulf situation as a restraining influence on the demand for credit;
and, looking further ahead, several bankers said they expect an economic slowdown
to persist well beyond midyear,
businesses and consumers.

further dampening

the demand for

loans by

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Summary.

The worst of the contraction in real GNP and industrial

production occurred last quarter, according to a panel of 23 Fourth District
economists.

Labor markets in Ohio have held up better than for the nation in

recent months, but the unemployment rate is expected to rise more rapidly in
the next few months.

Manufacturing in the Fourth District has also fared

better than in the nation, but conditions in the automotive, capital goods,
and steel industries have deterioriated in recent weeks.

Most retailers

report that sales in late December and early January picked up from the weak
performances in October and November.

Lower interest rates have not had a

visible effect on loan demand, which remains weak.
The National Economy.

All but two of a group of 23 economists with the

Fourth District Roundtable believe that the worst of the contraction in real
GNP and industrial production occurred last quarter.

They estimate that real

GNP declined at about a 2.7% annual rate in 1990;IVQ, and will decline at
rates of 1.7% and 0.2% in the first and second quarters of this year.

Growth

in real GNP is expected to rebound at a 2.7% annual rate in the second half of
1992 and a 3% rate in the first half of 1991.

The forecasts assume no

outbreak of war in the Middle East.
The panel also believes that the worst of the latest inflation bulge was
in 1990:IVQ, when overall prices rose at an estimated 4.9% rate.

Prices are

expected to increase by about a 3.3% annual rate between 1991:IIIQ and
1992:IIQ.

IV-2

The Regional Economy.

Labor market conditions in the District have

remained better than in the nation.

Nonfarm employment in Ohio inched up in

December, and was slightly higher than a year earlier.

The unemployment rate

rose 0.3% in December but averaged 5.7% in the latest three months.

Some

labor market officials believe, however, that the unemployment rate will rise
more rapidly toward the national average in the next few months, especially
because of further layoffs in the automotive and steel industries.
Manufacturing.

Output and employment have been stronger in the District

than in the nation, but deterioration occurred in key industries during
December, resulting in sizable layoffs in mid- and late January especially
in the automotive industry.

Auto production this quarter, however, is

expected to increase by about 5% to 10% from the weak fourth quarter,
according to several auto analysts.

A similar increase in production is

expected for next quarter, assuming revival in consumer confidence if the
instability in the Persian Gulf is resolved.
Some capital-goods producers have marked down their forecasts of output
for this year because of a weaker-than-expected economy.

Nevertheless, a

common view is that capital spending will hold up better than it did in past
periods of business weakness.

A machine tool builder reports that orders have

been declining in each of the last three months, but the declines have been
far less than in previous episodes of business slowdown.
Heavy-duty truck business sagged unexpectedly in November and apparently
in December, following a brief revival through mid-autumn when orders were

IV-3

pulled forward into 1990 because of new environmental regulations effective in
1991.
Steel producers report a sharp deterioration in orders and operations
in recent weeks.

The drastic cutback in auto output last month and

higher-than-expected volume in steel imports last quarter cut the operating
rate in the domestic steel industry to about 70% of capacity late last
month from an 84% rate in November.

Operations are expected to average in the

low 70s this quarter.
A defense contractor noted substantial pickup in the last few months for
special military goods destined for the Middle East.

They anticipate,

however, no reversal in the decline of defense spending, and have not
experienced a revival in defense orders.
Consumer Spending.

Most retailers report that sales in late December and

early January improved from a weak October and November, but sales were widely
mixed among retailers.

Consequently, inventories for some retailers are in

better balance now than before the Christmas season, while a little higher
than desired for others.

Retailers see little prospect that sales will

improve much, at least until the Gulf situation is resolved.

Improved real

income, especially because of lower gasoline prices, is a positive sign for
near-term sales, but most retailers expect consumer spending will be
lackluster through midyear.
New car dealers in the District report that sales have weakened sharply
for this time of year, but that inventories of new cars are lower than a year
ago.

Dealers have no trouble obtaining financing for inventory, but report

IV-4

that consumers are finding financing more difficult than a few months ago.
Dealers of domestic nameplates are not ordering for additional inventories,
but Honda and Toyota dealers apparently are adding to inventories in
anticipation of higher sales in the spring.
Financial Developments.

Latest interest rate declines have had no

visible effect on demand for credit by consumers or businesses.

Lenders

assert that rising concerns over employment and uncertainty about the
Persian Gulf situation are constraints on consumer demand.

Rates on

conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages in the Cleveland area average about
9.5%, with some lenders offering mortgages as low as 9.0%, but without much
consumer response.
Builders of new homes claim that construction is off more than usual for
this time of year, and a major developer cancelled plans for a shopping mall
because of the uncertain economy and increased difficulties in funding from
his usual sources of credit.
A reasonably well-capitalized bank with a large portfolio of real estate
loans is shifting away from commercial loans toward consumer loans.

Some

other well-capitalized banks still report that they have an ample supply of
credit available to qualified borrowers, but loan demand remains weak.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity weakened further in late December and early
January.

Sales activity was slow for District retailers, manufacturers,

realtors and auto dealers.

Manufacturers apparently decreased production and

home builders started relatively few houses.

Financial institutions reported

weak loan demand, and hotels and resorts experienced a downturn in occupancy.
On a positive note, export volume increased again at District ports, and the
region's farm sector was healthy.
Consumer Spending
Responses to our post-Christmas mail survey of retailers indicated that
Christmas and post-Christmas sales were disappointing.

A majority of the

respondents reported that Christmas sales were below year-ago levels, and many
stores also reported declines in shopper traffic and sales of big ticket items.
More than nine out of ten retailers indicated that they had employed fewer
workers than last Christmas, and about two-thirds indicated that they had
reduced their prices as December progressed.

Retail inventories apparently

changed little over the survey period.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity fell in December according to our regular
mail survey.

Weakened demand was apparent as orders and shipments declined

from November levels, and manufacturers cited poor sales as their biggest
problem.
workweeks.

Responding firms cut back production, employment, and their
The prices they paid for raw materials rose.

Most manufacturers believed that the business climate declined nationally
and locally in late December and early January.

They expected little

improvement over the next six months, and only a third foresaw increased
profits for their businesses in 1991.
Ports
District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton Roads (Norfolk)-indicated that exports rose while changes in import volume were mixed in
December compared with November and a year earlier.

All ports expected export

growth to outpace import growth over the next six months.

Hampton Roads

reported that its coal exports were at a record pace in late 1990.
Residential Real Estate
Housing sales were generally weak in December, according to our telephone
survey of District realtors.

Sales of new homes were poor, but sales of

existing homes remained stable.

Also, sales of expensive homes slowed more

than sales of modestly priced homes.

Realtors indicated that housing prices

had changed little over the past month, although they noted some decrease in
higher-priced homes.

Looking ahead, realtors expected home sales to increase,

especially in the more expensive segment of the market.

Realtors predicted

that lower interest rates and a quick resolution of the Mideast crisis would
boost buyer interest and sales in 1991.
Our telephone survey of home builders indicated that housing starts slowed
more than usual in December.
slowdown.

A majority blamed lower home sales for the

Builders indicated that many homeowners were remodeling and adding

to their existing homes rather than building new ones.
conditions to improve over the next three months.

Few builders expected

V-3

Tourism
Hotels, motels and resorts throughout the District indicated that tourist
activity had declined considerably compared with previous winters.

Most

respondents experienced declines in bookings, which they attributed to the
downturn in the economy, bad weather for skiing, increases in fuel prices and
the Mideast crisis.

A majority expected tourist activity to worsen in coming

months.
Finance
Financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that real estate
and commercial loan activity weakened in December and early January.

A

majority of institutions suggested that the slowness resulted from sluggish
loan demand and not from more stringent credit criteria.
Lenders indicated that the prime rate and other interest rates would have
to drop at least one percentage point further to boost loan demand.

They noted

that much of December's borrower traffic consisted of loan inquiries and
business loan refinancings rather than new loan applications.
Other District contacts suggested that consumers may be suffering from
financial stress.
home foreclosures.

These contacts cited increases in auto repossessions and
Also, according to surveys conducted by several District

newspapers, many pawnshops indicated that their loan activity was increasing.
State Budgets
Our discussions with state government budget forecasters indicated that
all five District states and the District of Columbia were either experiencing
or expecting revenue shortfalls.

They blamed the shortfalls on their

deteriorating economies, which they attributed to several factors including the
Gulf crisis.

V-4

Serious revenue shortfalls were reported in Virginia, Maryland, North
Carolina, and the District of Columbia.

In these jurisdictions, most major

categories of tax receipts either were declining or growing only sluggishly.
South Carolina noted a modest shortfall while West Virginia's revenues were
still considered adequate.

Both of these states, however, expected lower

revenues in the months ahead.
were only part of the problem.

Respondents said lower-than-expected revenues
They also cited overly ambitious spending

plans, federal and judicial spending mandates and rising health insurance
costs.
State budget analysts were not encouraged by the outlook.

A Maryland

official expected improvement soon; most others were hesitant to forecast a
turnaround in the near-term future.
Agriculture
According to farm analysts, conditions in agriculture were generally good
as of mid-January.

The condition of small grain crops planted last autumn was

reported to be above average due to warmer-than-normal temperatures and
abundant soil moisture.

Feed and forage stocks appeared adequate and were

expected to be more than sufficient to last the winter.
Our contacts suggested that the financial condition of District farmers
remained strong, but some expressed concern that higher production costs may
squeeze profit margins in the year ahead.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: A large majority of firms contacted around year end reported marginally
lower or flat production, sales, or employment compared to late fall and a year ago. Retailers,
with few exceptions, reported that real holiday sales fell below or only equalled last year's
levels. While domestic sales are reported to be down by many contacts in diverse industries,
several businesses report growing international sales.

Continued widespread contraction in

construction is reported to be causing construction-related manufacturing activity to weaken
further. Banking contacts supported these interpretations with information that consumer loan
demand and business capital spending are softening. Contacts report that the California freeze
is raising fruit and vegetable prices, while an unseasonably warm winter in other areas has led
to falling prices for natural gas.
Retail Sales:

Retailers said that real sales had turned out weak compared to a year

earlier, though most had expected this to happen. Contacts say that they planned inventory
carefully, promoted and discounted items early, and finally moved remaining merchandise with
further price cuts during the week before Christmas; that helped trigger an unusually large late
sales surge. It appears that sales activity was not as poor in the western part of the District.
Although sales of most big ticket items were reported to be weak everywhere, luxury items
received a temporary boost in December from the special tax slated to begin in 1991. Florida
restaurateurs and luxury resort operators report reduced business entertainment spending, and a
"no frills" hotel franchiser says that business travelers in the Southeast are "trading down."
Tourism, overall, is still strong but there are reports of softening domestic leisure travel to
Florida. According to industry contacts, convention attendance in Atlanta, New Orleans, and
Orlando has been record-setting.

VI-2
Manufacturing: Producers in most industries report declining or flat domestic sales
while reports on the strength of exports vary. Contacts reporting strong exports but flat domestic
sales include a telecommunications components manufacturer in Atlanta, linerboard and pulp
manufacturers with plants across the Southeast, a major regional aluminum can sheet producer,
and a few makers of original equipment auto parts. Mobile home manufacturers in Florida,
Georgia, and Mississippi report new or expected contracts to make homes for Russian immigrants
in Israel, helping to offset weak domestic sales. Manufacturers who report weak domestic sales
that are not being offset by growing exports include southern pine lumber producers for whom
Iraq represented a major market before its August invasion of Kuwait. Lumber sales to LDCs
in the Caribbean and Africa also are reported to be down because of the higher energy costs they
are facing.

A Georgia producer of carpets says that Saudi Arabia, the largest international

market for the state's carpets, has stopped taking delivery and that insurance costs on shipments
to the Middle East have become prohibitively high. A major supplier of inorganic industrial
chemicals to domestic manufacturers of many industrial and consumer products reports
significantly lower sales compared to a year ago. A plumbing fixture supplier serving Georgia
and Tennessee and a Florida wall coatings manufacturer report lower sales in their domestic-only
markets. In contrast, pen and pencil and cellular phone companies report healthy domestic and
foreign sales.
Financial Services: Bankers indicate that business and consumer loan demand was
weak in December compared to a year ago and attribute the weakness to the slackening economy
and uncertainties associated with the Middle East crisis. Loan officers say that capital spending
is shrinking or being delayed in several industries. Direct reports from businesses such as a hotel
franchiser, a computer software firm, and a producer of office supplies confirm this information.
Industrial engineering, accounting, and management consulting firms report a decline in their

VI-3
businesses due to reduced capital spending by clients.

However, one loan officer reported

continued strength in loan demand by the health industry, and a Miami banker notes growing
demand from firms exporting to South America.
Construction:

Most segments of construction activity across the region were down

sharply at year-end from levels a year earlier and in previous months of 1990. In contrast to
previous years, there was no initiation or acceleration of projects related to tax laws. Parts of
Louisiana and Mississippi are reported to have more building activity than last year at this time,
but these areas are expanding from depressed levels. A large building materials supplier, who
has already cut his payroll by 15 percent, says that he is experiencing collection problems from
hard-pressed contractors and that the remodeling business is flat. A home improvement company
in Georgia also reports that December and early-January sales are down from preceding months.
Wages and Prices: A major Florida contractor cites a decline in prices of concrete and
construction tools in response to construction's weakness. South Florida citrus and vegetable
growers are reported to be temporarily reaping much higher prices as a consequence of the
December freeze affecting Southern California crops. Trucking company contacts, a mobile
home manufacturer, and a regional supplier of linens say their profits are falling because they
are unable to pass on increased fuel costs. According to an industry contact, natural gas prices
fell significantly in January because of unseasonably warm weather and excess supplies.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. District economic activity slowed in December and early January, particularly as
auto production fell. A consensus outlook of business economists in the District called for a mild
recession nationally to end by the second quarter, followed by a sluggish recovery that is held back by
weak industrial production. District retailers indicated that consumer spending over the holiday season
was somewhat stronger than the national average. Auto sales and production remained weak in
December and early January, and the impact of slowing auto production is beginning to spread to other
manufacturers. Outside the auto industry, several capital goods manufacturers report recent weakness in
sales and orders. Export growth continued, although several contacts with important exporting sectors
expressed concern about continued strength. Construction spending continues on existing projects, while
expectations for 1991 activity continue to be weak. Loan demand in the District has softened.
Agricultural exports fell sharply in recent months.
Outlook for the National Economy. Business economists from around the District attending a
mid-December conference at the Bank generally anticipated sluggish growth in 1991. The consensus
outlook of 25 forecasts showed real GNP rising only 0.4 percent in 1991. The quarterly pattern indicated
by the consensus showed real GNP declining in the fourth quarter of 1990 and the first quarter of 1991.
A slow recovery was expected over the remainder of 1991, as declines in industrial production extended
into the second quarter. Citing weakening cash flow in the nonfinancial business and farm sectors,
several capital goods producers projected absolute declines in expenditures for their respective product
categories (including office and computer equipment). Consumer spending was expected to expand in the
second quarter at a slow pace as auto sales make a moderate rebound. In the weeks after the meeting,
reports by participants suggested that many revised forecasts downward as new data were released, but
little change arose in the expected quarterly pattern of economic activity.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales activity generally softened through most of the fourth quarter,
but picked up toward the end of the holiday season. Most contacts report that consumer spending in the
District was still somewhat stronger than the nation on average. Several retailers reported that holiday
sales were basically flat (in nominal dollars) with last year, while District sales increased slightly. Some

VII-2
contacts spoke of heavier-than-usual discounting toward the end of the year, which may have boosted
some retailers' sales at the expense of earnings. Contacts generally noted increased consumer costconsciousness and a shift towards practicality. The best sales performances typically were reported by
discount retailers. Several contacts reaffirmed the weakness in the Detroit area, although one analyst
stated that the warehouse club/discount format performed well in Detroit in December, showing good
volume increases. While most contacts reported little change in the mix of sales between credit and cash,
many reported rising delinquency rates on utilized credit.
Sales expectations for the new year are mixed, and contacts universally cited the Middle East
situation as a yet-to-be resolved uncertainty. Most contacts related a belief that the consumer has been
postponing discretionary purchases. However, opinions were mixed about the degree to which consumer
confidence will return, should a peaceful resolution to the Middle East conflict be reached. Several
business analysts in the District stated that the perception of difficulty in the banking industry has also
impacted consumer confidence. Retail contacts generally indicated that orders to manufacturers are
running about even with those placed at this time last year. Increased financial difficulties and inventory
building in several sectors, however, may constrain total order activity in the early part of the year.
Auto Industry. The auto production slowdown continued in December and into the first weeks
of 1991, as industry sales remained weak nationally and consumer confidence remained at recessionary
levels. While Big Three automakers attending the Bank's December meeting expect 1991 vehicle sales to
be roughly 7 percent lower than in 1990, sales rates (seasonally adjusted) are expected to improve each
quarter of the year. Fleet sales are expected to continue to grow in importance, lowering inventory
requirements for a given sales level and holding back a production rebound. Vehicle rental and leasing
activity are growing more rapidly than sales to individuals. Although several dealers expressed optimism
about the prospects of the "nearly-new" car market created by the quicker turnover of auto fleets, auto
producers report concern that new car sales and production will be adversely affected. Auto suppliers
report being impacted by slower auto production and by volatility in production schedules. Since
employees of many suppliers to Big Three automakers do not have the income guarantees won by

VII-3
members of the United Auto Workers, softness in auto-related sectors could curb District personal income
and spending growth in the near future.
Manufacturing Activity. Manufacturing activity has experienced an increasing number of
weakening sectors besides the auto industry, while some industries remain healthy. Overall, order book
quality seems increasingly subject to the same uncertainty that is slowing consumer spending, with many
contacts reporting that capital spending decisions have become contingent on outcomes in the Middle
East. A major producer of heavy equipment reported that sales declined sharply in December and early
January (from the year-earlier periods), while new orders have fallen off even more dramatically than
sales. The slowdown in auto production has begun to impact the previously stable steel industry. A large
District steel producer reported that the slowdown contributed to a sharp decline in its operating rate in
late December and early January. A major supplier to the electronics industry reported that component
sales growth was better than expected in December. This contact expected continued growth in 1991, but
at roughly half the rate in recent years. An economist for an electric utility stated that power sales to nonautomotive industrial customers in Michigan increased in December.
Trade Activity. Several District contacts reported that expectations have weakened for export
growth continuing at recent rates, although exports still provide some of their strongest markets. Citing
slower growth in domestic demand in Canada, much of Western Europe, and parts of Asia, economists
with two of the largest exporting firms in the District recently lowered their forecasts for 1991 export
growth. Another large District capital goods producer stated that export opportunities are still being
developed, and that export orders are holding up reasonably well. However, this contact expressed
concern about the potentially adverse impact on sales growth from slowing growth in several European
economies as well as political uncertainty in the Soviet Union. Steel imports actually increased in the
fourth quarter, although a large District steel producer stated that the increase may reflect, in part,
inventory building prior to a possible strike in late January. Citing the crisis in the Middle East, one large
District exporting manufacturer recently suspended international travel of its employees, and ordered all
U.S. citizens working abroad to return home.

VII-4
Construction. Commercial construction in the District is widely expected to be weak this year,
while spending for schools, highways, and other public construction is expected to take up some of the
slack. A large District producer of building materials stated that projects underway are being completed,
but new projects are well below levels reached at the end of 1989. A cement producer projected a
double-digit decline in the firm's shipments in 1991. Cement industry shipments in 1990 (through
October) showed that relative strength in the District has disappeared, with shipments growth in the Great
Lakes region now running about equal with that for the nation as a whole (on a year-to-date basis). A
supplier of materials to home builders in the Chicago area reported that business for many of its
customers has slowed dramatically, although sales growth for consumer do-it-yourself projects was
holding up well even through the Christmas season.
Financial Institutions. Several District financial institutions are experiencing weak loan demand
from many sectors, although some contacts noted a slight increase in credit card usage last quarter.
Several bankers reported continued weak growth in commercial real estate and industrial loans, which
was attributed mostly to an unwillingness to borrow. One large bank reported increases in services fees,
but basically unchanged lending policy. A savings and loan analyst noted some growth in home
mortgage lending when mortgage rates were below 9.5 percent, but most of that demand is for
refinancing. One large bank's credit card volume increased in the fourth quarter, with half of the gain due
to increased usage by existing accounts. This lender also reported no increase in consumer delinquency
rates (through November), although delinquency in home mortgage lending had increased slightly.
Agriculture. Corn and soybean exports have fallen off sharply in recent months. From January
through August of 1990, the combined U.S. export tonnage of corn and soybeans held nearly 13 percent
above the year-earlier level. But from September through December, the combined export tonnage was
off a third from the year-earlier pace and the lowest for that period in at least 16 years. Several factors
have contributed to the sharper-than-expected downturn, including the emerging trade problems facing
the USSR, bumper harvests elsewhere in the world, and various disruptions related to the Mideast
situation. Most analysts believe that the export pace will pickup in the months ahead but remain short of
the year-earlier level.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT -

ST. LOUIS

Summary
District

economic

conditions

continue

to

deteriorate.

Employment and output are declining in the durables manufacturing sector,
while

the

nondurables

spending during
loans

markets

is

relatively

stable.

the holidays was down sharply

outstanding

estate

sector

have

risen

continue

to

slightly
slump.

at

Real

from a

large

year

District

Agricultural

consumer

ago.

Total

banks.

and natural

Real

resource

conditions are mixed.
Consumer Spending
District

retailers

report

that

nominal

sales

during

the

1990

holiday season ranged from slightly higher to 10 percent lower than in
the previous year.

In addition to consumers' concerns about recession

and war, unseasonably mild weather reportedly dampened sales of winter
apparel
sales

early

in

the

season,

the week before

were near

Christmas.

levels,

desired

while

ice

storms

in

some

areas

Respondents reported that

however,

as most

retailers

hampered

inventories

had planned

for

sluggish sales.

When contacts were asked whether more price discounting

was used than in

previous

the first

quarter

of

years,

responses were

1991 varied from bleak

mixed.

to optimistic,

if the Persian Gulf conflict is resolved quickly.
car

sales

continue

to

be

well

below

The outlook for

year-earlier

particularly

Contacts report new
levels,

except

for

imported luxury cars, which registered strong December sales as consumers
sought
cars.

to

avoid the

new federal

taxes

on expensive

and

"gas-guzzling"

VIII-2

Manufacturing
Many

producers

heating and cooling

of

durable

equipment,

goods,

including

industrial machinery,

firms

producing

electrical

wiring,

refrigerators and furniture, have cut production recently; many expect
additional

cuts

in

the

first

quarter.

The

federal

government's

cancellation of a military jet contract will result in the elimination of
3,000 to

5,000 jobs at one Missouri

defense

contractor.

This follows

layoffs of roughly 4,000 workers last year by the same contractor.
of

the

region's

although

motor

plants

vehicle

making

plants

sports/utility

have

had

vehicles

scheduled overtime

in recent weeks.

have had declining

orders,

sizable

layoffs.

Overall,

however,

food

production
activity

has

processing, in particular, has been

and

layoffs,
minivans

have

Several vehicle-related factories

including two large

processing

intermittent

Most

tire

plants,

of nondurables
expanded.

has

Growth

which had
been
in

flat;

poultry

fueled by export sales and sales of

processed convenience dinners.
State Government Finance
Slowing

economic

growth

in

Missouri

and Tennessee

state government revenues to fall short of projected levels.
expect revenues

in

the current

than originally projected.
avoid a budget deficit.

fiscal

year to be

has

caused

Both states

roughly 2 percent

less

Both states also have limited spending

Revenues are expected to

show no real

to

growth

through 1991.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential

real

estate

markets

across

the District

continue

to

slump, although many contacts believe a turnaround will occur by the end
of the first

quarter.

A lack

of consumer

confidence

is

cited

as

the

major reason for slow sales, despite recent declines in interest rates

VIII-3

and home

Recent

prices.

layoffs

that housing market further.

in

St.

Louis

are expected

Commercial real estate markets, except for

distribution warehouse space in Memphis, also are weak.
slower pace
and

of

residential

suppliers

reported,

for

are

and commercial

broadening

example,

that

to depress

product

major

To adjust to the

construction,
lines.

many developers

One

commercial

Memphis

developers

have

contact
shifted

their focus from building office and retail centers to leasing, property
management and marketing of services for business owners.
Banking and Credit
Total loans on the books of 11 of the District's largest banks
rose 2 percent from the end of October through year-end, after showing no
growth in the two months previous.

Real estate and consumer lending grew

over the period, while commercial and industrial
to shrink.

(C&I) lending continued

Contacts expect no significant uptick in C&I or commercial

real estate lending, at least until the third quarter, because of weak
demand and tightened credit standards.

Preliminary estimates by many

banks

by

indicate

improved

profit

margins

the

fourth

quarter.

Net

interest margins were buoyed by declines in interest rates, which lowered
funding costs.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Heavy rains

and melting

snow have

caused

flooding in

some areas

and raised river levels throughout the District, but barge traffic has
not been disrupted significantly.
recent

orders

inventories

and

are

shipments

up.

District

percent ahead of last year.
prices

for

wheat,

soybeans,

returns for beef cattle.

Southern pine lumber mills report that

have

fallen

coal

below

production

year-ago
is

running

levels
about

and
4.4

Agricultural contacts report low or falling
broilers

and

hogs,

but

continued

strong

IX -1
NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic conditions have been uneven. Labor market conditions have been
mixed.

General merchandise sales growth has been slow to moderate.

Automobile sales have

declined from their year-ago levels. Housing activity has rebounded but has remained depressed from
its levels in the late 80s. Conditions in construction and manufacturing have been mixed. Resourcerelated industries have been doing fairly well.

Many respondents expressed concern about the

economic effects of the situation in the Persian Gulf.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
Labor market conditions have been mixed in the district. Minnesota's unemployment rate
was 3.8 percent in November, down from 4.2 percent in October, but up from 3.6 percent in
November 1989. Unemployment rates in November were higher than a year earlier in Montana and
the Upper Peninsula, but lower in North and South Dakota and western Wisconsin. Employment
levels in the district in November were generally higher than their year-ago levels. In Minnesota,
for example, the number of people employed in November was 1.5 percent higher than in November
1989.

There are some signs of weakness, however.

The help wanted index in Minnesota in

November was 26.3 percent lower than in November 1989. A nationwide survey of employers
reports that in the Minneapolis - St. Paul metropolitan area 8 percent of employers intended to add
employees and 13 percent intended to cut back their employment levels. The survey also reports that
the metropolitan figures were slightly worse than the national average. Wage and price increases
have remained moderate.

IX-2
Consumer Spending
District retailers of general merchandise report slow to moderate sales growth. One major
retailer reports that December sales in comparable stores were 2.4 percent higher than in December
1989. Another retailer reports that while national sales were only 1.5 percent higher in December
than a year ago, sales in the Upper Midwest region of the country were 4 percent higher than a year
ago. Retailers comments generally reflect disappointing sales relative to their expectations.

One

retailer reports that discounting of prices was broader and deeper than expected. Retailers generally
expressed a great deal of uncertainty about the outlook for the next few months, due in part to
concerns about the conflict in the Middle East.
New car sales in the district in December were generally lower than a year ago. Dealers
report sales declines from last December ranging from 6 percent to 30 percent. Reports on truck
sales in December relative to a year ago range from unchanged to a decline of 14 percent. Dealers'
reports on car and truck inventory levels range from moderate to high.
Housing starts have rebounded from their depressed levels in 1990, but are still sharply lower
than their levels two years ago.

The number of new housing permits issued in Minnesota in

November was 7 percent higher than in November 1989, but 25 percent lower than in November
1988. Existing home sales in the Minneapolis - St. Paul metropolitan area have recently shown signs
of slowing. In November they fell by 9.4 percent from November 1989.
Tourist activity has been moderately good. Ski resorts in Montana and parts of Wisconsin
report fairly good conditions, while those in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan report that a lack of
snow has slowed business. However, general tourist activity in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan
has been fairly good. The number of crossings over the Mackinac Bridge into the Peninsula in

IX-3
November was 7.2 percent higher than the previous record levels of November 1989. The number
of visitors to Yellowstone in 1990 was 6.1 percent higher than in 1989.
Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the district's construction industry have been mixed. The overhang of office
space in the Minneapolis - St. Paul metropolitan area is expected to depress construction activity in
the area. The value of office buildings in downtown Minneapolis has declined recently, causing an
expected erosion of about 10 percent in the city's commercial tax base.
Conditions in the district's manufacturing industries have been mixed lately. An index of
economic indicators shows that economic activity in the Minneapolis - St. Paul metropolitan area fell
in the third quarter from the second quarter, but was higher than in the third quarter of 1989.
Computer and electronics industries in the district have continued to be in poor shape, but aircraft
industry suppliers report rapid sales growth. Several respondents report that export demand has
continued to be strong.
Resource-Related Industries
The district's resource-related industries have been doing fairly well. Ranchers in the district
report that 1990 was an excellent year. Farmers generally report that crop yields in 1990 were fairly
good. However, prices for farm products have generally declined. An index of prices received by
farmers was 9 percent lower in November than in November 1989. Farmland values in the district
rose approximately 4 percent during 1990. Precipitation in the district this winter has generally been
below normal, which could adversely affect crop yields in 1991. Conditions in the district's mining
industry have been fairly good. Iron ore production in Minnesota in 1990 was 5.1 percent higher
than in 1989.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Growth in the Tenth District economy has slowed in recent

weeks, but is apparently still positive.

Farm income prospects have dimmed

somewhat while growth in the number of operating drilling rigs has leveled
off.

A disappointing Christmas season failed to boost sluggish retail sales,

prompting both retailers and manufacturers to trim inventories.

Mortgage

demand and housing starts both continue to fall, despite lower mortgage
interest rates.

Loan demand at commercial banks continues to drop as well,

due mainly to sluggish demand for commercial real estate loans and residential
construction loans.
Retail Sales.

Most district retailers report worsening sales over the

past three months, accentuated by disappointing results from the Christmas
season.

Sales during the holiday season were generally flat and often worse

than expected, although discounters enjoyed slight gains.

Retailers report

weak sales in most merchandise categories other than clothing and expect
further weakness in the coming months.

Most respondents have been trimming

inventories and expect to continue this trend.

Product prices have leveled

off and are expected to remain flat or increase only slightly in the coming
months.

New auto sales have fallen in most district states over the last

month and are expected to be sluggish again this year.

Financing is generally

available for inventories and for potential buyers, although some dealers
report tightening credit standards.

Most automobile dealers are trimming

inventories.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report stable to slightly higher input

prices over the past three months, leaving prices moderately higher than a
year ago.

Expectations about future prices are mixed, in part due to

X-2
uncertainty about the Persian Gulf crisis.

Materials availability and lead

times pose no problems for most manufacturers.
inventories.

Most firms continue to trim

A bright spot in the manufacturing picture is strong exports,

thanks both to the weaker U.S. dollar and to healthy economic growth abroad,
especially in Europe and South America.

One manufacturer of steel pipe and

tubes noted that a sharp drop in penetration of the U.S. market by Japan,
Europe, and Canada leaves more room for domestic producers.
Energy.

Oil prices declined in December due to abundant supplies of

crude oil and expectations of a peaceful settlement in the Gulf crisis.
Uncertainty about the outcome of the crisis and its impact on world crude oil
supplies continues to moderate gains in district drilling activity.

The

average number of operating drilling rigs in district states rose from 336 in
November to 341 in December, only slightly higher than a year ago.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Housing starts have declined in recent

weeks, sinking below year-ago levels in most areas of the district.

Most

builders expect starts to fall on balance over the course of the year, even
though new home sales and prices should generally remain stable.

Sales of

building materials are down substantially from both three months and a year
ago, prompting suppliers to predict 1991 will be a "tough year."

Respondents

from thrifts report moderate outflows of deposits over the past month and
expect little change in deposit flows over the next three months.
demand has dipped below seasonal norms.

Mortgage

Mortgage rates have been falling, and

most respondents expect rates to continue to fall slightly over the first
quarter of 1991.
Banking.
month.

Most commercial bankers report loan demand decreased last

In most cases, the decrease reflects lower demand for commercial real

X-3
estate loans and residential construction loans.

Results for commercial,

consumer, and home mortgage loans were mixed, while agricultural loan demand
increased somewhat.
the last month.

Most bankers report no change in credit standards over

While most respondents have not changed their prime rate or

consumer lending rates, they expect to reduce both in the near future.
deposits increased at most banks last month.

Total

Demand deposits were up, and NOW

accounts and money market deposit accounts were stable to higher.

Changes in

small time deposits varied widely, while large certificates of deposits
generally fell.
Agriculture.
caution.

District farmers and their lenders approach 1991 with

The winter wheat crop is in good to excellent condition in most of

the district, as extensive crop damage was avoided during the recent period of
cold weather.

The crop remains vulnerable to winter kill, however, due to low

soil moisture and the absence of a protective blanket of snow.

A sharp drop

in crop prices since mid-1990, a cutback in government payments under the new
farm bill, and higher fuel and agricultural chemical prices have lowered
prospects for farm income.

As a result, spending on new farm equipment fell

sharply in the last quarter of 1990, and bankers expect sluggish spending in
the year ahead.

Dimmer prospects for farm income have also slowed sales of

farm real estate in the district.

Still, concerns about the health of the

national economy and about lower farm incomes have affected spending in
district rural communities only slightly.
communities remain solid.

Retail sales in most rural

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Output in the District has been flat to slightly down.

The

manufacturing sector continues to decline while growth in the service sector
has slowed.

Retailers report weak holiday sales.

Construction activity has increased moderately.

Auto sales have improved.
Oil production has risen due

to increased production from existing wells and new drilling.

Local

government revenues are decreasing while demand for government services is
increasing.

The crop harvest increased this year, but production costs hurt

profit margins.
Manufacturing orders continue to be weak although there is little
evidence of any sharp decline.

Inventories remain lean.

Many respondents say

that their export orders continue to be healthy while domestic orders have
declined.
this year.

Many respondents expect a rebound in orders in the second half of
Orders to chemical producers have recently declined, after a surge

following the Kuwait invasion.

Continued high production of chemicals has

built inventories to desired levels and firms are now reducing output in
response to the declining demand.
orders and production.

Petroleum refiners also note declining

District manufacturers tied to the construction sector

(stone, clay and glass, lumber and wood products, and fabricated metals) say
that orders from outside the District have declined sharply, but District
orders are unchanged or growing.

Many respondents feel that much of the

recent weakness in construction is weather-related.

Although orders for

apparel products is flat, sales of lower priced basic lines have increased.
Producers of electronics say that orders generally have been flat, although
one producer of communication electronics says that sales of several new

XI-2

products have been robust.

Orders for primary metal producers are declining.

Most respondents in the paper industry say sales have been flat.

Sales of oil

field equipment continue to increase and many manufacturers are adding
capacity.
Growth in the service sector has weakened since the last survey.
is strong at agencies which supply temporary workers.
overall demand has been flat.

Demand

Law firms note that

Declining business conditions have slowed

demand growth for consulting firms.

Accounting firms note some increased

demand for cost-saving services such as tax advice and internal audits.
Airline industry respondents note a slight pick up in traffic due to price
discounting.
Retail sales are slightly above last year although retailers indicate
that holiday sales were disappointing.

District sales are modestly

outperforming the nation's, particularly in Houston.

Increased competition is

generating heavy price discounting which has squeezed margins.

Some retailers

indicate that inventories are above desired levels.
District auto sales have increased.

Dallas-Fort Worth area auto sales

were flat in November, holding year-to-date sales at last year's level.
Houston area sales were strong in November.

Houston is now expecting to end

1990 with a modest increase in year over year sales.
Energy extraction has increased in the past several months.

Higher oil

prices have increased both drilling for oil and production from existing
wells.

Large supplies of natural gas and unseasonably warm weather, however,

have suppressed natural gas prices.

Respondents say that current conditions

in the natural gas market have caused declines in drilling for gas.

The long-

XI-3

term outlook for gas has improved, however, and respondents say that drilling
for gas should improve this year.

Projections for growth in the rig count in

1991 vary from zero to a 15 percent increase.
Construction has increased modestly in recent months with much of the
activity centered in Houston and South Texas.

Highway construction has

recently increased but builders expect future declines in Texas as federal and
state funding shrinks.

Despite recent increases in residential construction,

respondents generally have become more negative about the outlook.

District

residential builders note that decreased lending by banks and the national
housing recession are major obstacles to significant growth in their industry.
Local governments say revenues are declining due to lower sales tax
collections.

Increased demands for health care, law enforcement and improved

waste water treatment facilities are straining already tight budgets.

As a

cost-cutting measure, several local governments have begun efforts to contract
out services such as sanitation and cleaning.
The District agricultural harvest is virtually complete.
were lightly damaged by freezing temperatures in December.

Some crops

The December

livestock and livestock products index increased 8 percent from a year ago and
2 percent from November.
cattle and calves.

Texas producers are averaging higher prices for beef

December crop prices were 2 percent below a year ago and 1

percent below November.

Lower prices for corn, cottonseed and wheat offset

higher prices for cotton, all hay, peanuts, sorghum and soybeans.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions in the West are reported to be softening further. Slower growth is
bringing continued moderation in wage and price increases throughout the District. Holiday retail
sales were mixed in the West, but, generally, were above low pre-holiday expectations. Manufacturing
activity continues to slow across much of the West. Agriculture and resource-related industries in the
District have been hit hard by a combination of low prices and weather related difficulties.
Construction and real estate activity continues to be hampered by an abundance of vacant office space
and difficulty in obtaining financing. Western financial institutions report mixed conditions, but many
areas note a weakening in loan demand.
Business Sentiment
Western business leaders' expectations about future economic growth deteriorated slightly in
January. Eighty-one percent now foresee a national recession in the next twelve months, compared
with 75 percent in November and 40 percent in September. An increasing number of business leaders
see this weak economic growth leading to a lessening of inflationary pressures. Almost half now
project lower inflation during the coming year. Respondents were less optimistic about foreign trade,
with only 29 percent expecting a pick-up compared to 44 percent in November.
Wages and Prices
Wage and price increases continue to moderate throughout the Twelfth District. Most retailers
reported significant discounting during the holiday season in the face of a softening economy.
Abundant grain and feed crops are pushing down prices for many agricultural commodities, like
wheat. Prices for citrus fruits, especially navel oranges, and some vegetables have risen significantly
as a result of the freeze in California. Wage demands are reported to be moderating as job security
has become a more important concern. In Seattle, manufacturing wages are reported up 5 percent

XII - 2

from last year, bolstered by gains in aerospace.
Retail Trade and Services
Retail trade activity is mixed in much of the West. Holiday sales were flat to slightly down
from last year. However, according to most reports, this performance was not too disappointing
considering the economic climate. Southern California registered weak sales, while retailers in other
areas of California reported slightly stronger sales. In Oregon and Washington, sales were flat despite
severe weather that slowed holiday activity. Sales were slightly above year-earlier levels in Idaho and
Utah, and up a strong 9 percent or more in Hawaii. Most retailers entered the holiday season with low
inventories, and report that business plans for 1991 will continue to be conservative. One retailer
reports that sales were up sharply in the first week of January.
Classified advertising volume continues to shrink for newspapers in California, but not as
sharply as in other areas of the country. One report indicated that total classified advertising volume
was down 3 percent from a year ago in California.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the West continues to slow. Defense-related aerospace activity
remains weak, and commercial aircraft manufacturing is expected to slow. Aluminum and steel
markets also are reported to be soft. Manufacturing export volume is reported to have improved
slightly, while imports have weakened.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agriculture is facing difficult conditions as lower prices and weather conditions cloud the
outlook. Large grain and feed crops are pushing down prices for many crops. In Idaho, the price of
farmland is reported to have fallen in the face of sharply lower prices for wheat. The freeze in
California wiped out the Navel Orange crop and damaged other crops and trees. The freeze is
expected to reduce California's $17.5 billion total farm revenue by $1 billion. In addition to crop

XII - 3

losses, the freeze also caused large layoffs in food processing plants in California's central valley.
Continued drought conditions also are reported to be causing major problems for California farmers.
Lack of grazing land is reportedly forcing ranchers to liquidate their herds or move them to feedlots.
Despite this increase in the beef supply, livestock prices remain high. Agricultural exports continue to
expand, but there are concerns that the California freeze will hurt citrus producers' ability to move into
the newly opened Japanese market.
Forest product industries remain depressed. Weak demand has caused prices for paper,
containerboard, and plywood to fall. These lower prices coupled with high log prices have squeezed
profits and caused many mills to close in the Northwest.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction activity in most areas of the West is weak as a result of an abundance of office
space in most of the major cities. Continued difficulty in obtaining financing for new construction
projects also is blamed for the slowdown in activity. Reports from Los Angeles continue to cite high
vacancy rates for downtown office space, and more space is coming on line. Commercial building in
Seattle is described as lackluster. There is reported to be a substantial amount of new space yet to be
absorbed in Seattle. Both residential and commercial activity remain relatively solid in Boise and Salt
Lake City as well as in Sacramento, Bakersfield, and other parts of California's central valley.
Real estate sales and prices remain weak throughout much of the West. In California, sales
have stabilized in the past few months, with prices near their year-earlier levels. Most of the
residential activity continues to be in the lower-priced end of the market. In Seattle, median home
prices peaked in mid-1990 and are reported down 15 percent from that peak.
Financial Sector
Conditions in Twelfth District financial institutions are mixed, with solid conditions reported in
the inter-mountain states and continued softening in coastal areas. Loan demand is reported weak in

XII - 4

Southern California, Oregon, and Washington. One report notes that auto loan demand has softened,
while another report indicates that consumer credit card balances did not increase as much as usual
this holiday season.

