SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

January 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUM M ARY

.............................................

First District - Boston ...................

i
....................

Second District - New York ...................
Third District - Philadelphia ...................

...............
...............

Fourth District - Cleveland ...................................
Fifth District - Richmond

...................

Sixth District - Atlanta ...................

I-1
II-1
III-1
. IV-1

...............
..................

V-1
VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago ...................

..............

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis ...................

...............

VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis ...................

..............

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City ...................

..............

X-1

Eleventh District - Dallas ...................
Twelfth District - San Francisco

.................

XI-1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X II-1

i
SUMMARY*

Reports by business and banking sources contacted by Federal Reserve districts suggest
that activity was lackluster as the year drew to a close. Retailers in most districts report that
holiday sales were at or modestly above year-ago levels before adjustment for price changes.
Manufacturing sources generally note steady or declining production and employment. Except
for export goods, orders and backlogs generally softened into 1992. According to realtors, lower
mortgage rates have aided home sales, particularly of lower-priced properties. Single-family
construction expanded modestly, while new commercial activity remained dormant. Aside from
a surge in mortgage refinancing, banking sources suggest that consumer and business loan
demand has not revived. Bankers report no change in credit standards. While some bank
contacts report ongoing loan quality problems, others are optimistic about prospects for
improvement as borrowers work down debt service burdens. Energy industry contacts confirm
that lower oil and natural gas prices are leading to cuts in expenditures for drilling and energyrelated products. District reports indicate that commodity and materials prices were generally
unchanged or declining; pressures on wages and retail prices have been minimal.

Despite

softness as the new year began, business and banking contacts generally anticipate that economic
conditions will improve by mid-year.

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and based on information collected before
January 13, 1992. This document summarizes comments received from businesses and other
contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

ii
CONSUMER SPENDING
Retailers generally confirmed that holiday sales were flat to slightly higher than year-ago
levels before adjustment for inflation.

Discounters and some specialty stores posted better

performance at the expense of traditional department stores.

Sources in Atlanta, Cleveland,

Kansas City, Minneapolis, and Dallas report modest sales gains led by nondurable goods,
particularly basic apparel and other small-ticket items. Sales in several districts were below
expectations, and retailers in the Philadelphia district have continued to cut prices through early
January.
Inventories held by retailers in Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, and Philadelphia were above
target levels in early January, while retailers in Atlanta, New York, and Kansas City were
content with current inventories.

Retail contacts generally do not plan to expand stocks

aggressively in the first quarter.
According to auto dealers, new car sales were generally weak in Atlanta, Chicago,
Dallas, Kansas City, and San Francisco districts. However, Minneapolis and Cleveland report
some improvement in auto and truck sales.
Retailers and auto dealers generally expect sales to recover in 1992, but not until the
second half of the year. Strict inventory control, competitive pricing, and continued cost-cutting
were cited by several districts as the general strategy for the near future.
MANUFACTURING
Factory activity faltered in most districts through early 1992 according to those surveyed.
Renewed weakness in production and orders was cited by most contacts. Dallas contacts report
that chemical production is flat and demand for oil field machinery is declining with oil prices.

iii

Weak auto output has hurt auto suppliers, according to Cleveland and Atlanta. Chicago also
cites continued weakness in auto production and few signs of a turnaround in orders for
appliances, heavy equipment, or primary metals.
St. Louis and Atlanta report stable or increasing demand for packaging materials, where
some price increases are sticking. Export demand continues to rise for some firms, according
to sources in Kansas City, Boston, Richmond, and St. Louis. Manufacturers in Philadelphia
report steady industrial output.
Boston contacts indicate that capital spending is restrained by adequate or excess capacity
and concerns about debt. Cleveland sources confirm that capital goods orders recently declined.
Plants are generally operating below capacity, according to industry contacts in Kansas City, and
Dallas chemical producers are concerned about overcapacity. Several districts report that, despite
recent reductions in interest rates, capital expenditures will remain at 1991 levels until economic
conditions improve, although there were several reports of productivity-enhancing capital
projects.
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Richmond report generally stable prices for
material inputs and products. Factory product prices are flat in the Boston district; the weakest
lines are being discounted.
Inventories in the Kansas City and Philadelphia districts continue to drift downward,
though no district reports excessive inventories as a major problem. Plans to expand stocks are
conspicuously absent. Manufacturers' general expectations for the first quarter are for continued
weak sales and flat prices, but sources are relatively uniform in expecting significant
improvement in sales and production in the second half of 1992.

REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Realtors in most regions report that lower mortgage rates have prompted modest gains
in home sales. In Atlanta and New York, real estate contacts note that a significant portion of
the home sales originated with first-time buyers and lower-priced properties. Sales in the Boston
and Richmond districts remained mostly flat over the past six weeks.

Except in the San

Francisco district, which reports some continued decline, sources in most areas find home prices
to be relatively stable.
Reports from St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and Atlanta note some improvement in
single-family starts, but starts in the New York district remain slow due to generally sluggish
demand. Multifamily activity remains stalled in Atlanta but is accelerating in Dallas.
Realtors, mortgage lenders and home builders are generally optimistic for the spring.
Bankers in Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Kansas City believe residential mortgage activity could
post healthy gains. Atlanta realtors expect strengthening sales and St. Louis builders believe that
conditions will improve significantly by mid-1992.
In the Dallas district, industrial and office real estate demand is flat.

Office leasing

declined in the New York area since the last report. Commercial activity in the Minneapolis
district is mixed. Dallas and St. Louis report moderate increases in public construction.
BANKING AND FINANCE
Aside from a surge in mortgage refinancing, most districts report consumer and business
loan demand has not expanded significantly. Contacts in several districts say that households are
refinancing from adjustable-rate to fixed-rate mortgages.

San Francisco also suggested that

savings from lower monthly payments are being used for household debt reduction.

Gains in

v
new mortgage activity are much spottier. Demand for other consumer and business loans was
generally reported flat or down.
Reports on loan quality were mixed. New York contacts report increased delinquency
rates on all types of loans, forcing some restructuring. San Francisco found that bank profits
are still restrained by deteriorating real estate loans. Philadelphia bankers expect improving
portfolio quality as lower interest rates reduce debt service costs. Bankers in Atlanta noted either
stabilization or improvement in the quality of their portfolios during the fourth quarter.
Credit standards, on balance, remain unchanged. The consensus among banking contacts
is that aggregate loan demand will remain flat until the second or third quarter of 1992.
AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Winter crops are generally said to be in good condition across the nation with the
exception of the Dallas district, which reported severe weather damage to agricultural production.
Livestock producers in several districts are struggling with lower prices.
Declining oil and gas prices have resulted in reduced drilling activity in the Kansas City
and Dallas districts. Dallas reported that lower prices are creating a somber energy outlook for
1992 and added that some producers are shifting exploration overseas, while many energy and
related companies have announced layoffs.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity continues at a low level in the First District.
For most retailers, Christmas sales were even with last year's.
Manufacturing demand remains weak, with sales and orders below year-ago
levels at most firms contacted.

Manufacturers' employment continues to

decline, and capital spending plans are restrained.

Few firms expect

any improvement before mid-year.
Retail
Nominal dollar sales were level with Christmas 1990 for the
majority of First District retailers contacted in early January.

The

few merchants who reported significant increases over last year are
upscale or specialty stores.

For virtually all retailers, consumer

activity was particularly restrained in the first half of the Christmas
season, but a later-than-usual "last minute rush" prevented major sales
declines.
Although some retailers offered large discounts early in the
season, prices have now stabilized.

A few merchants with especially

strong market positions passed some cost increases on to consumers.
Most continue to maintain strict control over inventory.

In general,

both margins and profits are flat.
All contacts undertook routine seasonal hiring, but plan no
changes in permanent employment.

Wage increases are minimal.

exceptions, capital spending plans are severely limited.

With few

Preserving

liquidity reportedly has priority over large investment commitments
since consumer spending remains erratic and competition intense.

Few

foresee a substantial improvement in their business in the new year.

Manufacturing
First District manufacturing conditions remain sluggish.

A

majority of respondents indicate that late 1991 shipments were down from
year-earlier levels, with reported declines ranging from 4 to 20
percent.

Several contacts experienced renewed weakness in the fourth

quarter, with new orders and backlogs below late 1990 levels.
small minority saw modest year-over-year gains.

Only a

Still, despite

generally weak demand, most contacts pointed to at least one product
line with rising sales and orders.

Some electronics and

telecommunications products were relatively strong, as were sales by
some companies to the health care sector, brokerage firms, and customers
in aerospace, plastics, and environmental protection.

Although the auto

industry is expected to be weak over the medium term, two contacts
reported increased sales to U.S. auto firms and to Japanese transplants.
The European and Canadian economies were generally said to be as weak as
or weaker than the U.S. economy, but a few firms reported a rise in
foreign sales.
Manufacturers' sales prices are generally flat to down.

Most

contacts are offering discounts on their weakest lines or across the
board.

In turn, respondents are seeking price concessions from their

own suppliers.

Still, several report pinched margins, only partially
To contain costs, two-thirds of the

relieved by productivity gains.

respondents have reduced employment from year-ago levels, either through
layoffs or attrition.
cuts.

Almost half are planning or considering further

No firm expects to expand its work force any time soon.
One-third of the respondents plan to increase capital spending in

1992 by as much as 10 percent.

For the rest, investment will be equal

to or less than year-ago efforts.

In explaining their restrained

I-3
investment plans, almost half point out that they have adequate or
excess capacity.
debt levels.

Others mention concerns about cash flow or onerous

While lower interest rates reduce the cost of carrying

this debt, no contact indicates that interest rate cuts will lead his
firm to make additional investments in the near term.

A few contacts

hope that such cuts will prompt their customers to do so, however.
A majority of manufacturing contacts expect no improvement in
economic activity before the second half of 1992.

A few hope for a

pickup in the third quarter in response to lower interest rates; others
express faith in election-year fiscal initiatives.

Even so, most expect

very slow growth over the medium term.
Residential Real Estate
Reports on First District home sales vary.

Some realtors report

that sales have picked up to relatively healthy levels; others say sales
remain weak.

Even where home sales are low, no additional weakening has

occurred in recent months.

Moreover, realtors contacted think home

prices have bottomed out or are close to doing so.
Outlook
The nonprofit New England Economic Project (NEEP) released its
semi-annual forecast in early December.

Based on a forecast that the

national economy would "continue to creep sluggishly out of recession,"
the NEEP forecasts call for a delayed recovery in New England, with
total nonfarm jobs showing no growth until the third quarter of 1992.
Manufacturing employment losses will continue until the end of 1992 for
the region as a whole, while nonmanufacturing shows some growth as early
as the second quarter, notably in wholesale and retail trade.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District economy since the last report were
generally on the soft side.

During November retail contacts were split

between those with sales above and below plan while December results were
generally below target.

Residential construction activity remains low and

office leasing activity slowed.

District unemployment rates rose in December

for the third consecutive month following a seesaw pattern during most of the
year.

Most senior loan officers at small and midsized banks reported no

change in their willingness to lend.
Consumer Sector
District retail contacts had mixed results during November, splitting
almost evenly between those with sales above and those with sales below plan.
While December results were more uniformly below target, several retailers
expressed pleasure that sales proved better than the dire media forecasts.
The sales environment was very competitive and marked by considerable pricecutting which began very early in the holiday season.

Despite relatively

lean inventories, retailers were heavily promotional in an attempt to
overcome anticipated consumer caution.

Over-the-year sales changes at

department stores ranged from -4 percent to +5 percent in November and from
flat to +2 percent in December.

An annual survey conducted by the Retail

Council of New York State covering some 200 stores across the state found
sales volume during the Christmas season to be generally unchanged from a
year earlier.
Items which sold relatively well included staples such as men's and
women's sweaters, gloves, and outerwear as well as dresses, cosmetics and
certain toys.

Sales of big ticket items varied among respondents.

Due

in large part to a substantial pickup in sales during the two weeks
surrounding Christmas, inventories were reported at or somewhat below
targeted levels.

II-2
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction activity remains slow in the District due to
both the season and generally sluggish demand.

The high inventory of homes

available in the resale market and consumer uncertainty about the economic
outlook continue to be cited as major factors.

Reportedly, much of the

homebuying which is currently taking place is by first-time buyers and others
in need of "affordable", lower-priced units.

Two yet-to be-constructed

communities in New Jersey and New York were recent sellouts because of their
relatively low prices and attractive financing.

Among other housing

construction scheduled are an $18 million building in the Bronx to house
homeless adults and, in all five boroughs of New York City, new housing for
working and middle-class families under a recent $76 million federal grant.
Office leasing activity slowed somewhat since the last report.

Midtown

Manhattan witnessed its second largest transaction of the year, but a sizable
amount of vacant space was marketed and the primary vacancy rate rose.

In

downtown Manhattan, where no new construction is underway and several wellknown buildings are undergoing extensive capital improvement, the vacancy
rate declined for the second consecutive month.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates rose in December for the third consecutive
month following a seesaw pattern during most of the year.

New York's rate

edged up to 8.1 percent from 8.0 percent in November while New Jersey's rate
increased to 7.4 percent from 7.1 percent.

Since the last report, plans for

some sizable cutbacks have been announced which are likely to have a downward
impact on local employment.

Nynex, the local telephone company in New York

State and New England, will reduce its workforce over the next two years by
almost 10,000 and Xerox, which has several locations in the District, will
eliminate 2500 white-collar positions by the middle of this year.

Moreover,

in the semiannual survey of the Manufacturers Association of Central New

II-3
York, nearly 25 percent of respondents in January said they plan to cut
employment over the next three months, up from 15 percent last July.
On a more positive note, Ford and GM recently announced plans to invest
a total of $350 million in their western New York plants over the next two
years.

Most of the money will be used for new machinery and retooling.

In

addition, a Dallas-based firm plans to move a manufacturing operation from
the South to New York State.
The December survey of Buffalo purchasing managers showed a doubling of
the percentage of firms with fewer new orders and a substantial increase in
the percentage with lower production.

While some of this slowdown apparently

is a seasonal pattern, the extent of it is somewhat greater than in December
1990.

The November survey of purchasing managers in Rochester, however,

showed a decline in the percentage anticipating a deterioration of business
conditions over the next quarter.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the
Second District reported that their willingness to lend remains unchanged
from three months ago.

Credit standards at most banks surveyed remain the

same, though a few banks reported stricter standards for consumer loans.
Most respondents stated that overall loan demand was stable with some
variation across categories.

Nearly all loan officers reported charging

lower rates than three months ago, reflecting decreases in the prime rate.
These lower rates have brought about increased demand for mortgage
refinancings, even though the demand for new residential mortgages and
construction loans remains weak.

Those respondents noting a decrease in

overall loan demand are using advertising campaigns and aggressive ratecutting policies as a way of attracting new loans.

The majority of banks

surveyed report an increase in delinquency rates on all types of loans,
forcing some to restructure existing loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District appeared to be steady in late December and
early January, based on reports from major business sectors. Manufacturers generally indicated
that business was steady although some firms were trimming working hours. For most retailers,
Christmas season sales were even with the prior year in current dollars.

This was below

expectations, and many stores were holding special January sales to reduce inventories.
Bankers reported that loan demand remained essentially flat except for a surge in mortgage
refinancing applications in recent weeks as interest rates fell.
Third District business contacts generally foresee some improvement later in the year.
Manufacturers expect the pace of orders to pick up over the next six months. On balance, they
are planning to add to payrolls and boost capital spending by midyear. Retailers anticipate a
somewhat better sales picture, but not before the third quarter. Bankers are also looking to the
second half for improvement; they expect a modest upturn in business and consumer lending
to get underway then, although some believe residential mortgage activity could post healthy
gains this spring with an increase in home sales.
MANUFACTURING
Reports from Third District manufacturers in early January were mixed, but on balance
suggested that industrial activity was running at a steady pace. While shipments were moving
up, area firms indicated

that new orders were being received at just a level rate.

Manufacturers gave mixed reports on inventories although it appeared that, on net, stocks were
edging down. While employment was practically steady, according to a majority of companies
contacted, one-fourth noted recent reductions in working hours. Nearly all manufacturers said
prices for both inputs and the products they make were holding steady.

Looking ahead, about three-fourths of manufacturers contacted for this report expect
business to improve by midyear, and the rest were about evenly divided between those

III-2
anticipating steady business and those expecting a decline. Overall, manufacturers look for an
increase in orders to boost backlogs and lead to some further reduction in inventories over the
next six months. In line with this forecast, industrial firms in the Third District are planning
to extend working hours and increase payrolls slightly. They are also scheduling some increases
in capital spending for the first half of the year.
RETAIL
Most Third District retailers contacted for this report indicated that sales for the
Christmas season were below their expectations. On average, sales were approximately even
with 1990 in current dollar terms. Mass merchandisers and department stores generally saw
sales slip marginally from 1990 levels while discounters and some specialty stores (especially
mid-priced jewelry and apparel stores) posted gains. Nearly all types of stores were making
further price cuts on a broad range of goods in January to reduce excessive inventories, and
most merchants said that the pace of sales in the first week of the month was fairly steady.
Store officials generally expect January sales to exceed the low levels of January 1991, but most
expect the current November-January fiscal quarter results to just match the year-ago period
in current dollars.
Most retailers expect sales to remain slow at least until midyear.

They hope that

improving overall economic activity by that time will boost consumer confidence and lead to
healthier sales. Nevertheless, many retail contacts do not expect a strong upward trend in
consumption spending to develop. Expecting little short-term improvement in demand, and
concerned that competitive pressures due to over-capacity will continue, store executives do
not anticipate significant increases in revenues. Instead, many indicate they will be looking
to improve operating efficiencies in order to bolster profit margins.
FINANCE
Most Third District bankers contacted in early January said loan demand remained soft
except for a surge in applications for mortgage refinancings.

Although there were a few

reports of slight upturns in home purchase mortgages, mainly for lower-priced homes, real
estate loans outstanding at major banks in the Third District continued to trend down. Bankers

III-3
also described demand for consumer installment credit as flat to slightly down in recent weeks.
Bankers generally reported a similar trend for commercial and industrial loans.
On the whole, Third District bankers expect a gradual improvement in the economy and
a slow pickup in lending to get underway around midyear. Bank lending officers said the
recent decrease in interest rates will make debt service more manageable for business borrowers
with floating-rate loans, leading to some improvement in credit quality for both current and
potential borrowers; but bank lending officers generally do not expect the lower rates to
prompt a significant upturn in demand for commercial and industrial credit. Some bankers
said they expect increased homes sales in the spring to boost mortgage demand.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.
District.

There is still little sign of a renewed recovery in the Fourth

Major retailers experienced a sales gain during the Christmas

season from levels a year earlier, but the increases were less than expected.
Industrial activity in the District slowed recently, led especially by the
auto industry.

Revived growth in industrial production could occur this

quarter, if auto production strengthens as generally expected.

Lower interest

rates have boosted refinancing of mortgage and business loans, but new
business and consumer lending still shows little indication of growth.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales during the Christmas season were reported

between 2% and 4% above levels a year earlier.

A few retailers cited

better-than-expected sales, but others described sales as disappointing or
"below plan".

Sales in a large upscale shopping center were said to be better

than in 1990, but ranged widely between retailers who posted large gains and
those who had declines from a year earlier.

A retailer with stores throughout

the District reported that sales in Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Cincinnati were
stronger than nationally and than a year ago, but sales in some smaller
metropolitan centers of the District were weak.

Despite the uncertain outlook

going into the holiday shopping season, price discounting was no greater than
a year earlier, according to some retailers.

IV-2

At year-end 1991, inventories were larger than desired by some retailers.
They generally have shaved their sales goals for the spring months, but
uniformly expect a stronger second half than first half of 1992.
According to economists associated with consumer goods industries, real
consumer spending last quarter rose between zero and a 1% annual rate, and is
expected to rise between a 1% and 2% annual rate this quarter.

There is

little support among them for a temporary cut in personal income taxes to
stimulate spending.
Automotive.

Most automotive analysts anticipate that the auto industry

will contribute to growth of industrial production and total output this
quarter, following a decline in auto output last quarter.

Auto production is

expected to increase a few percent this quarter from last.

Industry analysts

do not expect additional production layoffs this quarter, although temporary
plant shutdowns could occur if inventories rise more than desired.

New car

stocks are said to be larger than desired for some cars, but low for a few
popular models.
Auto dealers in the District are a little more optimistic about short-term
sales prospects than they have been in recent months, because their December
sales improved from November and from a year earlier.

That helped to cut some

of their excess inventories, and most dealers contacted now expect that they
will slightly increase their factory orders this quarter from last.
Manufacturing Conditions.
supplying industries.

Weakened automotive output has set back auto-

Steel producers note a letup in orders for delivery

during the rest of this quarter, and consequently a shortening in lead times.

IV-3

Also, some cutback in steel inventories this quarter, following a
larger-than-desired buildup last quarter, will likely result in a trimming of
steel output.

Orders for auto paints and coatings and glass have softened

since last fall, but are no longer deteriorating, according to a major
supplier.

Some auto tire analysts expect that both original equipment and

replacement tire demand in 1992 will be up a few percent from 1991, but no
pickup from the present weak demand is expected until after the first quarter.
Several capital goods producers report a softening in orders in the past
month or two following a revival that began last spring.

The upturn in

heavy-duty truck output flattened in recent months after several months of
irregular but rising activity, according to a supplier.

The daily average of

orders for an industrial equipment producer in December fell after a steady
climb through November.

Customer inventories are believed to be low, however,

because orders have been more frequent but smaller.

A parts supplier to the

office machinery industry reported a further rise in orders through last
quarter.

He expects that spending for real producers' durable equipment last

quarter rose at about a 5% annual rate, led by the computer and aerospace
industries, with most other capital goods industries showing little change
from the previous quarter.
Manufacturers in general do not anticipate an increase in their capital
spending in 1992 from 1991, although spending plans vary widely by industry.
Some producers expect higher outlays this year, particularly for equipment, to
improve product quality, broaden product lines, and increase productivity.
Some plan less spending this year than last because of cutbacks in business

IV-4

structures.

A tool producer plans a step-up in spending this year for further

modernization of existing facilities.

Although the primary metals industry is

apparently anticipating some cutback in spending this year, a producer plans a
large capital expenditure for quality and cost improvement.

A mineral

resources producer expects his firm and industry to cut back spending in 1992
because of prospects for weak prices for their products.
Capital spending plans are not being delayed, although some may be
stretched out, and discussion of a possible tax change is not yet affecting
spending plans.

A common view among manufacturers seems to be that an

investment tax credit, although less beneficial over the long run than a cut
in corporate tax rates, would be a temporary stimulus to investment.
Financial Developments.

There is still little sign of strengthening in

new business or consumer loans, according to banks and thrift institutions.
Lenders report, however, heavy demand for refinancing of mortgage loans, and
more businesses are refinancing bank loans.

Some lenders have only

recently begun to lower borrowing rates on consumer installment loans, but
interest rates on a 30-year fixed-rate loan have been easing steadily and are
now common at 8%, with some mortgage bankers offering rates at about 7.5% plus
points.

Many mortgage lenders anticipate a sharp rise in demand for new loans

during the spring.

Some thrifts report that mortgage holders are shifting

from adjustable-rate to fixed-rate mortgages.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District economic activity was mixed in late December and early January,
while confidence about the economic outlook rose.
flat.

Retail sales were generally

Manufacturing activity declined, compared with stable activity in the

previous survey.

Both retailers and manufacturers, though, were more

optimistic about their prospects over the next six months than they had been
in the last survey.

Lower mortgage rates lifted home sales in some areas and

spurred refinancing activity and inquiries by prospective homebuyers
throughout most of the District.

Exports rose faster than imports at District

seaports, and farmers began the new year with generally favorable weather and
price conditions and improved balance sheets.

State revenues were mostly on

target, although some further expenditure cuts were expected in coming months.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that District retail activity
stabilized in December after several months of decline.

Survey respondents

said that sales, adjusted for seasonal factors, remained steady after November
and that shopper traffic improved.
expenditures fell.

Inventories, employment, and capital

Retail prices were stable, while wholesale prices and

wages rose.
Retailers were optimistic about sales and shopper traffic over the next
six months.

They expected wages, wholesale prices, and retail prices to rise

and employment to fall further.
Manufacturing
Our survey of manufacturers indicated that District factory activity

declined in recent weeks.
previous survey.

By comparison, activity had been stable in the

Respondents reported decreases in most indicators.

Exports

increased, however, and little change was reported in prices or capital
expenditures.
Manufacturers' forecasts for the coming months were more optimistic than
in the previous survey.

They expected increases in all measures of economic

activity except inventories, which they thought would be stable.

Two-fifths

of the respondents expected increases in manufacturing employment and total
employment in their respective states.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that exports were generally higher in December than
in November, while imports were unchanged.

Compared with a year ago, export

activity was higher and import activity was lower.

Exports were expected to

increase faster than imports during the next six months.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit standards were unchanged over the last six weeks.

Although some banks

noticed a slight increase in consumer and commercial loans, most reported that
demand was flat over the period.

All of the banks contacted had lowered their

prime rates during the last six weeks, and almost all had reduced loan rates
across the board.

Lower interest rates, respondents said, have accelerated

refinancings, which constituted a substantial majority of home mortgage
requests.
Housing
Real estate analysts, homebuilders and mortgage bankers surveyed by

V-3
telephone reported that the residential market remained mostly flat over the
past six weeks.

Some respondents, though, suggested that sales in their areas

were beginning to increase.

Many noted that lower mortgage rates had

increased traffic and that home prices were steady.

In areas where sales

remained sluggish, potential homebuyers were insecure about their jobs and
income levels.
State Budgets
A telephone survey of state government forecasters indicated that
revenues were mostly on target, except for a moderate shortfall in South
Carolina.

In contrast, the states experienced large shortfalls last year.

This year's forecasts assumed more modest economic growth than did last
year's.

In several jurisdictions, December revenues from specific taxes were

unusually strong, but forecasters were unsure of the reasons.

Generally, tax

revenues were still depressed by sluggish economic growth.
North Carolina reportedly had no need for further expenditure cuts, and
it was unclear whether South Carolina would have to trim its budget.

Other

Fifth District jurisdictions were considering major spending cuts, and several
were considering tax increases.

Several respondents said that rapid growth of

federally mandated Medicaid spending continued to be a primary source of
budgetary pressure.

State government worker layoffs were considered likely in

Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia.

In West Virginia, cuts were

expected to trim state agencies' material and travel budgets.
Agriculture
Farm analysts indicated that conditions in agriculture improved in
recent weeks.

Rain relieved dry conditions in most of the District and left

the small grain crop in generally good condition.

Hog prices, already below

V-4
levels of a year ago, fell further in recent weeks; otherwise, most livestock
prices were at or above year-ago levels.

District farmers entered 1992 with a

stronger financial position, thanks to relatively good 1991 crop yields and
strong livestock prices.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: Contacts in the District reported that economic activity in December was
generally sluggish. Retailers saw disappointing Christmas sales that were even with to modestly
above year-ago levels. Discounters benefitted from increasing demand from price conscious
consumers, taking market share from department stores and upscale shops. Auto sales showed
no signs of improvement. Manufacturing activity remained slow, although firms in the printing
and packaging industries reported modest increases in orders and production. Banking contacts
report that loan demand was again flat. Home sales in the lower price ranges continued to show
improvement, and realtors are optimistic for spring sales. Commercial construction, however,
remained dormant. No exceptional wage or price pressures were reported.
Consumer Spending: With the exception of discounters, retailers contacted throughout
the District reported that, in real terms, Christmas sales were even with year-ago levels.
Discounters consistently outperformed department stores and reported sales gains over last year.
The largest gains were noted in sales of "basics," not luxury goods, and were led by apparel
items. Customers paid with cash more often than in previous years. Inventories remained lean
but reportedly did not constrain holiday sales. Retailers do not anticipate significantly increasing
new orders in the near future and are not optimistic about first quarter sales. Durable goods
sales have not improved; automobiles and household appliances are particularly soft. While
Florida contacts report increasing numbers of foreign tourists, this growth has not been sufficient
to offset declines in domestic traffic. Per capita visitor spending is also down from a year ago.
Manufacturing: Few manufacturers in the region report increasing activity. Stagnant
commercial construction continues to impact carpet producers adversely.

Weakness in the

furniture and auto markets is holding back textile production. While apparel producers note that
demand for some lines, particularly athletic wear and denim products, is expected to continue

VI-2

to post good growth, new orders for other lines have been weak. Military contractors continue
to report declining orders and employment because of defense spending cuts. Low steel prices
and slack consumer spending on big ticket items are hurting a regional producer of steel for
appliances.
More positively, contacts said that employment remained stable and that orders have
increased for producers of printed materials for business and for packaging of consumer
products. Sales picked up in the fourth quarter for a large paper producer and recent product
price increases appear to be sticking according to a company spokesman.

Lumber and wood

industry contacts expect demand to pickup sharply over the next few months as housing starts
begin to improve.
Financial Services: The majority of bank contacts in the region reported that loan
demand was flat in December and remained below year-ago levels. Several bankers expressed
disappointment with the limited amount of new loan activity that has emerged since the recent
reduction in interest rates. However, one contact did note that the drop in rates had sparked
some optimism in the local business community. Lower rates have also resulted in a wave of
mortgage refinancings.
Most bank contacts report that the quality of their loan portfolios either stabilized or
improved slightly in the fourth quarter. They added that their credit standards were essentially
unchanged in the last six weeks. Auto dealers and construction contractors continue to report
that credit is tight.
Construction: After adjusting for seasonal variations, most realtors reported improved
December home sales compared to activity in recent months. The strongest sales are again in
the lower to mid-price ranges as first-time buyers continue to be drawn into the market by lower
mortgage interest rates. The luxury market is "quiet" and sizable price concessions are being

VI-3

made, according to most brokers. Several noted that people who are currently renting are now
finding it possible to buy a home with comparable after tax payments. Most realtors expect
continued sales gains and are optimistic for the spring. Single-family homebuilding has shown
scattered signs of improvement. One broker reported a recent increase in sales of lots for lowerpriced homes to developers. Contacts, however, said that multifamily construction remains at
minimal levels with little improvement expected in the near future.
Commercial construction remains depressed with high office and retail vacancy rates
in many District cities.

Contacts do not expect much new construction activity for the next

several years. Several blamed lack of financing for curtailed commercial construction.
Wages and Prices: Contacts report ample supply of qualified workers with wage and

input prices remaining relatively stable. Transportation firms are posting flat to slightly higher
shipping rates. Citrus prices are holding up in a strong market.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Most sectors of the District economy softened over the past six weeks, although there
were signs of improvement in several key sectors. Reports from retailing contacts suggest that sales over
the holiday season were essentially flat with a recessionary year-earlier period. Auto sales generally
remained weak around the District, although several large dealers reported solid sales improvement in
recent weeks. Combined car and light truck production schedules call for first quarter 1992 assemblies to
be even with the fourth quarter of 1991 on a seasonally adjusted basis. New softening in production
outside the auto industry also contributed to recent weakness in District manufacturing activity. As a
result, District manufacturing employment softened as the year ended. Lower home mortgage interest
rates have mainly generated higher levels of refinancing activity, but have also sparked some
improvement in the District's home resale market.
Retail Sales. District retail sales for the holiday season were about flat with weak sales last year,
despite widespread discounting and heavy promotional activity. Large retailers reported that sales in the
District generally followed the national pattern. This is in marked contrast with last Christmas, when
District sales held up well compared to the national average. One large chain stated that discount-driven
sales gains (on a year-over-year basis) recorded in the last two weeks of December reversed a sharp yearover-year sales decline early in the holiday season. Sales strength was concentrated in soft goods, and
inventories of many items, especially "big-ticket" appliances, remained above plan. Another large chain
reported that year-over-year sales gains improved as December progressed, with small appliances
performing relatively well. This chain's sales in District markets were mixed, but showed some
improvement from previous months on a seasonally adjusted basis. The company's inventory remains
well above plan, and the firm is committed to cutting stocks further. A large survey of independent
retailers in Illinois and Northern Indiana indicated that year-over-year sales declines worsened over the
latter half of 1991. The preliminary results of a post-holiday survey of Michigan retailers showed that the
percentage of stores reporting year-over-year sales declines for the holiday season was well above
"normal" levels. A manufacturer's representative stated that financing receivables from several large
discount chains grew increasingly difficult in recent months, citing growing lender concern with the
retailers' credit quality.
Autos. Reports from auto industry contacts generally indicated continued weakness in both car
sales and production, although two recent reports from large auto dealers suggested some improvement in
consumer demand. A supplier of financial services to many District auto dealers reported that most
dealerships' sales remained weak. A domestic auto producer stated that dealer orders remained weak, and

VII-2
showroom traffic has yet to improve from fourth quarter rates. Reports of continued sluggishness in auto
sales are not universal, however. One of the largest dealers in the District stated that sales improved
markedly during December and early January, citing improvement in customer and salesperson
confidence. This dealer has begun to rebuild inventory, after remaining extremely cautious over the latter
half of 1991. Another large dealership is optimistic about sales in the first half of 1992, and recently
ordered a "slew" of lower-priced new cars in anticipation of a surge in sales. Declining interest rates have
substantially reduced this dealership's inventory financing costs. An auto industry analyst expects
combined car and light truck production in the first quarter of 1992 to be essentially flat from the fourth
quarter of 1991 on a seasonally adjusted basis, although first quarter car production depends on planned
assemblies that have been pushed forward into March. If sales do not improve as the first quarter
progresses, this analyst expects production schedules to be cut further, making the auto sector a drag on
the District economy.
Manufacturing. Purchasing managers' surveys and direct contacts suggest that the recovery in
District manufacturing activity stalled late last year, and industrial production in the District may have
declined on a seasonally adjusted basis. The Chicago purchasing managers' survey index, like that for the
nation, weakened in December, and dropped below 50 percent for the first time since June 1991.
Significant declines in the production, new orders, and order backlogs components accounted for most of
the weakness in the overall Chicago index, while the inventory and employment components remained
below 50 percent. Likewise, the most recent surveys in Detroit, Milwaukee, and Southwest Michigan
each indicated some loss of momentum. A large appliance manufacturer stated that first quarter
shipments were expected to be below a weak year-ago period. A large manufacturer of heavy equipment
noted that orders from customers in primary metals, paper, and petrochemical industries remained soft in
December and early January, with little sign of a turnaround in sight. A large manufacturer of
communications equipment reported that orders remained mixed, citing weak demand from two key
markets -- construction and state and local governments. At the same time, this manufacturer stated that
December orders for semiconductors were the highest for that month since 1987, despite continued
weakness in orders from the auto and personal computer markets.
Employment. In November, total payroll employment in the District fell significantly on a
seasonally adjusted basis, led by the first drop in District manufacturing employment since April. The
continued decline in national manufacturing employment in December was concentrated in several key
District industries, including industrial machinery and fabricated metals. The results of purchasing
managers' surveys also suggest that District manufacturing employment continued to weaken in

VII-3
December. The pace of layoff announcements by District firms appears to have increased in recent
weeks, and could affect future employment in a wide variety of industries, including consumer goods
manufacturing, transportation, technology, and communications. Most of the major plant closings that
are likely to follow General Motor's restructuring announcement are expected to be outside of the District,
but the impact on white-collar employment and independent parts suppliers will put a further drag on
District employment. Unemployment rates in Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan have been running above
the national average, and Illinois' unemployment rate rose from 7.7 percent October to 9.3 percent in
December. The District employment outlook still has some bright spots, however. Several Chicago-area
executive recruiters reported significant increases in recent weeks in the number of manufacturing firms
looking to hire people, although improved demand has been concentrated in requests for higher-skilled
personnel. A placement firm specializing in technically-oriented sales and marketing personnel reported
that "business is booming." After a significant decline in the first three quarters of 1991, this firm
enjoyed a record fourth quarter. Another placement firm noted that "we are seeing a lot of optimism on
the industrial side." One recruiter stated that strength in demand was even evident in the steel industry.
Real Estate/Construction. Reports from District realtors and financial institutions indicate that
lower home mortgage rates have principally affected refinancing activity, but have also helped spark
some improvement in the existing-home sales market. A large realtor reported the best December sales
month in its history, with transaction volume substantially higher than in December 1990. One financial
analyst stated that consumers' gains from refinancing could be postponed, however, as refinancing
volume is taxing processing capacity. This contact reported that smaller banks appeared to be
increasingly interested in making new residential mortgage loans in recent weeks. Commercial
construction remains weak, and cement shipments and construction contract awards suggest that overall
building activity in the District is now about as weak as it is nationally. A large cement producer
specializing in commercial construction in the Chicago area reported that shipments declined
substantially in December from the previous year, and the December decline was much sharper than the
decline for the year to date. The outlook for this firm's cement shipments is supported by the prospect of
higher public works spending in 1992, and the firm is also seeing improvement in demand for cement
used in residential construction projects. Not one respondent to a recent nationwide survey of
commercial real estate professionals expected property prices, on average, to rise, from 1991 to 1992.
The anticipated median price decline in the Chicago area was larger than decline expected for the nation
as a whole.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Manufacturing

remains

activity

firms report increased activity.

Residential

levels.

demand remains
District

is still

depressed,

farmers

holiday sales

construction

construction financing

report

in

the

comparable

continues

to

some

to year-ago

improve,

although

a constraint for some builders.

especially in the consumer
low

but

District,

The health services sector continues to

Retailers report

add employees.

weak

cotton

and hog

loan
but

prices,

Loan

categories.
strong

wheat

prices.
Manufacturing
District

Although
sector,

activity

remains

several bright spots were noted.

equipment

contact

inventories

were

manufacturer

in

reports
in

good

Arkansas

that
shape

reports

A paper manufacturer

markets.

orders
relative

slow

the

manufacturing

For example,

an electrical
month

were

steady

to

demand.

A

especially

in

strong sales,
reports

in

stable

sales

last

for

power
its

its

and
tool

export

packaging

paper, but declining sales of paper for advertising supplements.

A paper

products company announced the development of a new plant with about 200
employees in Bowling Green, Kentucky.
SEmployment
The District has been spared the brunt of recent cutbacks

in the

domestic auto sector because the models produced in the region are strong
sellers.
workers

In fact, one Missouri auto plant has recalled at least 1,000
for

a

third

shift

because

of

continued

strong

demand

for

VIII-2

minivans.

Two months after

largest

shoe

affecting
closures
shoes.
its

manufacturer

1,150 workers
include

high

laying

off 1,300

announced

another

throughout

labor

round

Missouri.

costs

and

a

employees,

of plant

Reasons

"truly

the nation's
closures,

stated

terrible"

for

market for

A Kentucky tire manufacturer recalled its workers to replenish
reflecting a new contract with a domestic

inventory,

Growth in

auto maker.

service-sector employment has cushioned some of the losses

goods-producing

sectors.

For

example,

a

telecommunications

firm

Memphis plans to add 100 workers, the second increase in six months.
St.

the

Louis,

growth

in

health services jobs

(2,800

in

in
in
In

has helped

1991)

offset cutbacks at the area's major firms.
Consumer Spending
Retail

sales

St.

Louis

season.

in

the District

and

were mixed for the

contacts

Memphis

report

sales

1991 holiday
of

non-auto

merchandise were little changed from last year, while the Louisville and
Little Rock regions posted modest to significant
electronics,

jewelry

and

small-ticket

discounted

than

general

currently at desired levels,

and Louisville
because

of

careful

shopping season.

buying by

store

as

contacts

however,

price-cutting

Inventories in St. Louis and

while reports from Little Rock

inventory levels

state that

Apparel,

Big-ticket items were more

merchandise;

overall was at the same level as last year.
Memphis are

sold well,

items

believed consumers were looking for values.
heavily

increases.

are lower

managers

and a

than anticipated
favorable

holiday

Despite cautious optimism about the first quarter, many

retailers do not expect sales to pick up until later in the year.
Construction and Real Estate
District homebuilders
home

construction.

The

report

exception

or

flat
is

in

modest activity in new

northwest

Arkansas,

which

VIII-3

continues

to show strong

growth

construction.

Most

out

conditions

and

that

District

in

both single-

builders believe

Construction financing is

will

and multi-family

the

industry has bottomed

significantly

improve

home

by

still reported to be constrained.

mid-1992.
Despite

the

lowest mortgage rates since the mid-1970s, many buyers are still hesitant
to

commit

because

of job

security

concerns.

prices are relatively stable, despite
builders.

New and

existing home

increases in materials costs for

The nonresidential construction sector, with the exception of

public works projects, is still very weak throughout the District.
Banking
Loans
declining.

on

consumer

banks

category

books

of

District

banks

are

still

flat

or

The lackluster holiday sales season is reflected in consumer

lending data:
largest

the

of

commercial

during

loans

loans,

loans

the

to

last

show

which

declined
four

growth

rose

0.3

1.6

percent

months

during

percent.

of

at

1991.

the

last

the
The

third

District's
only

of

major

1991

was

District bankers report that

most real estate loan activity is related to mortgage refinancing.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
The winter wheat
condition,

in parts

in

the District

prices

for

cotton

of Arkansas where

and hogs,

Livestock is mostly in good condition.
report

weak demand;

however,

while

weeks.

percent

from last

has

to

good

caused some

Contacts report weak or
prices

have

firmed.

Lumber producers in the District

Southern Pine

year,

mostly fair

flooding has

cattle

lumber

prices held firm through the end of the year.
down by 8

in

is

Wheat prices remain relatively strong.

damage.
falling

except

crop

producers

report

that

Coal production, although

increased

significantly

in

recent

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
The District's economy has been largely stagnant lately. Labor market conditions generally
deteriorated. Retail sales increases were modest, except in those areas that continue to benefit from
the influx of Canadian shoppers. New auto sales remain weak, though truck sales have rebounded
sharply. Construction and manufacturing conditions were mixed. Agriculture did well, with high
crop yields offsetting price declines. Tourism has remained strong.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
The November unemployment rate in Minnesota was 5.0 percent, slightly higher than its 4.7
percent rate of the month before, but substantially above its year-ago level of 3.9 percent. The
growth of Minnesota's nonagricultural employment in November was only 0.38 percent over the last
year, with declines in all sectors except government (up 1.02), transportation (up 0.27), and finance,
insurance, and real estate (up 1.36). In particular, manufacturing (down 1.47), mining (down 1.18),
and construction (down 7.68) all posted substantial declines. The November unemployment rate in
Montana, at 7.4 percent, was also higher than it was a month ago (6.2) or a year ago (6.8). This
weakness was also reflected in the anemic growth of Montana's nonagricultural employment in
November, up only 0.96 percent from a year ago. The November unemployment rate at 4.0 percent
was higher than its month-ago (3.4) or year-ago (3.3) levels in North Dakota.

November's

unemployment rate was higher in the Upper Peninsula (up to 11.7 percent from 9.8 percent a year
ago) and western Wisconsin. The only part of the District in which the unemployment rate fell in
November was South Dakota, which at 2.8 percent was down only 0.1 percent from the previous
month and 0.4 percent from a year ago. South Dakota's economic strength was also reflected in
nonagricultural employment growth which was up 3.0 percent in November relative to a year ago.

IX-2
Consumer Spending
Holiday retail sales in the District showed very modest growth. A number of major retailers
reported sales increases in comparable stores ranging from 1 to 6.5 percent in December relative to
a year ago, with discount chains reporting increases of 6 to 16 percent over the same period.
Retailers also reported more frequent bad checks and shoplifting. Retail sales continued to be strong
in those parts of Montana, North and South Dakota, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan within
a reasonable drive from the border due to the continuing influx of Canadian shoppers, and hotel
occupancy rates in these areas were quite high.
New truck sales surged in December with some dealers reporting sales increases of 83
percent in December relative to a year ago. However, year-to-date truck sales were still 9 to 13
percent below last year's level. New car sales in the District improved in December, but continue
to be weak, with local dealers of domestic cars reporting year-to-date sales declines ranging from
20 to 25 percent, while foreign car dealers reported flat year-to-date sales in October. Used car sales
continue to be strong.
Housing sales improved in the District. In the Minneapolis--St. Paul area, housing sales were
up 13 percent in the fourth quarter, and 3.8 percent year-to-date. This was despite the fact that sales
fell slightly in December relative to the previous month, and were essentially unchanged from their
year-ago level.
Tourist activity has been excellent in the District. Yellowstone National Park had its best
year ever. Total bridge crossings onto the Upper Peninsula of Michigan this year have been above
their year-ago levels, with crossings over the Mackinac and International bridges in November and
December up 4.8 percent and down 0.3 percent, respectively, relative to their year-ago levels. The
upcoming Super Bowl is expected to bring $45-$50 million in direct expenditures to the Minneapolis-

IX-3
St. Paul area. Heavy early snow fall got the skiing and snowmobiling seasons off to a good start,
but the lack of recent snow has slowed winter recreation considerably.
Construction and Manufacturing
Conditions in the District's construction industry have been mixed. The November
level of new housing permits in Minnesota was down 5.6 percent relative to a year ago, while
commercial construction in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area continues to be depressed. Elsewhere,
construction is reported to be doing well in North and South Dakota, and holding its own in
Montana.
Conditions were mixed in the District's manufacturing industries. In Minnesota, average
weekly hours at 40.8 in November were slightly higher than their year and month-ago level of 40.5.
In contrast, Minnesota's November average hourly earnings were up only 2.8 percent relative to a
year ago.
Resource-Related Industries
High crop yields in the District generally more than offset price declines in 1991. Dry beans
and potato production are at record levels in both North Dakota and Minnesota. Top soil moisture
is in good condition for spring planting. Recent milder weather has stirred some concern about
spoilage in the sugar beet crop. Minnesota's mid-December all farm products crop price index was
down 1.5 percent relative to its year ago level, with crop prices up 1.0 percent, livestock prices
down 17.0 percent, dairy products up 21.6 percent, and poultry products down 2.7 percent over this
period. Uncertainty about future farm income has depressed farm machinery sales somewhat.
Mining conditions have been mixed in the District. Copper prices are holding firm, but oil
and molybdenum prices remain low. The lumber and wood products market is mixed, with problems
due to environmental issues anticipated in the near future.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.
but unevenly.

The Tenth District economy still appears to be growing slowly
Retail sales are up modestly, with Christmas sales apparently

somewhat better than a year ago.

Housing activity also continues to improve.

But signals from the manufacturing sector are mixed, auto sales are down, and
energy activity is slackening.

Moreover, the farm sector has retreated

somewhat from its recent peak performances.

Prices generally remain steady

both at retail and for many manufacturers' inputs.

Most retailers are

satisfied with current inventory levels, while manufacturers are striving to
reduce their inventories of materials and other inputs.
Retail Sales.

Retail sales have improved slightly over the past month,

with apparel sales accounting for much of the improvement.

Sales were

generally weak, however, with Christmas sales up only modestly from last year.
Just a slight improvement in sales is anticipated this year.

Retailers report

stable prices over the past month and expect small price increases in 1992.
Most retailers are satisfied with current inventory levels and expect little
change in the coming months.
Auto sales declined slightly in the district over the last month.

Some

potential buyers still find it difficult to get loans due to tighter credit
standards.

While automobile dealers expect sales to begin picking up in the

next few months, most of them are still trimming inventories.
Manufacturing.

Purchasing agents report mixed price changes.

The

prices of metals and fuel have fallen, while the prices of some manufactured
components have increased.
few months.

Agents expect prices to remain stable for the next

Materials are readily available.

inventories and plan further reductions.

Most firms have been trimming

Plants are generally operating below

X-2
capacity.

Exports have risen in recent months, especially for firms with

markets in Mexico and South America.
Energy.

Energy activity in the district has weakened recently due

mainly to falling oil prices and an outlook for soft prices throughout the
year ahead.

The average number of operating drilling rigs in district states

decreased from 237 in November to 228 in December.

The December rig count was

33 percent below its year-ago levels.
Housing Activity and Finance.

Housing starts in most areas of the

district increased somewhat from the previous month and were much higher than
a year ago.

Builders expect starts to increase further in the first quarter

of 1992 and in the year as a whole.
especially lumber, have increased.

The prices of some building materials,
Sales of new homes are higher than a year

ago, with prices higher in some district areas but unchanged in others.
According to most survey participants, inventories of new homes are below
normal.
Most district thrift institutions report deposit outflows during recent
months.

Respondents expect outflows to continue at a steady pace over coming

months because of low rates on deposits.

Mortgage rates have dropped at least

100 basis points over the past three months but are expected to level off in
coming months.
refinancing.

Mortgage demand and commitments are strong due largely to
Respondents expect mortgage demand to remain strong during

coming months, due to both refinancing and new home purchases.
Banking.

Changes in total loan demand were mixed last month, with half

of the respondents reporting no change and equal numbers of the remaining
respondents reporting increases and decreases.

Demand for home mortgages

rose, while demand for consumer loans, construction loans, and commercial real

X-3
estate loans were flat to down.

Loan-to-deposit ratios were generally

unchanged from the previous month but lower than a year ago.
All respondents reduced their prime rates last month and almost all
expect to leave these rates unchanged in the near future.

More than half of

the respondents also reduced their consumer lending rates last month, and a
few expect to lower rates further in the near future.

Lending standards were

unchanged.
Deposits increased at most reporting banks.

Increases in demand

deposits, NOW accounts, and MMDAs outweighed decreases in large CDs and small
time deposits.
Agriculture.

After a poor start, the winter wheat crop has improved due

to recent widespread precipitation.
above average in most areas.

The crop's condition is now average to

More moisture is needed to ensure further crop

development due to dry subsoil conditions in parts of the district.
Yearend credit reviews for district farm borrowers showed little change
from a year ago in the number of problem loans.

But credit reviews did reveal

a growing disparity between livestock and crop borrowers.

Bankers report that

some livestock producers struggled to repay loans as cattle and hog prices
slumped in the last half of 1991, while crop farmers benefited from rising
wheat prices.

Bankers expect the divergence in crop and livestock incomes to

continue in 1992.

Nevertheless, bankers expect only a slight increase in

problem loans overall.
Bankers expect farm loan demand to be steady in 1992.

Demand for

livestock loans may fall, while demand for wheat operating loans may edge up
as farmers take advantage of higher wheat prices.

A few banks report

increased demand for real estate loans as nonfarm investors move funds out of
certificates of deposits to purchase farmland.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Heavy competition has

Economic activity has been flat or slightly down.
reduced selling prices and profits in several sectors.
has been stagnant and may be declining.

Manufacturing activity

Retail sales improved in December.

Overall Christmas sales were equal to or slightly higher than last year's
level.

Retail respondents report higher than desired inventories.

Many

respondents conclude that consumers are concerned about the economy because of
announced and anticipated layoffs.

Most respondents do not expect activity to

increase until the second quarter of 1992 or later.
Overall Christmas sales were equal

Retail sales improved in December.
to or slightly above last year's level.

Retailers report much stronger sales

at discount stores than at non discount stores.

Most respondents note higher

than desired inventories, particularly in apparel.

Selling prices have been

very competitive, and some respondents have reduced profits to decrease
inventory.

Automotive sales remain slow.

District manufacturing activity has been stagnant and may be declining.
Apparel production has slowed but remains above last year's level.

Chemical

production has been flat, with some weakness in the demand for plastics.
Chemical producers are concerned about overcapacity and do not expect orders
to rise until the third quarter of 1992.

Domestic demand for oil field

machinery has been stagnant despite an expected seasonal increase.
have fallen.

Prices

Growth of international demand has slowed but remains positive.

Prices have also fallen as demand declined for petroleum refining and
electrical and electronic machinery.

Overcapacity in the supply of primary

metals has reduced prices and cut profits in that sector.

Demand for

XI-2

fabricated metals is well below last year's level.

One exception is the

producers serving the petrochemical industry, who experienced a pick-up in
demand for equipment that helps meet the standards of the Clean Air Act.
Production of paper products remains slow but above last year's level.
paper producers report higher than desired inventories.

Some

Environmental

concerns continue to restrict the supply and boost prices for lumber and wood
products.

Producers are optimistic that lower interest rates will increase

demand soon.

Recent wet weather has helped depress the demand for cement,

except along the Texas-Mexico border, where demand remains strong.

Cement

producers express optimism about the prospects for a substantial increase in
demand--primarily from an increase in federal funding for highways.
District construction activity is up slightly but shows signs of a
slowdown.

Construction of single-family housing has increased modestly, but a

drop in housing permits probably indicates that growth may be negative.
Although respondents report tight credit conditions are moderating growth,
apartment activity has been strong.
is flat.

Industrial and office real estate demand

Non-building construction has increased moderately, and respondents

expect an increase in federal funding will boost highway construction.
Demand for District services has not increased and may have softened
slightly.

Heavy competition has decreased selling prices, except for

airfares, where bankruptcies in the industry have reduced competition.
service respondents noted rising costs and reduced profits.

Some

Accounting

services report an increase in demand for bankruptcy and corporate financial
services.

XI-3

Low oil and gas prices are creating a somber 1992 outlook for the energy
sector.

High OPEC production and expectations of Iraq and Kuwait's reentry

into the oil market have lowered oil prices.

After hovering around a $20-per-

barrel average in 1990, the price of oil dropped to $17.50 in mid-January.
Natural gas prices reached 14-year lows during the summer, and warm weather in
the fourth quarter has not spurred much of a price increase.

The average

wellhead price of natural gas in 1991 was 15 percent below that of 1990.
Current low prices and prospects of further declines in the second quarter
have reduced exploration and production activity in the nation and the
District.

Some oil and gas producers are shifting their exploration

activities overseas.

Many energy and related companies have announced

layoffs.
District commercial loan demand is reported to be steady or declining
slightly.

Banks report excess liquidity and indicate that they are having

trouble finding quality credits.

Activity has increased for refinancings and

first mortgages.
Severe weather has damaged agricultural production and reduced farm and
livestock income projections.

Livestock prices are below last year's level.

Crop prices are mixed with higher prices for corn, grain sorghum and wheat but
lower prices for cotton, cottonseed, hay, peanuts and soybeans.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic weakness persists in much of the Twelfth District, although intermountain
regions remain relatively healthy. Christmas sales were generally below expectations, although
some pickup in post-holiday sales was reported. Manufacturing continues to contract in
California, and little growth is reported in other parts of the District. Real estate markets are
generally sluggish, but residential sales activity shows some signs of bottoming out. Wage and
price increases are modest, with the exception of health care. Significant mortgage refinancing
activity is reported by lending institutions, though other loan demand remains weak. Consumers
are reported to be using the savings from refinancing to reduce other debt levels, or shifting to
shorter-term mortgages to build equity more quickly. Agricultural and resource industry
conditions are mixed, with livestock and timber sectors reporting stress.
Business Sentiment
Economic expectations of Twelfth District business leaders remain subdued. Thirty-one
percent of respondents now expect output to decline in at least two of the next four quarters,
compared to 25 percent in November and 7 percent in September. An additional 56 percent
expect the economy to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent. At the same time, the proportion
of business leaders expecting improved business investment, consumer spending, and housing
starts increased from November. The most optimistic expectations of business leaders were for
housing starts, where 58 percent of the respondents projected some improvement in the next four
quarters. Eighty-seven percent expect inflation to decline or remain stable.
Wages and Prices
Upward pressures on wages and prices remain minimal throughout most of the Twelfth

XII - 2

District. Retailers are reported to have engaged in heavy discounting in response to sluggish
holiday sales. Wage and price cuts also are reported in service sectors, including consulting,
money management, entertainment, catering, and teaching. A significant exception is health care,
where health benefit plan prices are expected to rise 8 to 20 percent in 1992. Lumber prices
have been flat since mid-July, and most commodity prices are flat or falling. Most wage increases
in the Twelfth District are reported in the 3 to 4 percent range, although manufacturing wages in
Washington are reported to be rising 4 to 6 percent.
Retail Trade and Services
Christmas retail sales in the Twelfth District were generally at or below their weak 1990
levels, even with aggressive discounting used to attract wary consumers. Sales in California were
down somewhat from last year. Low-end retailers appear to have had a slightly better experience.
Sales in Utah and eastern Washington were strong. One retailer reports that in the eight days
since Christmas, sales in California have been encouraging, about 5 percent above expectations.
Auto sales are reported flat in California and down in the Puget Sound area, but show
improvement in Idaho. Firms doing business with state and local governments are cautious due to
budget problems, and are hiring consultants on contract rather than increasing the number of fulltime employees. The demand for legal services is flat. The health services sector, however,
continues to add jobs.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the Twelfth District remains sluggish, with the number of jobs in
California continuing to contract due to cutbacks in aerospace and electronics. Boeing, however,
is still producing at full capacity and new orders for commercial aircraft, which had fallen in 1991,
picked up in mid-December. The capital spending plans of several respondents remain little
changed, apparently unaffected by recent interest rate cuts, though a major upgrade of an

XII - 3
aluminum smelter was recently announced in eastern Washington.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural conditions in the Twelfth District are varied. Cotton, cattle, and fruit prices
are down. Excess supply and falling consumer and export demand for beef has caused significant
losses among feedlot operators. Losses are also reported by Idaho bean and potato growers due
to low prices. Oregon agriculture, however, has had its best year in 10 years. Court injunctions
have nearly halted federal timber sales in Washington and Oregon. Lumber product markets face
moderate demand and price increases are expected.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity remains slow in much of the Twelfth District, with no
significant effect yet seen from recent interest rate declines. In California, the housing industry is
stagnant with prices of some upper-end homes dropping a reported 10 to 15 percent from their
previous peak. The number of sales of existing homes, however, edged up in December after
declining since May. Conditions are reported weak in Washington, with some slippage in home
prices. Contacts in Arizona, however, report a slight increase in housing starts. Farm and ranch
real estate sales in Idaho are off 50 percent from a year earlier due to weak agricultural
conditions.
Financial Institutions
Twelfth District financial institutions report a significant increase in mortgage refinancings
due to recent interest rate declines. The resulting savings, however, appear to be used for debt
reduction rather than consumer spending. One-third to one-half of refinancing applicants are
reported moving to a 15-year mortgage to build up equity with little change in payments. Outside
of refinancings, loan demand remains sluggish, and margins are being compressed by lower
interest rates. Weak earnings continue due to problem real estate loans.

