For use at Noon, E.S.T.
Wednesday
December 9, 1992

Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic

Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

November 1992

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

NOVEMBER 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

.

.

First District -- Boston
Second District --

.

New York

Third District --

Philadelphia

Fourth District --

Cleveland

Fifth District --

Richmond

.

.

Eighth District --

Chicago
St. Louis

.. .. .. ..

.. .

I..
-1
I

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

. .
. .

. .
. .

.I. . II-l

S

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. IV-1

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

..

Sixth District -- Atlanta
Seventh District --

.. ..

.

.

. .

VI.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

V-1

VII-1

VIII-l

Ninth District -- Minneapolis

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

IX-1

Tenth District --

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

X-

Eleventh District -* Dallas

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. XI-1

Twelfth District --

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. XII-1

Kansas City

San Francisco

i
SUMMARY*

Reports on economic conditions point to modest improvement in most

Federal Reserve districts, but the rate of gain is uneven.

Ten of the

12 districts note a slight to moderate pickup in some or all sectors of
the economy.

By contrast, San Francisco indicates that weakness in

California is offsetting moderate growth elsewhere in the district.
Retail activity is reportedly increasing across most of the nation, and
retailers are optimistic about the current holiday season.
Manufacturing is improving in about half of the districts - generally,

quite modestly.

Ongoing cutbacks in defense remain a notable drag on

the recovery in some regions.

Residential real estate markets continue

to pick up in most of the nation, but commercial real estate, where
mentioned, remains weak.

Loan demand reportedly increased in several

districts, but credit conditions remain unchanged in others.

The fall

harvest is almost complete - with record yields and output recorded in

most crops.
Retail

Retail sales in October and early November reportedly gained
strength in all districts but San Francisco; results in that district
were mixed, with California performing poorly relative to the other
states.

In five districts, sales in recent weeks were better than
Respondents in most districts noted greater consumer

expected.
confidence.

The Boston and Chicago reports link the change in consumer

attitudes to the end of the Presidential campaign.

New York retailers

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and based on
information gathered before December 1, 1992. This document summarizes
comments received from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal

Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

ii
attribute modest increases to promotional efforts rather than to

improvements in general economic conditions.

Consumer confidence

remains poor in southern California.

Recent sales increases seem focused in nondurables.

Apparel

sales, in particular, were strong in New York, Cleveland, and Kansas
Most districts reporting on auto sales found modest increases or

City.

slight declines, while sales of light trucks were strong in Chicago and
Cleveland.

In the three districts commenting on tourism, business was

mixed.
Despite increased sales, retailers across districts are satisfied
with current inventory levels.

While costs and prices are generally

perceived as flat, reports from Boston, Cleveland, and Atlanta note less

consumer insistence on discounts.

Only Richmond sees increases in

wholesale and retail prices.
Except in California, retailers reportedly expect 1992 holiday
sales gains to be better than last year's.

However, the degree of

optimism ranges from "the best performance in eight years" (in Chicago)
to "nothing spectacular" (in New York).
Manufacturing

Recent manufacturing activity has been flat to slightly improved
across much of the nation.

Indicators from Dallas are generally strong,

and Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland. and Chicago report small gains, on
average.

Overall activity in the Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and

Minneapolis districts is described as "steady" or "unchanged," while
many manufacturers in the New York district and California continue to
experience weak demand.

iii
Demand for home building and furnishing products has strengthened
among manufacturers located in the Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
Minneapolis, and Dallas districts.

But demand for autos, auto

components, and other transportation equipment varies considerably
across districts.

For example, while Chicago district automakers report

recent growth after a third-quarter sag, transportation equipment did
not participate in the widespread rise in production reported for the
Philadelphia district.

Sales have improved for computer software and

some hardware (Boston, Dallas, San Francisco), as well as for various
nondurables (Atlanta, St. Louis, Dallas).
The defense sector is an area of declining demand in the Boston,
New York, Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco districts.

Although

Kansas City notes positive export results, foreign sales are identified
as an item of concern in the Boston, St. Louis, and Dallas districts.
Little to no general inflationary pressure is reported.

However,

high capacity utilisation rates have led or are expected to lead to

firming prices for some construction materials and steel.
Many districts continue to report employment reductions in
manufacturing, although in some cases the rate of decline has abated and
scattered hiring has occurred. Two-thirds of the Federal Reserve Banks
note signs of positive or improved expectations about future business.
Employment is not expected to increase in proportion to demand, however,
as manufacturers across the nation are intent on cutting costs and
improving labor productivity.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate tell a tale of two markets, with
improvements in the residential sector but continued stagnation on the
commercial side.

All districts report improved sales for existing and

iv

new single family homes, although Boston, New York and Richmond note
doubts as to whether this improvement will be sustained.

Home sales in

the Dallas-Fort Worth area are at the highest level in five years.

San

Francisco reports that sales of existing homes in California rose in
October, the first monthly increase since February.

New York, St.

Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City and Dallas all cite increases in singlefamily starts or permits in their districts.
The commercial market, however, remains weak.

Boston and Dallas

report very sluggish conditions in commercial offices, while Richmond
and New York have areas showing limited net absorption.
finds a large excess supply of commercial property.
California, some rents have fallen 25 to 40 percent.

Minneapolis

In southern
San Francisco also

cites forecasts that show California rents falling another 10 to 15
percent in 1993 and increased foreclosures.

No district reports any

growth in commercial construction, although Boston and Minneapolis
report some public sector building.
Financial Services
Financial institutions report a slight increase in overall loan
demand despite a fall-off in mortgage refinancings.

A rising interest

in business loans was noted by Philadelphia, Kansas City and St. Louis.
Dallas and Atlanta report an increase in consumer loans.

New York

indicates that although residential mortgage activity continued strong,
consumer loan demand weakened and demand for nonresidential mortgages
remained soft.

Demand for business loans is also weak in the San

Francisco district.

Boston reports that contacts among investment

management companies experienced increases in assets under management.

v
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries

The fall harvest is over except for corn, which has been delayed
by rain or snow in the Richmond and Midwest agricultural districts.
Despite the wet weather, growers report record yields for corn as well
as for the soybean, cotton, rice, and sugar beet crops harvested
earlier.

Abundant supplies have reduced feed prices and improved

profits for dairy farmers, feedlot operators, and ranchers in the
Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas districts.
areas continue to pay down debt.

Thus, farmers in these

Nevertheless, according to contacts in

Dallas, net farm income is likely to fall in 1992 because of declines in
prices and government subsidies and increases in production costs.
As for lumber and wood products, strong demand from U.S. and
foreign furniture makers has raised prices for hardwood from the
Richmond district.

Demand for western newsprint also remains strong,

but restricted access to public timber supplies is noted as a problem in
the Northwest.

Several mills have closed recently because of a shortage

of logs.
Mining in the Minneapolis district continues slow; workers from
the iron mines are on furlough, and oil and gas production and refining
are generally unchanged.

By contrast, contacts in the Kansas City and

Dallas districts note a possibly temporary pickup in drilling,
especially for natural gas.

While oil and gas prices have drifted down,

natural gas inventories are described as tight, and below-average
temperatures could spur price increases.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON
Led by a reported pickup in consumer confidence, economic activity
in the First District improved modestly in November.

Most manufacturing

contacts indicate that demand is even with or slightly above year-ago
figures.

For 1993, they generally expect a small increase in real GDP.

A pickup in November sales has raised spirits in the retail sector;
retail contacts now feel that consumer confidence may have rebounded in
time for the Christmas season.

Commercial real estate remains in the

doldrums.
Retail

The modest upturn reported in October has strengthened further in
November, according to First District retail respondents.

Previously,

retailers attributed sales increases to their promotional activities;
now contacts unanimously agree that consumers' willingness to spend rose
in the weeks following the election.

A majority report sizable sales

increases across product lines, and only one contact expressed concern
that the current improvement in sales represents early buying that will
reduce the important "last minute rush."
While pricing remains competitive, consumers are not showing the
same degree of price-consciousness seen last year.

Retailers believe

that inventory levels are adequate but not excessive for the holidays,
and seasonal hiring has occurred.

Permanent staff levels and wages

remain largely unchanged.
As demand has increased, margins and profits have begun to
improve.

However, capital spending plans in most cases remain limited

to remodeling existing locations.
1992 Christmas season.

All contacts express optimism for the

Manufacturing

Most manufacturing respondents report that demand is flat to up 5
percent compared to a year earlier.

The strongest sales increases

involved some computer and home-related products.

Auto-related demand

was described as flat by a couple of contacts, but up substantially for
another.

Commercial aircraft-related sales are also highly variable.

Defense business is flat at best, and down substantially for some
contractors.

Manufacturers generally expect that the U.S. economy will

show modest growth in 1993.
Manufacturing contacts indicate that foreign sales have been
mixed.

In some cases they have achieved surprising success by offering

an attractive product or technology, despite a generally weak economic
climate.

Several expressed concern that declining foreign markets will

pull down their sales in 1993.
Except for selected items facing strong demand, manufacturers
describe both materials and selling prices as flat to down.

Just over

half of this month's manufacturing contacts indicate that they have
reduced U.S. employment--by up to 12 percent--in the past year.

At the

others, employment levels were unchanged. Most manufacturers report
that capital spending has been flat to slightly up over 1991 investment.
Commercial Real Estate
The commercial real estate market in the First District is very
slow and shows no signs of recovery.

Office vacancy rates are now about

20 percent with little net absorption. Even the most optimistic
contacts see future absorption rates of only 2 to 3 percent per year.
Most new leasing activity involves tenants moving to higher quality
space, so vacancy rates on Class B and C space could be as high as 30
percent while vacancy rates on Class A space are below average and

I-3
falling.

Effective rents for low quality space in poor locations have

now declined below operating costs.

Contacts say that many vacant

buildings may eventually be torn down because they cannot recover the
renovation costs necessary to attract new tenants. Conditions in
Connecticut are reported to be worse than in other areas because of
problems in the financial services and defense industries.

Throughout

the region, the retail and apartment markets are holding their own, and
contacts suggest that the retail market may see some growth if the
economy improves.

Nonresidential construction is

limited to the public

sector and a few industrial buildings constructed to meet specific
needs.
Nonbank Financial Services
Investment management companies surveyed report increases in
assets under management in the range of 2 percent to 10 percent in the
quarter.

Tax-free funds and government bond funds were especially

popular, followed by growth equity funds.

The majority of respondents

have increased employment in recent months and plan further increases in
their work force.
Venture capital firms report mixed results for firms in their
investment portfolios.

According to these contacts, software and

semiconductor firms had strong sales, while capital equipment firms had
sales below projections.

Retailers had trouble meeting their targeted

margins, especially in the Northeast, although they experienced
improvements over the second quarter; broadcasters were affected by
declines in advertising revenue.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Economic developments in the Second District remained mixed in recent weeks, but
seemed slightly more positive, on balance, than in the last report. October sales at most
District department stores were reported to be on or above targeted levels though results
varied widely. Homebuilders in most of the District noted some recent improvement in the
residential construction market, and office leasing activity has been relatively strong in
midtown Manhattan. District unemployment rates improved in October but nonfarm
employment has continued to decline. Reports from Buffalo purchasing managers showed a
worsening in both production and new orders during November following an improvement in
October. Loan officers at small and midsized banks indicated no change in their willingness
to lend.
Consumer Spending
Sales results varied widely at District department stores during October but most were
reported to be on or above targeted levels. Due in part to special attractions such as
storewide promotionals and the opening of remodeled floors, the majority of the stores had
over-the-year gains in October, which ranged from 0.5 - 11.0 percent. However, one chain
reported a year-to-year decline. Categories of merchandise registering the strongest increases
were most types of women's apparel, cosmetics and men's sportswear. Two respondents
noted a pickup in furniture sales as well.
Inventories are generally at satisfactory levels and, indeed, a little below plan in some
areas where sales were stronger than anticipated. With regard to the holiday season, most
contacts anticipate somewhat larger year-to-year gains than occurred last year "but nothing
spectacular".

II-2
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilders in most of the District reported some recent improvement in the
residential construction market. Several contacts spoke of increased traffic and an upturn in
sales, spurred in part by the low level of interest rates and the desire to buy before mortgage
rates rise. Buyers remain cautious, however, in the wake of continued layoffs and uncertainty
about the economic outlook. Starts are expected to top last year's low level in most areas
though the extent varies from "by quite a bit" in some upstate New York communities to "not
by a lot" in downstate New York and New Jersey. Obtaining loans for acquisition and
construction is still reportedly difficult in much of the District and one respondent stated that
the problem is worsening rather than improving in his area.
In recent weeks, office leasing activity has been relatively strong in midtown
Manhattan where for the first nine months of this year the footage leased was some
23 percent above the year-earlier level. In downtown Manhattan, however, the pace of
leasing has been slower and for the first nine months totaled little more than in 1991. As a
result, while the primary vacancy rate in midtown Manhattan has been declining, the
downtown vacancy rate has risen and by October, according to one source, a two percentage
point difference existed between the two rates.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates improved somewhat in October as New Jersey's rate fell
to 8.1 percent from 9.0 percent in September and New York's to 8.7 percent, also from
9.0 percent. However, nonfarm employment has continued to decline in both states though
the pace of loss may have moderated. Regarding the outlook, the employment impact of
Martin Marietta's intended purchase of G.E. Aerospace, which has offices and operations in
several District locations, remains uncertain. Furthermore, Grumman plans to cut 500 more
jobs on Long Island by the end of March, related to the closing of its aircraft factory, and in
upstate New York, Miller Brewing will cut 180 jobs early next year.

On the positive side, an

II-3
automotive transmission plant in the Syracuse area just hired new production workers for the
first time since 1986 and might add more in response to increased product demand.
Two other developments which could have a positive impact on the District are
noteworthy. Farmers in the West reportedly are now receiving shipments of some of New
York City's treated sludge to fertilize crops, restore depleted croplands and curb erosion,
which helps lessen the City's sizable waste-disposal problem. In addition, two new,
employee-owned airlines have recently begun offering low-cost, unrestricted flights from
Newark to various Florida destinations, adding to the growth of this rapidly developing
airport
Reports from Buffalo purchasing managers showed a worsening in both production
and new orders during November following a substantial improvement in October. More
generally, our District manufacturing contacts indicated continuing weak economic activity.
Financial Developments
Nearly all senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second
District indicated that they are as willing to lend as they were two months ago. Although
residential mortgage demand continued strong during the last two months, consumer loan
demand weakened and demand for nonresidential mortgages remained soft. A slight
improvement in commercial and industrial loan demand was partly attributed to seasonal
factors. In light of continued weakness in overall loan demand, several officers reported an
increase in the use of advertising campaigns.
All respondents reported either maintaining or lowering loan rates. A majority of
officers indicated that delinquency rates for mortgages and consumer loans were unchanged or
lower during the preceding two months.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District picked up in November according to
contacts in major business sectors.
and

new

orders

although

they

Manufacturers noted increases in shipments

continue

to

report

declines

in

employment.

Retailers generally indicated that both customer traffic and sales remained on
an upward trend, and most of those contacted in late November said business was
running at or above the pace they had expected for the month.

Third District

bankers noted an increase in demand for commercial and industrial loans.

They

said they continued to originate a large number of residential mortgages but
applications for both refinancing and purchase mortgages had dropped sharply in
recent weeks.
Looking ahead, most of the Third District business contacts polled for this
anticipate

report

continuing improvement at

a modest pace.

Manufacturers

generally expect the upward trend in orders to remain intact, boosting order

backlogs and prompting some increases in employment during the next six months.
On

the basis

of

the

current

pace of

expectations for the Christmas season.

sales,

retailers

have

raised

their

Many believe that sales for this holiday

period will exceed last year's by a better margin than has been the case in
recent years.

Some express caution for 1993, however, as they expect potential

tax increases, if they are enacted, to dampen consumer spending.

Bankers expect

both loans and deposits to move upward through next year, although they expect
the rate of increase to be slow.
MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing activity in the Third District picked up in November,

III-2
according to reports from area industrial companies.

While around half of those

contacted said business was steady, just over one-third indicated that they had
stepped up shipments and were receiving more new orders compared to the prior
month.

The gains appeared to be spread among most of the major industry groups

in the region with the exception of textile producers and manufacturers of
transportation equipment who noted declining shipments and orders.

Despite the

indications

that

order

backlogs are just steady and that employment has slipped, on balance.

Area

of

improvement Third

District manufacturers

report

industrial companies continue to report that prices for both inputs and their own
products are generally stable.
Looking ahead, managers at Third District industrial plants are optimistic.
More than two-thirds of those contacted for this report expect increases in
shipments and orders over the next six months, and nearly one-third anticipate
rising order backlogs.

While a majority plan to keep employment levels steady,

one-quarter indicate they will step up hiring and extend working hours. An equal
number are scheduling increases in capital spending for the next six months.

RETAIL
Most Third District retailers contacted in late November said both customer
traffic and sales were on the rise, and the trend appeared to continue through
Thanksgiving weekend.

While some merchants said sales at their stores were

running below the rate for which they had planned, most indicated that business
was picking up to meet or exceed anticipated levels for this time of the year.
The

recent

gains

have

led many

Third District

expectations for the Christmas shopping period.
year-over-year gains

could exceed those

merchants

to

raise

their

Several said they believe the

of the past several years.

Some

retailers expressed caution for 1993, however. These merchants said sales growth

III-3
could stall if personal income taxes are increased next year.
FINANCE
Reports from major Third District banks in November indicated that overall
loan volume outstanding was moving up slowly, representing an improvement in loan
demand from the situation that has prevailed throughout most of this year.
Bankers said lending was on the increase in three major credit categories-business, consumer, and real estate loans.
Several bankers noted that demand for commercial and industrial loans was
rising and that banks were competing aggressively for new business loans in the
region. While the actual pace of growth was described as slow, bankers said the
demand was coming from a broad range of companies, including middle market and
small businesses.
Bankers gave

mixed reports on consumer

consumer loan volume

was

increasing,

lending,

on balance,

but it

appeared that

at Third District banks.

Several bankers said a significant number of their customers were consolidating
installment credit into home equity loans.

Nevertheless, these bankers said

total consumer-oriented lending was increasing at their institutions.
Most of the bankers contacted for this report said they were continuing to
book residential mortgages at a strong pace in November, but most also said that

new applications for refinancings and purchase mortgages had fallen sharply.
Looking ahead, the. balance

of opinion among Third District bankers

interviewed for this report was that both loan volume and deposits will grow in
1993, albeit slowly.

Most bankers said they expect only modest increases in

funding needs in the near future and they anticipate that net interest margins
will remain at or only slightly below current levels.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary. Business activity in the Fourth District continues to expand unevenly
across industries. Retailers, reporting stronger year-over-year sales increases in October
and early November, plan to carry larger inventories than they anticipated a few months
ago. Growth in manufacturing production has revived in recent months, but some
producers see no change in activity so far this quarter from last, while others report that
orders and production are better than they estimated previously. Although District
respondents anticipate larger gains in their business next year than in 1992, they foresee
little growth in employment because of continued emphasis on productivity improvement.
Consumer Spending. Retailers in the Fourth District generally agree that sales in
October and early November were better than they previously estimated. Consequently,

they raised their sales estimates for the 1992 holiday season, and now anticipate a larger
percentage increase this year than last. One discount retailer, however, experienced
smaller year-over-year gains, largely in apparel, which they believe may represent a shift
by consumers to more upscale stores.
Retailers attribute some of the recent unanticipated sales strength to special
factors, especially the colder-than-usual weather in October, which boosted sales of
outerwear and sweaters. They uniformly plan to build larger inventories than they
previously expected, and one retailer has decided to expand its stocks of gift-type goods.
Economists associated with consumer spending estimate a 2% to 3% increase in
real consumer spending this quarter from last, which is slightly higher than their earlier
forecasts, but a let-up from the rapid pace of the third quarter.
Auto dealers were disappointed that November new car sales weakened for both
domestic and foreign makes, although light truck sales strengthened again. New car

IV-2

stocks are believed to be adequate, and dealers apparently will hold back on factory orders
to prevent inventories from growing too rapidly.
Manufacturing. Growth in manufacturing output has revived in recent months, but
capital goods producers still report mixed activity so far in the fourth quarter.
Some producers of electric motors and equipment, welding machinery, and
industrial bearings report that business so far in the fourth quarter has been about
unchanged from the third, perhaps because of talk about an investment tax credit next
year, according to some industry sources. Orders and production of heavy-duty trucks,
however, have been rising rapidly in recent months to levels that are approaching 1988
highs, although suppliers of truck components believe that the surge is associated with
anticipated truck price increases. Some producers of industrial controls note signs of a
turnaround in their business.
Steel producers estimate that orders and production this quarter will be higher than
they forecast only a few months ago. Operating rates of some producers are presently
averaging close to 85% of capacity, with demand strongest for flat-rolled steel products.
Hedging against a scheduled 3% steel price hike in January may be pulling some business
from early next year into this quarter.
Auto producers still estimate that production and new car sales this quarter will
still be slightly higher than last, despite a sag in November new car sales. Production of
light trucks continues to rise, partly at the expense of passenger cars. Market shares of
the Big Three auto producers will likely benefit from more rapid increases in prices for
foreign than domestic nameplates, according to some industry contacts.
Employment. Manufacturers and depository institutions plan no big step-up in
employment next year, even though they anticipate more-rapid growth in their output and
revenues. Achieving further productivity growth appears to be a common goal of District
respondents.

IV-3

Some manufacturers believe that they have sufficient capacity to accommodate a
higher production level in 1993 and can resort first to more overtime hours and then to a
recall of laid-off workers before adding new employees. Only a few anticipate that their
business will expand enough to require new hiring, and then probably not until next spring.
Auto sources indicate no prospect for employment growth because of further long-term
cutbacks by some producers and only replacement hiring by others.
Some retailers are planning a larger increase in hirings for this holiday season than
last, but many plan to achieve greater productivity growth by increasing use of
technology, just-in-time stocking, and self-help centers within stores.
Financial Developments. Banks report that they are aggressively seeking qualified
borrowers, but that loan demand remains soft. They see more intense competition for
business loans, with some banks apparently paring their margins to meet bank and
nonbank competition. The exit of a major issuer of commercial paper has led to some
recent increase in business loan activity, according to some lenders.
The recent heavy volume of mortgage refinancing has let up since the latest rise in
mortgage interest rates, according to several banks and thrifts. A few large lenders, who
did not increase their mortgage rates in recent months, report that loan refinancing and
new mortgage loan applications in November were strong.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
Overall District business conditions improved slightly in recent weeks,
although activity in many sectors remained sluggish.
somewhat, but manufacturing was unchanged.
mixed.

Retail sales increased

Activity at District ports was

Residential real estate continued to improve, but commercial real

estate was lackluster.

Credit conditions were unchanged at District financial

institutions, while state tax collections showed strength in most
jurisdictions.

In agriculture, fall harvesting neared completion in most

areas of the District.
Consumer Spending
Our regular survey indicated that retail activity strengthened somewhat
in recent weeks.

Shopper traffic and sales, excluding big-ticket items,

apparently increased, as did wholesale and retail prices.
reported in employment or capital expenditures.

No change was

Wages generally were

unchanged, although a few respondents indicated that wages rose.
Retailers were upbeat about recent business conditions and foresaw
improved prospects for the next six months.

Respondents said general business

activity increased both in their areas and in the United States.

Looking

ahead, retailers expected increases in most indicators, especially sales and
shopper traffic.
Manufacturing
Manufacturers indicated that District factory activity held steady
during the past month.

Respondents noted little change in most indicators,

although they reported lower levels of order backlogs and apparently paid

higher prices for raw materials.

Respondents cited government regulation as

the most important problem they faced.
Manufacturers were sanguine about their prospects for the next six
months.

Increases in most indicators were anticipated, but raw materials

inventories and the number of workers were expected to be unchanged.

Finished

goods inventories were expected to decline.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--reported that imports were higher in October than in
September while exports were generally lower.

Compared to a year ago, import

activity was generally higher and export activity remained about the same.
During the next six months, exports were expected to increase at Charleston
but to remain unchanged at Baltimore and Hampton Roads.
Tourism
Hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District indicated that
tourist activity in November was unchanged from October but was below year-ago
levels.

About half of the respondents reported that fall bookings were about

even with a year ago while most other respondents reported declines.
Regarding the outlook for the next several months, respondents were evenly
divided between those who expected tourist activity to improve and those who
expected activity to be unchanged.
Finance

District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions were little changed over the last six weeks.

Respondents

stated that both commercial and consumer loan demand were steady.

Rates on

commercial loans were unchanged while those on consumer loans were lower.

Banks noted that mortgage loan rates increased recently and that home mortgage
activity slowed because of lessened home refinancings. Some nonbank
institutions continued to report that stringent examination standards hampered
their ability to lend to creditworthy customers.
Residential Real Estate
A telephone survey of realtors suggested that activity in the
residential market continued to improve in most of the District, although
increased buyer apprehension apparently slowed activity in some areas.

Home

prices remained steady. New home sales were stronger than existing home sales
in the Carolinas and in the Washington, D.C. area, while the reverse occurred
elsewhere in the District.
Nonresidential Real Estate
Activity in the commercial real estate market generally remained
sluggish, but realtors indicated that leasing activity improved. Vacancy
rates in the office and retail markets fell slightly because of the absorption
of existing space.

In the Columbia, South Carolina area, several new shopping

centers were under construction, but little new commercial development was
reported elsewhere.
State Government Revenues
Tax revenues continued to grow in District states according to
forecasters contacted by telephone.

In several states, tax analysts suggested

that income tax withholding collections were running at higher levels than
state employment figures would suggest, which indicated that state employment
figures may have understated actual job growth.

Several tax forecasters

reported increases in tax collections from retail and real estate sales.

V-4

Agriculture and Forestry
Analysts reported that crop conditions improved in recent weeks.
Favorable weather allowed completion of fall harvesting across most of the
District, although rain continued to hamper activity in South Carolina.
Preliminary estimates indicated record or near-record corn yields.
Lumber industry contacts reported strong demand and prices for hardwood
lumber.

Furniture manufacturers, both in the United States and abroad,

apparently were the primary source of the increased demand.

Industry contacts

indicated that lumber prices rose in response to stronger demand and tougher
government regulations on lumber suppliers.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: According to contacts in the Sixth District, the Southeast economy was
showing signs of moderate improvement through the end of November. After the first weekend
of the holiday shopping season, retailers report sales increases across a broad range of goods,

and most merchants believe that this season will be the most profitable one in three years. Most
manufacturers indicate that factory activity has held steady in recent weeks, but persistent
weakness is reported by firms linked to defense production. Home builders and realtors say that

single-family residential markets remain healthy, and contacts in south Florida note that the
hurricane rebuilding effort has begun to stimulate local construction and retail sales. Commercial
construction, however, continues to be slow in most areas, and business and consumer loan
demand remains muted. On the inflation front, most contacts report that they have seen no signs
of upward pressure on either wages or prices.
Consumer Spending: Retailers throughout the District were upbeat in their assessment
of sales through the end of November. Weekend sales following Thanksgiving were reported
to be above year-ago levels throughout the District. Increases have been reported across a broad
range of goods, with nondurable items leading the way, but sales of durable goods such as home
furnishings, electronics, and appliances have also shown improvement. Inventories are relatively
lean as planned, and merchants expect this season to be characterized by fewer discounts and
higher profit margins than in the past few years. Retailers are in the process of hiring seasonal
employees to meet this annual surge in activity, and most indicate that they will hold the line
even if sales are stronger than anticipated. Although auto dealers have seen little change in

VI-2
showroom traffic in recent weeks, the majority continue to report at least modest increases in
sales over year-ago levels.
Manufacturing: Manufacturers' reports on factory activity were mixed in November.
Some industries continue to be plagued by persistent weakness.

This is particularly true of

defense contractors, several of which have announced plans to cut a substantial number of jobs
at District plants. Firms linked to the production of communications equipment and autos have
also reported slowing production, shipments, and new orders. Producers of nondurable goods,
however, generally have recorded moderate increases in factory activity. Apparel and textile
manufacturers characterize current levels of production and shipments as encouraging, but they
expect a leveling off by early next year as their backlogs are reduced and customers' inventories
restored.

Manufacturers of building supplies and other home products continue to report

increases in demand stemming from the hurricane rebuilding effort. Producers of shingles,
plywood, roofing felt, and carpeting report that they are running their plants at capacity levels.
Construction: After taking into account normal seasonal patterns, most residential
realtors report that conditions continue to improve in single-family housing markets. Low-to-mid
priced homes are still the best sellers, but the market for trade ups and more expensive homes
has improved. Builders note steady single-family construction activity, and a growing minority
are seeing increases in speculative building. Multifamily and commercial construction, however,
remains slow in most parts of the District and contacts suggest that there is little near-term
prospect for improvement.
South Florida is beginning to experience the expected increase in economic activity as
a result of the hurricane rebuilding effort. In particular, contacts report that the local economy

VI-3
of Dade county has recorded substantial increases in both retail sales and construction. However,
contacts also report that a number of individuals and families have opted to move out of the area
rather than to rebuild their damaged or destroyed homes. On the commercial side, realtors in
areas around Dade county have seen a surge in short-term leasing from companies whose
facilities were damaged by the storm.
Financial Services: Bankers around the District report that loan demand was flat to
up slightly through the end of November.

Mortgage refinancings still represent the most

prevalent form of loan activity, but contacts believe that this wave of refinancings has finally
peaked.

Other forms of consumer lending have shown some improvement in recent weeks,

particularly auto financing in parts Florida and Georgia.

Commercial lending, however, is

reported to be flat, and most loan applications have been for refinancing, debt consolidation, or
acquisitions, rather than new business activity. Contacts in Miami have seen deposits rise by
about 10 percent since the hurricane, but there still have not been any reports of a significant
increase in commercial or consumer lending in the area.

Small business continues to report

difficulties obtaining credit, although conditions have not worsened. It appears that lenders are
becoming more aggressive in consumer lending.
Wages and Prices: Contacts report that wage pressures are practically nonexistent.
Firms continue to focus on cost cutting, including workforce reductions, in order to improve
balance sheets. Materials input prices have remained stable for most producers, and competitive
market forces have foiled recent attempts to raise prices of final products.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT-CHICAGO

Summary. Seventh District economic conditions improved in October

and November.

Consumer spending continued to advance on a seasonally

adjusted basis, and appears to have gained momentum in recent weeks.
Retrenchment was evident in the District's manufacturing sector in August
and September, but activity seems to have stabilized and moved somewhat
higher.

Automakers' appraisals of market conditions were much improved

compared to the third quarter, when production edged downward.

Household

survey data depict a significantly more robust recovery in District labor
markets than establishment survey estimates, and a quarterly survey of
hiring plans showed continued improvement in the Midwest.

However, large

firms generally have stated that hiring in 1993 will be restricted even
in the event of a significant economic upturn.

Reports on commercial and

industrial loan demand were mixed but suggestive of some strengthening
overall.

A record soybean harvest is nearly complete, but extensive

rains have led to major delays in the corn harvest.
Consumer Spending. Consumer spending in the District appears to
have moved higher in October and November, and retailers' expectations
for holiday sales gains rose in recent weeks.

One recent survey showed

that the percentage of Michigan retailers expecting holiday sales
increases reached the highest level in the past eight years.

The

survey's director stated that "this is a clear break from the uncertainty
of the recent past."

Another holiday sales survey indicated that a

greater share of retailers in Illinois and southern Wisconsin expect
sales gains than the national average.

A discount retailer reported that

sales stalled out during election week, then reversed and strengthened
significantly in mid-to-late November.

This retailer raised its forecast

for sales in the holiday season, and is now looking for its best yearover-year holiday sales increase (in real terms) in the last eight years.
A survey conducted by a check processing firm indicated that day-afterThanksgiving activity rose over 10 percent in the Midwest, compared to 5
percent nationally.

One District retailer reported that same-store sales

gains improved over the Thanksgiving weekend in spite of bad weather.

VII-2

Autos.

After losing some momentum in the third quarter, the auto

industry contributed to growth in the District economy in recent months.
A large automaker stated that dealer orders had been lagging sales as the
market softened in the third quarter, but orders turned around and rose
faster than sales during October and early November.

Another automaker

noted that recent light truck sales gains have been well distributed by
product category, with new increases in sales of full-size pickups (which
are primarily for commercial use).

Dealer complaints about the "upside-

down" problem (where used car trade-in value is less than the outstanding
loan balance) have been on the wane, according to another automaker, and
there has been a substantial increase in the number of debt-free vehicles
on the road.

One automaker noted continued increases in used car prices,

which also could help buoy the trade-in market.

Increasingly optimistic

appraisals of sales trends were joined by higher expectations for
production, although significant gains were not expected to develop until
the first quarter of 1993.

Another automaker noted that the scheduled

gain in car production in the first quarter of 1993 would be the best (on
a seasonally adjusted basis) in the last two years, although actual
assemblies are dependent on dealer orders holding at current levels.
Manufacturing.

District manufacturing activity moved sideways to

modestly higher in October and November, and reports from individual
firms took on a more positive tone following the national election.

A

majority of District manufacturers continued to report production gains
in various purchasing managers' surveys.

That majority grew increasingly

thin during the third quarter and into October, although some improvement
was evident in the Chicago survey for November.

The price component of

the Chicago index fell for the fifth consecutive month in November,
reaching one of the lowest levels in the past five years.

The production

component of the Milwaukee survey joined its counterpart in the Chicago
survey by falling in October and rising in November, but signalled
expansion in activity during both months.

Surveys conducted in Western

Michigan were summarized in October by the survey's director as
indicating that "things are flat and getting flatter," although modest

VII-3
improvement was noted in November.

A survey of metalworking firms in the

Chicago area indicated some slowing in the rate of recovery in October.
Reports provided by individual manufacturers were more optimistic
in recent weeks than in October.

A manufacturer of parts used in heavy

machinery stated that "after the usual lead times following the end of a
recession, we are beginning to see a recovery in capital goods markets."
This company also noted that sales of controls for household appliances
continue to benefit from the housing recovery.

A large appliance

manufacturer expected industry-wide domestic shipments to rise modestly
again next year.

A chemical company reported that sales of coatings used

in finishing consumer durable goods are "by far our strongest" area,
principally due to strength in sales of housing-related products like
cabinetry and furniture.

At the same time, this contact noted that sales

of coatings used in general industrial purposes remained soft. An office
furniture manufacturer stated that sales stopped declining in August, and
have experienced a modest but consistent recovery since then.

A large

manufacturer of fluid power equipment reported that the heavy-duty truck
market "is clearly the strongest area of our business."

Assemblies have

grown slower than orders, mainly because OEMs have been trying to lock in
production for later-than-usual delivery next year.

However, this

contact did not express concern about the prospect of order
cancellations, and expects heavy-duty truck assemblies to rise nearly 20
percent in 1993.
Employment.

District labor markets continued to recover in recent

months, although measuring the extent of the recovery is difficult with
available data.

Establishment survey data suggest that total District

nonfarm payroll employment was flat to slightly higher in recent months,
but household survey data and reports from temporary help firms suggest a
stronger upturn may be underway.

According to household survey

estimates, District employment began a significant recovery late in 1991,
and by August 1992 had returned to pre-recession levels.

More recently,

the unemployment rate fell markedly in Illinois over the four months
ended in October, as a sharp decline in the number of people reporting
themselves unemployed was joined by a significant increase in the number
of people having a job.

A quarterly survey of employer hiring intentions

VII-4

indicated renewed improvement among Midwest firms.

Anecdotal evidence

for a recovery in permanent employment among larger District companies
remained sparse at best, however, with most firms indicating that
productivity gains are expected to restrict hiring, even if economic
growth increases. A large retailer stated that retailing is rapidly
becoming more capital intensive. A communications company reported that
continued growth in telephone line installation has been driven partly by
a trend among its customer base towards substitution of labor with
capital. A large food processing company stated that "as we put capital
in, we take people out."
Banking. Reports from large banks on the demand for their
commercial and industrial loans were mixed but suggestive of some
strengthening overall. Those banks reporting improved demand cited
customers' financing needs for capital spending more frequently than for
inventory investment. Several banks reported having undertaken efforts
to strengthen capital positions in recent months; planned or actual
equity issuance was the most frequently cited measure. Loan sales and
securitization initiatives were noted more frequently than credit
standard tightening. Regulatory capital positions were characterized as
adequate or comfortable by each bank contacted. Credit standards and
loan terms were largely unchanged, although a minority of respondents
noted a modest decline in the spread between loan rates and base rates.
Agriculture. Farmers in District states have nearly completed what
is estimated to be a record soybean harvest, but progress in harvesting
the record-large corn crop is characterized as the slowest in 20 or 30
years. As of November 22, a third of the corn acreage in District states
was still waiting to be harvested. The high moisture content of this
year's slow-to-mature crop accounted for the initial harvest delays.
More recently, extensive rains have limited the amount of field-drying
and rendered many fields too muddy. The harvest in several areas of the
District may not be finished until well into the winter months. The
field losses on the remaining acreage will be larger than normal. The
losses will be costly to individual farmers but are not likely to alter
the overall implications of a record crop.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Summary
District economic activity continues to increase modestly, fueled by positive
expectations for the current holiday shopping season. Many manufacturing firms have not
experienced any recent changes in their demand, but see a bright future. Others, especially
those in defense-related industries, continue to undergo reorganizations to compete in global
markets.

Nonmanufacturing firms have experienced increases in demand, especially

retailers; many retailers predict the strongest year-end rally in recent years. Residential
housing construction continues to be a source of strength throughout the District. Buoyed
by business loan growth, total loans outstanding continue to increase at large District banks.
Bumper crops are expected in most areas of the District.
Manufacturing
Reports from District manufacturing firms continue to be mixed, as some see better
times ahead, while others are extremely cautious. One contact in the air conditioning and
heating equipment industry reports an optimistic outlook for next year, especially in the
aftermath of Hurricane Andrew; sales are expected to increase 10 percent. Other durable
goods producers also see improvements. For example, a maker of aluminum wheels for
cars and trucks is expanding, leading to 300 new jobs, and an electrical components
assembler is moving production from New Jersey to the Memphis area, creating 130
positions.

In addition, a maker of tennis equipment will renovate its plant and resume

production after a two-year suspension, creating 150 new jobs by March, and a shoe plant,
previously scheduled to close, will remain open until at least early next year because of an
unexpected increase in orders.
Among firms less optimistic about the future, one contact in the electrical equipment
sector reports that worsening foreign economies have led to growing skepticism about export

VIII-2

growth, which had been a bright spot in the company's sales picture. Sales are down about
6 percent from last year's modest level.

A glass company in Illinois and an art supply

manufacturer in Missouri will close by January, eliminating a total of 500 jobs.
As for restructuring in the District, a major chemical company announced a new
reorganization and cost reduction plan that will eliminate 500 jobs. Increased development
costs for new pharmaceuticals, without similar increases in product prices, have strained the
company. A St. Louis defense contractor laid off another 400 workers at the beginning of
November.

Additional layoffs, possibly affecting up to 3,500 St. Louis workers, are

expected in the near future.

A maker of agricultural spraying equipment in Arkansas

announced that it will move production to Texas and northern Illinois, taking 160 jobs with
it. Finally, a company producing household storage containers is closing its Tennessee plant
and consolidating production in South Carolina, resulting in a loss of 800 District jobs.
Nonmanufacturing
Reports from District nonmanufacturing firms are generally optimistic, especially
from area retailers. Many area retailers reported increases in sales during October. In light
of recently reported increases in consumer confidence and initial reports of strong postThanksgiving Day sales, retailers expect inflation-adjusted holiday sales to be up

significantly from last year. Some retailers have reported that they would rather forego
sales than be stuck with excess inventory; therefore, stock is being maintained at minimal
levels. Other nonmanufacturers also see growth. For example, a women's clothing chain
is expanding its Memphis distribution facility, adding 100 new jobs, and a mortgage
company that had previously laid off about 700 St. Louis employees will add 250 new
positions during the next six months. A telecommunications firm, however, decided to
close its Louisville office, eliminating more than 110 jobs.
Construction and Real Estate

Residential construction continues to be a bright spot in most parts of the District.
Single-family housing permits in September and October were up substantially from their

VIII-3

year-ago levels, though most areas reported stronger year-over-year increases in September
than in October. New and existing home sales are also reported as strong in most areas of
the District. One contact noted that recent increases in interest rates have encouraged
potential homebuyers to get into the market before rates rise further.
Banking and Finance
Loans outstanding at 12 large District banks increased 0.6 percent from midSeptember to mid-November, after declining 0.4 percent during the prior two months.
Much of this turnaround can be attributed to business loans, which grew 1 percent during
the past two months after a 4.7 percent decline during the prior two months. Consumer
loans rose 1.6 percent from mid-September to mid-November after a 2.8 percent increase
from mid-July to mid-September. Real estate loans, however, remained flat, declining as
much in the last two months as they had risen in the prior two months. A sample of 93
small and mid-sized District banks showed comparable trends.

All categories of loans

except for consumer loans posted increases in the last two months that exceeded their
performance in the prior two months.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Persistent rainfall has hampered the fall harvest in many District areas.

For

example, the corn harvests in Illinois, Indiana and Missouri are expected to continue well
into December. The cotton harvest is also behind schedule in Tennessee. Nonetheless,
bumper crops are expected in most areas. Record corn and soybean yields are expected in
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Missouri and Tennessee; Arkansas also expects to have a record
soybean yield this fall. In terms of actual production, Illinois and Indiana farmers expect
to have record-breaking corn and soybean crops, while Kentucky and Missouri farmers
expect to harvest a record corn crop as well. A record rice crop is expected in Arkansas
and Missouri; likewise, Tennessee cotton producers expect to harvest a record crop.

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
Most sectors of the Ninth District economy continue to improve slowly in
late fall.
strong.

Retail sales are strengthening.

Residential construction is

The 1992 crop is in and generally good, with the exception of wet

weather retarding the corn harvest.
excellent.

Prospects for winter tourism appear

Labor markets are slightly stronger.

A mid-November Minneapolis

Fed poll of business and community leaders reflects this improvement.

It

showed that most considered their local economy to be better than the nation's
and many thought that economic activity would be up in 1993.

But

manufacturing shows little growth, and mining continues to be slow.
Consumer Spending
Consumers appear willing to spend.
and stronger profits.

Major retailers report improving sales

Moreover, Advisory Council members and representatives

of retail firms report expectations that holiday sales will be stronger than
in 1991.

News media note generally good sales over the Thanksgiving weekend.

For example, the Mall of America, in a Minneapolis suburb, attracted 170,000
shoppers on the Friday after Thanksgiving, its second best day since opening
in August.
The district sales office for a domestic auto manufacturer reported
sharply stronger auto sales in November and described its outlook for the
balance of 1992 as "extremely good."

Three Helena Branch directors report

strong auto sales or increased dealer profits in their areas.
The winter tourist season appears to be off to a good start.

Deer are

abundant in Michigan's Upper Peninsula, northern Wisconsin and northern
Minnesota and large numbers of hunters are anticipated.

Downhill ski resorts

are open in Montana and owners anticipate an excellent season, although spotty
snow cover has delayed cross-country skiing in eastern areas of the District.

IX-2
Home Sales and Construction

Construction, especially of homes, is generally strong.

An Advisory

Council member from Montana reports that some home contractors are advising
buyers that home orders are backlogged until next summer.

In Minnesota,

building permits for September were up approximately 15 percent from a year

ago, with virtually all the growth in single-family residences.

Strong

residential construction was also reported in eastern North Dakota and in
Wisconsin cities.
Other construction is not as strong.

A Minnesota director reports that

non-residential building is generally limited to the public sector.
heavy construction is slowing seasonally as winter sets in.

Road and

The severe

surplus of office space in Minneapolis/St. Paul has cast a pall on large
building construction.

One director notes that his firm was laying off senior

tradespeople who specialize in constructing tall office buildings.
Manufacturing, Mining and Forestry
Manufacturing shows little growth.

September manufacturing employment for

District states was steady or slightly down from a year earlier except in
South Dakota.

An Advisory Council member reports that sales of several

Minneapolis/St. Paul manufacturers are essentially flat, with these firms
reaching beyond traditional markets in an effort to maintain, not improve
sales.

But forest products production, especially of plywood substitutes and

hardwoods in the eastern part of the region, is reported strong and one
Council member notes strong sales of machinery to the paper industry.
Furthermore, over half the manufacturers responding to the Bank poll indicate
that their capital spending will be up in 1993.
Mining continues to be slow.
workers due to lack of orders.

Iron mines have temporarily furloughed
New oil and gas drilling permits

IX-3
issued in North Dakota through Nov. 1 were below the level for 1991 and
substantially below 1990.

Though growing, the average drilling rig count for

North Dakota in the year to date is below 1991.

Production and refining in

Montana and North Dakota are generally unchanged from last year.
Labor Market Conditions
Labor markets are slightly stronger.

In November fewer large layoffs were

reported by the media than in the previous two months.

Advisory Council

members generally report improved employment conditions.

The mid-November

Bank survey of business and community leaders showed 49 percent anticipating
that employment would increase in 1993; only 10 percent thought it would fall.
Agriculture

With the exception of corn, the 1992 harvest is largely completed.

Some

early snows and wet weather across the region have severely retarded the corn
harvest and hurt quality.

Sugar beet producers in Minnesota and North Dakota

report outstanding yields and sugar content.
Soil moisture and pasture conditions going into the winter are rated at
adequate or better across most of the region, with the exception of a few
districts in the western Dakotas and Montana.
While milk production is generally unchanged from a year ago, dairy
profitability is generally satisfactory due to adequate feed supplies and
somewhat stronger milk prices.
Most Advisory Council members report somewhat stronger sales of farm
machinery.

One from eastern North Dakota noted that his report on machinery

sales was "the most positive one in three years."

Others report that farmers

continue to pay down debt and that land sales had picked up slightly in some
areas.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.
moderately.

Tenth District economic activity continues to expand

Retail sales including new car sales are improving, housing

starts and new home sales are still rising, and activity in the energy
industry continues to pick up.
during the last month.

Moreover, bank loan demand has strengthened

In agriculture, the effect of weaker crop prices has

been nearly balanced by gains in the livestock sector.
Retail Sales.
the past month.

District retailers report an improvement in sales over

Sales have been strong in a variety of categories, including

durable goods such as computers, appliances and carpet, as well as soft goods
such as women's apparel.

Selling prices have remained stable or have fallen,

and are expected to remain stable over the next three months.

Retailers

foresee a significant improvement in sales over the same period, sparked by a
better-than-average Christmas season.

Most retailers express satisfaction

with current inventory levels and expect to hold them steady over the next
three months.
Automobile sales were up slightly from last month and most dealers are
optimistic about future sales.

Financing is generally available for both

dealer inventories and potential car buyers.

Dealers are expanding

inventories slightly because of the new model year and increased showroom
traffic.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report steady to slightly higher

input prices in the past month and expect a similar trend over the month to
come.

Some firms report longer lead times for obtaining some materials, but

availability is not a problem.

Firms are either maintaining current inventory

levels or are trimming inventories due to seasonal factors.

Most firms are

X-2
still operating at well below capacity.

Firms that export generally report

improved sales abroad.
Energy.

Drilling activity continues to pick up, especially in the

district's natural gas fields.

The average number of operating drilling rigs

in district states increased from 250 in September to 291 in October.

This

recent jump in drilling activity pushed the region's rig count 16.2 percent
above its year-ago level.
Housing.

Single-family housing starts are up sharply over the past year

and the past month, but multifamily starts remain flat.

Builders expect

housing starts to remain strong over the next three months despite colder
weather.

Sales of new homes are also substantially higher than both last year

and last month, and inventories are low.

Mortgage demand and commitments are

strong due largely to refinancing, but are expected to weaken due mainly to
seasonal factors.

Respondents express considerable uncertainty about the

direction of mortgage rates.

Prices of new homes are up moderately, largely

reflecting past increases in the price of lumber.
Banking.
the last month.

District bankers report somewhat stronger loan demand during
Demand was up for home mortgages, commercial and industrial

loans, and agricultural loans.

The demand for consumer loans and home

construction loans was unchanged, however, and the demand for commercial real
estate loans weakened slightly.

The loan to deposit ratio for district banks

was higher compared with both a year ago and a month ago.

The level of bank

investments was unchanged over the last month.
District bankers held their prime lending rates steady last month, and
most respondents expect no further change in the near future.

District banks

recently cut their consumer lending rates, but do not expect further changes

X-3
in consumer rates in the near term.

Respondents report no changes in their

other lending standards.
A majority of the respondents experienced deposit inflows in the last
month.

The growth in deposits was primarily in demand deposits, NOW accounts,

and MIDAs.

Small time and savings deposits fell slightly in the last month,

while large certificates of deposit were unchanged.
Agriculture.

The district's fall harvest is nearing completion slightly

later than normal due to wet weather.

Corn and soybean yields are generally

well above average, and milo yields are about average.

While the wet weather

has slowed the fall harvest, it has encouraged development of the recently
planted winter wheat crop, which is in generally good condition.
The harvest of large corn and soybean crops has pushed down feed prices,
boosting profits for cattle feeders.

With stronger profit margins, district

feedlot operators are feeding more cattle than a year ago.
The uptick in profits for cattle feeders has helped offset the effects
of weaker crop prices on farm incomes.

Some dryland wheat producers face

weaker incomes due to the low yields and weak prices.
bankers expect timely paydown of most farm loans.

Overall, district

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic growth in the Eleventh District has increased since the last
survey.

Respondents from most sectors of the economy report a noticeable rise

in orders and an improved outlook.

Manufacturing respondents note improved

economic conditions with the exception of continued weak international demand.
Responses from business service firms confirm a general improvement in the
regional economy.

Construction and real estate activity continues to be

boosted by strength in residential home building.

Pre-holiday retail sales

were stronger than expected and retailers are optimistic about the holiday
season.
factors.

Oil and gas drilling has been increasing, partly due to temporary
Banks report an increase in real estate and consumer lending.

Farm

net income is expected decline in 1992.
Most manufacturing respondents report an increase in orders and an
improved outlook for 1993.
strong growth in orders.

Construction-related industries continue to report
Brick demand has been particularly strong.

Respondents in electrical and electronic equipment say that demand has picked
up, particularly in telecommunications, computers, and construction-related
products.

A producer of primary metal says that orders improved in mid-

November but that the outlook remains cautious because of the continued
weakness in the international economy.

Apparel demand is reported to be

strong, particularly for denim products.

Producers of corrugated boxes and

newsprint report sizable gains in sales.

Demand for oil field equipment has

increased due to strength in natural gas prices and the year-end expiration of
a tax credit for certain types of natural gas drilling.

Respondents in the

XI-2

petrochemical industry say that orders have been flat due to increased world
capacity and weak economic conditions in Europe.
Construction and real estate activity continues to be buoyed by strength
in single-family home construction.

Most of the major markets in the District

report strong gains in single-family housing starts.

One respondent notes

that in 1992 new home sales in the Dallas/Ft. Worth area will be the strongest
in five years.

Most of the major office markets remain weak although

occupancy rates and rents in Austin continue to rise.

Energy sector

restructurings are contributing to weakness in the Houston office market.
Business services firms note an increase in demand from a broad array of
economic sectors.

Temporary employment agencies in Dallas/Ft. Worth and San

Antonio cite seasonally-adjusted gains in demand from the manufacturing
sector.

A temporary employment agency in Louisiana notes a sharp rise in

demand due to a resurgence in oil and gas activity and in industrial
construction.

An accounting firm respondent says that overall demand

continues to be subdued by the advent of better software programs which allow
small businesses to do their own bookkeeping.

Despite this trend, however,

most respondents in the accounting/consulting industry note a moderate rise in
demand from the manufacturing, retail and energy sectors.
border was noted as particularly strong.

The Texas/Mexico

While the demand for legal services

is reported as flat to slightly up, one respondent says that the health care
industry was "stronger than a horseradish."
Most respondents say that pre-holiday retail sales in the District were
better than projected and that they now expect the holiday season to be the
strongest in several years.

Respondents from national retail companies say

XI-3

that sales from their Texas stores have been stronger than the national
average.

New car sales were down sharply in October.

Respondents say that

most of the fall was due a new agreement between auto manufacturers and rental
companies that prolongs the time which rental companies hold cars.

After

adjusting for the decline in fleet sales, auto sales were down only slightly.
District oil and gas drilling has improved sharply.

Respondents say

that a historically high 53 percent of the rigs running are searching for
natural gas.

Section 29 tax credits for natural gas drilling, which are set

to expire at year-end, have motivated much of the rise in drilling activity.
Oil and natural gas prices drifted down throughout much of November.
Respondents say that oil prices are being influenced by the weak world economy
and strong OPEC production.

While natural gas prices have slipped, the recent

spot price for November delivery was 30 percent higher than November, 1991.
Respondents say that inventories of natural gas remain tight and that an
unseasonably cold winter could spur price increases.
Banking industry respondents note a recent pick up in residential real
estate and consumer lending.

Most banks, however, continue say that there is

a shortage of loan demand from quality borrowers and that business loans
continue to decline.

Most respondents expect a moderate increase in loan

demand over the next 12 months.
Agricultural respondents say that 1992 is turning out to be a weak year
for District farming although ranchers are likely to have a good year.

Farm

net income in the District is expected to decrease in 1992 due to lower prices
for commodities, decreased government subsidies, and increased production
costs.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions are mixed in the Twelfth District, as weakness in California is offsetting
moderate growth in most other District states. In California, cutbacks continue in aerospace and
defense-related manufacturing, retail sales are sluggish, and the state's fiscal condition has worsened.
Outside of California, moderate improvement is reported in retail trade and residential construction,
with the strongest conditions reported in Utah and Idaho. However, Washington faces further
cutbacks in aerospace, and tourist activity is down in Hawaii. Overall business sentiment improved
slightly and District agricultural conditions are generally good. Little upward pressure on prices is
reported, and several contacts expect wage increases of around 3 percent.
Business Sentiment
Sentiment among Twelfth District business leaders has improved moderately since our last
report. One-third of our respondents now expect the real economy to expand during the next four
quarters at a rate of at least 2.5 percent. This proportion is up from one-fifth in October and
September and has returned to the level seen this past summer. An additional sixty percent of our
respondents expect real output to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent.
Wages and Prices
Several contacts are projecting wage increases of around 3 percent for the coming year, down
from an average of 3.5 to 4 percent for the past twelve months. The same contacts are reporting that
benefits increases during the coming year will be at least double that--over 6 percent.

The increase

is attributed largely to the cost of medical benefits, projected by some contacts to rise 10 or 11
percent. Several respondents noted that their organizations either had cut back or were planning
cutbacks in medical benefits in order to hold down costs.

XII - 2
Outside of medical costs, few upward pressures on prices are reported in District markets.
One exception is wholesale electricity prices in the Pacific Northwest, which have risen with demand
and a decreasing power surplus.
Retail Trade and Services
Weakness in California is holding down District consumer spending. Contacts report that
sales are barely above year-ago levels for California as a whole, before adjusting for inflation, and
are declining incertain regions, mostly in southern California. Retail sales are showing a slight
pickup in recent weeks, however, particularly in northern California. Consumer confidence in the
southern part of the state is reported as still poor. Outside of California, contacts report increasing
sales and expectations for a good Christmas season. With respect to retail employment, one contact
from a major retail chain reports that the trend is definitely toward improving productivity, even if it
means laying off more workers.
A telecommunications firm in California reports that orders for new business hookups are
weak, and that uncollectible bills remain high. In Hawaii, tourist-related businesses are still in the
process of cutting their staffs due to a decline in visitors from the mainland. Tourism in California is
reported to have increased slightly in dollar volume over a year ago, but market share is down. The
sluggish California economy has led analysts to project a significant state budget shortfall through the
end of the 1993-94 fiscal year. Official estimates of the shortfall range from $4.1 billion to $7.5
billion.
Manufacturing
District aerospace activity continues to contract as layoffs continue in southern California and
Washington. In Washington, Boeing has completed its slowdown of 737 production, but has
announced plans to reduce production of the 757 and 767 models by one-third in 1993 with a layoff
of 2,500 workers (2,000 in the Seattle area). Observers in Seattle are forecasting that the local

XII -3
aerospace industry will drop a total of 10,000 jobs by the end of 1994, with an additional 26,000
"spinoff" jobs lost as a result.
Other District manufacturing activity is mixed. Contacts in Utah still report some reduction
in defense-related industries, but new hiring by computer software companies. A contact from
northern California reports that conditions for small personal computer and defense-related electronic
companies continue to soften. Computer software sales by Washington companies are reported
strong. Construction machinery sales are reported up 5 percent over a year earlier. A contact in the
paint and coatings industry reports that national sales continue at a level slightly more than 5 percent
above a year earlier.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
District agricultural conditions are generally good in most markets. Contacts in Idaho and
Utah report agricultural conditions as favorable, and contacts in eastern Washington report a strong
crop year. Concern remains, however, about continued drought.
Demand for wood products is holding steady, and western lumber production is running
slightly above the level of a year earlier. The operating environment for western lumber producers,
however, is described as "tough" due to restricted public timber supplies. Contacts report several
recent mill closures due to the shortage of logs, with one contact expecting attrition of one-third of
existing Northwest lumber and plywood mills. Demand for western newsprint continues to be very
strong, however, and several companies are running at capacity.
Construction and Real Estate
Nonresidential real estate and construction markets are reported to be weak in several District
markets. In southern California, one contact reports that tenants renewing leases are negotiating rent
discounts of 25 to 40 percent. The same contact expects foreclosures for major projects in 1993 to
exceed those in 1992. Another contact in northern California reports that rents and the purchase price

XII - 4
of space will probably decline another 10 to 15 percent. Commercial real estate is reported flat in
Utah, and a contact in the Oregon construction industry reports fierce competition among contractors
due to excess capacity.
Stronger conditions are reported in the residential sector. In California, existing home sales
climbed sharply during October, and posted the first concurrent monthly and annual sales increases
since February. Contacts in eastern Washington report a continued boom in residential real estate and
construction, and housing starts in Utah are reported strong.
Financial Institutions
Conditions at District financial institutions are reported as sluggish. In California, contacts
report that loan demand remains weak for most types of commercial and consumer credit. The
number of applications for small business loans continues to decline, while the volume of larger
commercial loans also is falling. The residential mortgage market in California is reported to be
mixed. Moderate demand for first mortgages is largely offset by weak demand for second mortgages
and home equity lines of credit. Outside of California, contacts report some growth in loans in
Arizona and Nevada and light to moderate business loan demand in Utah. Weak loan demand,

however, is reported in Alaska and Hawaii.

