For use at Noon, E.D.T.
Wednesday
August 5,1992
BOARD
RESERVE
FEDERAL
AUG 10 92

Summary of Commentary on

Current

Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

July 1992

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

July 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

. .i

SUMMARY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .......

First District - Boston. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

-1

Second District - New York. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Third District - Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

Fourth District - Cleveland . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III-

. ..

IV-1

.

V-I

Fifth District - Richmond. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
Sixth District - Atlanta.

II-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

.

VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

VIII-1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

X-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis.

Eleventh District - Dallas.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Twelfth District - San Francisco. . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

.

XI-1
XII-1

Residential Real Estate
Home sales and home building activity in recent weeks varied by region
but appeared on balance unchanged for the nation as a whole.

Cleveland and

St. Louis reported decreased sales, and Richmond indicated that sales were
flat. Atlanta, Chicago, and Minneapolis, however, reported increased sales,
as did San Francisco for all states except California, where sales were weak.
Residential construction activity rose in the Chicago and Dallas
districts, and in the San Francisco district outside of California.
Homebuilding activity decreased in the St. Louis district and was generally
unchanged in the Atlanta and Kansas City districts and in California.

New

York and Minneapolis indicated mixed activity in their districts.
Cleveland, Richmond, Kansas City, and Dallas said that lower interest
rates were not spurring home buying, although Chicago indicated that lower
rates were helping.

In the New York and Richmond districts, real estate

agents mentioned that the job security concerns of potential home buyers were
continuing to dampen sales.
Nonresidential Construction
Nonresidential construction activity generally remained sluggish.
Atlanta noted that most activity stemmed from either private custom-built or
government projects.

New York and Richmond, however, indicated that some new

commercial projects were underway.

Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco

reported continued depressed commercial real estate prices.

Office building

vacancy rates in the New York district, while still high, evidently fell in
recent weeks as rents became more competitive.' Dallas and San Francisco
indicated that commercial property was selling far below construction costs.

Lower interest rates apparently had had little effect on commercial real
estate loan activity.

The demand for these loans was reported to be flat or

down by Richmond, Kansas City, and San Francisco, and steady to somewhat
higher by New York.
Financial
On balance, financial conditions improved slightly across the nation
over the past six weeks.

Loan demand was characterized as stronger by

Richmond, Chicago, and Kansas City and described as stable by New York,
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, Dallas, and San Francisco.
Commercial loan demand continued to exhibit weakness, although Richmond and
Kansas City cited some improvement.

Among districts commenting on consumer

loan demand, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Kansas City registered increases,
while New York, Richmond, and St. Louis reported no change.

Among loan

categories, home mortgages exhibited the greatest strength in most districts,
but the bulk of the activity was attributed to refinancing, which picked up
somewhat in early July.

Atlanta and Chicago noted that some banks were more

aggressive in seeking new loans, but Boston found that small businesses were
still choosing to obtain credit from nonbank sources.
Lenders in the Philadelphia and Dallas districts expected loan demand to
be flat over the next few months.

Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago cited the

continuing reluctance of bank customers, particularly businesses, to take on
new debt.
Inventories
Inventory conditions varied across the country.
inventories were especially disparate.

Reports of retail

Philadelphia and Chicago reported

levels below and in line with plans, respectively.
inventories to be at historically low levels.

Atlanta reported retail

Inventories in manufacturing

edged up in the Philadelphia district, and were unchanged in the Richmond
district.

Dallas district manufacturers described their inventories as high.

Both Kansas City and Dallas respondents expected inventory levels to fall in
the weeks ahead.
Prices and Costs
Richmond and Kansas City indicated small increases in the prices charged
by retailers and manufacturers in recent weeks, while other districts reported
little change.

Manufacturers' input prices were stable, although Richmond,

St. Louis, and Dallas noted increases in business and production costs.
Construction costs rose in the Kansas City and Minneapolis districts.

St.

Louis, Dallas, and San Francisco reported recent declines in lumber prices,
while Kansas City reported increases.

Dallas indicated increases in the

prices of chemicals, petroleum, and steel.

Minneapolis and San Francisco

reported greater-than-average increases in health care costs.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Conditions in agriculture were slightly improved.

In the Richmond,

Chicago, and St. Louis districts, and in areas of the Kansas City district,
recent rains have brought relief to heat- and drought-stressed crops.

Dallas

reported that crops in the district had benefited from a return to more normal
weather.

Damage to wheat was reported in the San Francisco district, however,

where dry conditions in the Pacific Northwest reduced yields, and in the
Chicago district, where too much rain harmed the crop.

Minneapolis and Kansas

City reported that hail had harmed some crops and that crop development had

been slowed by unseasonably cool weather.

In the livestock sector, Chicago

indicated increased hog production, and Kansas City reported that cattle herds
were expanding slowly.
Movements in farm prices varied.

Crop prices were reported to be above

last year's levels by Minneapolis but declining in the Dallas district.
Livestock prices were lower in the Chicago, Minneapolis, and Kansas City
districts but stable in the Dallas district.

Chicago indicated that milk

prices were up.
Energy activity in the nation evidently continued to contract in recent
weeks.

The drilling rig count declined substantially in the Kansas City

district, where activity was near historically low levels, but rose somewhat
in the Dallas district.

Oil industry respondents in the Dallas district

indicated that they were cutting domestic exploration spending.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District manufacturing contacts reportedly face mixed and
variable demand conditions.

Those serving the auto industry have seen a

recent pickup in demand; others are experiencing renewed weakness in
several sectors.

Most expect the economy to make continued small gains

for the remainder of the year.

Retailers express dissatisfaction with

the pace of improvement in economic conditions within the District, and
none anticipates any significant change in the near term.
Retail
Most First District retailers contacted in late July report no
increase in sales over year-ago levels.

They offer two explanations.

First, cool weather has limited demand for summer merchandise, like
gardening items and air conditioners.

Second, consumers are said to be

reluctant to spend while labor markets remain slack.

Among the few

retailers who have experienced increases in sales, only one attributes
the improvement to a bottoming-out of the economy.

All retail contacts

agree that the New England economy is neither improving nor
deteriorating, but at a standstill.
All note that the cost of goods remains stable or has increased
only modestly.
unchanged.

Similarly, prices offered to consumers are largely

Only one firm has been able to increase prices, and the

majority say that discounts and promotions are still required to
stimulate consumer interest
strict control.

Nevertheless, inventories remain under

Capital spending plans are generally limited to

updating and remodelling; only two contacts expect to add to the number
of their locations within New England.
Few contacts have increased employment at existing stores.

And

even within this group, one describes the new hires as mostly temporary,
while another added workers only after existing staff had consistently

clocked considerable overtime.

Only the respondents opening new stores

plan to hire additional staff.

Most are reluctant to increase wages;

those who have done so have given only minimal raises.

After seeing

some improvement in the first months of the year, most retailers now
feel that the economy has stagnated.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturing contacts describe business conditions
as mixed and unusually hard to interpret.

For almost 40 percent of the

respondents, sales and orders are reportedly below year-ago levels by as
much as 9 percent.

But for an equal number, sales and orders are above

1991 levels, with gains reaching 20 percent.
generating mixed signals.

Recent trends are also

Over the last month or so, half of the

contacts have observed a modest improvement in demand, largely from the
auto industry; the others have seen signs of renewed weakness.

Orders

for defense and commercial aircraft products are weakening, and regional
computer companies have announced operating losses and declines in
revenue in the second quarter.

In addition, several contacts express

concern that formerly robust European and Japanese markets may be
slowing; by contrast, Latin American prospects are said to be taking a
turn for the better.
A majority of manufacturing contacts report that employment is
unchanged from or slightly below year-ago levels, but a minority cite
gains of 7 to 10 percent.

Moreover, by contrast with recent periods,

most contacts expect to maintain their work force at its current size.
A minority plan declines.
Most contacts indicate that capital spending in 1992 is unchanged
from or below 1991 levels.

This generally cautious approach reflects

ongoing concerns about debt levels and liquidity needs; some companies
are requiring divisions planning capital projects to generate the
necessary cash themselves.

Despite their current caution, several firms

plan increased capital spending in FY 1993.

Investment goals include

expanding capacity, launching new products, meeting environmental or
communications needs, and cutting costs.

Small business contacts still

report difficulty in obtaining bank loans, but most have found
alternatives;

suppliers are now making credit available, even for

capital projects.
Input prices were generally said to be stable.

Some contacts

indicate that they are still able to negotiate "deals" and continue to
be pleasantly surprised by price developments.

Nevertheless, rubber-

related prices reportedly rose 2 to 4 percent on July 1, and a few
respondents expect prices for paper and petroleum-based products to
start up shortly.

Respondents' selling prices are generally flat to

down, with some discounting continuing both in this country and abroad.
Several contacts mentioned that the auto companies are demanding price
reductions, even on existing business.

Only a minority of respondents

have raised prices; the maximum increase was 3 percent.
Half of the respondents express optimism about their own company's
prospects for the rest of the year.

However, with recent trends so

diverse, most contacts expect the U.S. economy to show little net
change.

Citing uncertainty, the debt overhang, and the steep yield

curve, they see continued small gains as the most likely outcome through
the end of 1992.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports on District developments continued mixed in recent weeks.
Department store sales results varied widely in June though most
contacts reported better-than-expected gains.

Office leasing activity

showed some further improvement and several areas experienced a decline
in vacancy rates.

Conditions in the residential construction market

have been somewhat mixed, however, and unemployment rates rose in June
to their highest levels since the early 1980s.

Most loan officers

surveyed at small and midsized banks noted no change in their
willingness to lend but lackluster demand.
Consumer Spending
Sales results at District department stores varied widely in June
though most contacts reported better-than-expected gains.

The targeted

levels were quite modest in some cases, however, and one chain had
results that were below both plan and substantially below its yearearlier level.

When compared with June 1991 changes ranged from

-11 percent to +17 percent with most stores reporting gains between 4
and 9 percent.
Despite unusually cool weather, demand for men's and women's
clothing was strong and one chain experienced its best Father's Day week
in four years.

Furniture and other household items also sold well.

As

a result of the generally positive sales results, inventories at most
department stores were on or somewhat below plan.

With regard to the

outlook, respondents were still fairly cautious though they were hopeful
that visitors to New York's Columbus quincentennial celebration and the
Democratic convention would provide a significant stimulus to July sales.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Conditions in the residential construction market have been

II-2
somewhat mixed in recent weeks.

Homebuilders in two western and central

New York areas reported a good response to this year's spring home shows
with considerably better sales than a year earlier and some pickup in
new orders as well.

Sales were also off to a good start at a New Jersey

site where 81 homes will soon rise.

In other areas, however, activity

was reportedly slow as consumers remained reluctant in response to
continued layoffs and economic uncertainty.
Office leasing activity showed some further improvement as firms
continued to avail themselves of lower rents and other concessions in
order to upgrade their quarters.

Several observers noted that, as

commercial space is becoming more competitive with outside areas, some
firms are cancelling plans to relocate and opting to remain in the
District instead.

As a result of these developments several areas,

including Long Island, northern New Jersey, Westchester County and midManhattan, have experienced a recent decline in office vacancy rates,
although these rates remain at high levels.

A major exception was

downtown Manhattan where firms moving to newer buildings marketed older
space and the vacancy rate rose.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates rose in June to their highest levels
since the early 1980s and, at 9.2 percent in both New York and New
Jersey, are now the second highest among 11 large states.

New York's

rate jumped from 7.9 percent in May while New Jersey's was up from
9.0 percent in May.

While these seasonally adjusted state unemployment

rates often show monthly volatility, their current high level and the
continuing decline in nonfarm employment suggest to some analysts that
the recession in the District has not yet run its course.

Moreover, the

outlook is dimmed by recent announcements of additional employment
cutbacks ahead.

In upstate New York, for example, Smith Corona will be

II-3

moving to Mexico within the next year, eliminating almost 700 jobs, and
a footwear producer will be moving to Arkansas by the end of August
eliminating another 145 jobs.

On a more positive note, a pharmaceutical

company employing 650 which had planned to relocate has instead decided
to remain in the District and two manufacturing companies have just
signed contracts with federal government agencies and could expand
employment.

In addition, the construction industry will receive a boost

from a new $235 million mixed-use tower for which land is being cleared
in Manhattan's Lincoln Center area.

Much of the building, which will

cover an entire square block and have 38 floors of apartments, together
with 8 floors of office and retail space, has already been sold or
preleased.

Reports from purchasing managers in June showed some

improvement in general business conditions in Rochester and stability in
Buffalo.
Financial Developments
Nearly all loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks

in

the Second District indicated that their willingness to lend remained
steady relative to two months ago, but the demand for loans was
lackluster.
mediocre.

Both consumer and residential mortgage demand were
The few respondents mentioning an increase in the demand for

residential mortgages attributed it primarily to refinancing activity.
However, the demand for business loans was reported as steady to
somewhat higher.
Most respondents reported no change in delinquency rates during
the past two months.

Virtually all officers reported lowering their

deposit rates but noted there was no outflow of deposits.

Rather,

deposits generally shifted from maturing certificates of deposit into
more liquid savings accounts, as customers avoided being locked into low
long-term rates.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Business conditions in the Third District in late July appeared mixed.
While manufacturers continued to report growth, other sectors were sluggish.
Reports from area manufacturers indicated that orders and shipments were on the
rise, although unfilled orders and employment were just steady.

Most retailers

said sales were running just even with or below the pace set this spring as well
Sales of summer apparel, in particular, were

as in early summer of last year.
well below plan.

Some discount stores, however, were achieving relatively good

year-over-year gains.

Bankers generally described loan demand as weak.

While

some institutions reported growth in home equity and consumer lending, on balance
loan volume is virtually flat at major banks in the district.
The outlook in the Third District business community reflects current
trends.

Manufacturers forecast continued gains in orders and output but they do

not expect order backlogs to mount.

Retailers anticipate some improvement in the

fall, but many do not expect a healthy sales pace to take hold until next spring.
Bankers generally do not anticipate an increase in loan demand soon.

They say

both business firms and consumers appear reluctant to incur more debt and are
unlikely to stop up borrowing even when the pace of economic activity quickens.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District continued to move up in July,
on net; nearly one-third of the
business,

and

manufacturers

nearly
indicated

two-thirds
that

industrial firms contacted reported improved
said

new orders

business
and

was

steady.

shipments were

On

balance,

rising.

Order

backlogs appeared to be unchanged overall, and inventories were up marginally.

III-2
Producers of nondurable goods generally gave better reports than did makers of
durable

goods.

In particular, metals producers

noted some

makers

recent

slippage

and nonelectrical-machinery

in shipments

and

On balance,

orders.

manufacturing employment was unchanged.
A majority of the manufacturers contacted for this report expect business
to continue to improve over the next six months.

They look for increases in

orders to be matched by increases in shipments, leaving order backlogs virtually
steady.

Firms with plans to step up hiring and capital spending outnumber those

that anticipate cutting back employment or capital expenditures.
Industrial prices remain generally stable, according to area manufacturers.
Despite the current increase in business, three-fourths of the plant managers
surveyed said that both input and output prices have been steady recently, and
they expect price stability to persist into next year at the least.

RETAIL
Third District

retailers gave mixed

reports

in July.

Most

of

those

contacted for this report said sales were running just even with or below the
rate achieved in the spring months of this year and in July of last year.

Auto

dealers indicated that the sales rate in July slipped from June but remained
above the year-ago pace.

Some specialty stores and discount stores were faring

better than the overall trend.
softness than strength.

In general, however, there were more reports of

Sales of summer apparel were generally running below

plan, and some merchants said their inventories of these goods were above desired
levels.

Merchants noted heightened competition as they have undertaken more

promotions to maintain planned sales levels.

Several store executives believe that sales will be

weak for the year as

a whole and that it will be difficult to maintain profitability.

While many

III-3
Third District merchants

are looking to

the fall for the first signs that

consumer spending will begin trending up, some believe that a healthy sales pace
will not be restored until 1993.
FINANCE
Third District bankers contacted in late July generally said loan demand
was weak.

A few indicated that consumer loans and home equity loans were up at

their institutions, but total lending was flat. The most recent drop in mortgage
rates

has

prompted an

increase

in mortgage

applications, much of

it for

refinancing, but bankers said the volume of applications has not been as great
as it was when rates fell at the beginning of the year.
Commercial bank loan officers do not foresee an increase in loan demand
soon.

Several said that both business firms and consumers appear reluctant to

take on new debt.

Some bankers also believe that loan demand will not rise

strongly even when economic activity accelerates; they say businesses will be
able

to

increase

output

significantly without having

to borrow to expand

capacity, and consumers will use growing incomes to improve their household
balance sheets.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

There is still little indication of a step-up in business

activity in the Fourth District, although many respondents believe that the
third quarter began stronger than the second quarter ended.

Manufacturing

continues to lead the recovery in the District, with respondents generally
anticipating that production this quarter will at least match last quarter's
increase.

Retailers report that a recent spurt in sales helped to keep

inventories near desired levels without the need to resort to the usual large
summer clearance sales.

Auto sales and production this quarter are expected

to be slightly higher than last, despite scattered production cutbacks by some
producers.

Lower mortgage interest rates have contributed to another boost in

loan refinancing, but have not yet added much to new loan activity.
Manufacturing.

Despite the recent setback in manufacturing output in

both the District and the nation, manufacturers anticipate that this quarter's
performance will match or exceed that of the second quarter.

Nevertheless,

worker recalls, if any, are on a highly selective basis.
Chemical and plastics producers report sales increases for coatings,
plastics, and special chemical products last quarter were at double-digit
rates, and some producers anticipate that strong demand will continue through
the balance of 1992.

A small producer of chemical and metal products notes

that record sales last quarter came from a variety of industries.
Respondents remark that capital spending is still primarily geared to
productivity and product quality improvement.

However, a tire producer

IV- 2

notes that rising demand for replacement tires has boosted output and profits

sufficiently to support adding to production capacity.
Capital goods producers cite continued unevenness in business.

Order

backlogs have been inching up in the machine tool industry, although net new

orders softened in recent months, according to some producers.

A diversified

manufacturer reports that their June orders rose strongly following weak
months in April and May, but a producer of industrial components indicates
that its order increases flattened in recent months.

A producer of financial

service products describes domestic demand as strong, and anticipates that
production of office equipment machinery will continue near last quarter's
high rate.

Factory sales of heavy-duty trucks recovered substantially in the

spring, and a rising trend is anticipated through the second half of the year,
according to a major parts producer.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales in July showed little, if any, increase

over June, according to District retailers, despite a recent sales flurry.
Some retailers report a step-up in sales of consumer durable goods, but
continued softness for nondurable goods.

Because their inventories are either

at or slightly higher than desired levels, they do not anticipate summer
clearance sales will be as large as in recent years.

Some retailers are

apparently promoting fall merchandise, because of a dearth of summer goods.
Retailers are planning a less-than-usual inventory buildup of fall
merchandise, not only because of uncertainty over sales prospects, but also
because of improved inventory and sales techniques.
Automotive Prospects.

Third quarter motor vehicle sales and production

are expected to be slightly higher than in the second quarter, despite a
recent cutback in production by Honda.

Sales next quarter are expected to be

IV-3
the best of the year, according to several automotive sources.

They also

note, however, that July sales were only at or slightly below anticipated
levels but inventories are still described as being generally balanced.
According to some producers, production next quarter could falter from this
quarter if sales do not continue to improve.
Auto dealers appear to be more cautious in their sales outlook than in
recent contacts.

The level of July sales may fall somewhat short of June's.

Those dealers that have begun to order 1993 models are planning to carry a
smaller inventory than they had last fall.
Residential Construction.

The latest reduction in mortgage interest rates

has not yet sparked a revival in demand for new mortgage loans in most parts
of the District.

Mortgage rates in the Cleveland area have been lowered to

between 7.6% and 8.6% for a 30-year, fixed-rate loan.

While thrifts and banks

report a strong revival in demand for loan refinancing, some major lenders
expect new loan applications in July to fall short of the June level and even
below that of a year earlier.

In the Cincinnati

area, however, where 30-year,

fixed-rate mortgages average about 8.3%, demand for new loans is reported to
be strong.
Banking.

Major lenders report no significant change in net growth in

business or consumer loans since the interest rate cuts earlier in July.

They

attribute continued softness in business loans in part, to a faster growth in
loan pay-offs than in new loans.

They also note a recent pickup in home

equity credit and mortgage refinancing.

They acknowledge that other lending

rates, such as for new cars, have been reduced only marginally.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District business conditions and attitudes in June and early July were
little changed from the weeks before.

Economic activity continued to grow

modestly, and while survey participants remained concerned about the pace and
sustainability of that growth, on balance they were optimistic about business
prospects in coming months.
finance.

Activity increased in manufacturing, ports and

Buyer traffic rose in residential and nonresidential real estate,

but sales remained flat in most areas.
flat.

Consumer spending and tourism were

In agriculture, recent rains partially reversed earlier damage to

crops.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated little change in retail activity in
recent weeks.
was stable.

Retail sales and shopper traffic were unchanged, and employment
Wholesale prices, retail prices and wages apparently rose.

Inventories increased, as did capital expenditures.
Retailers were optimistic about their prospects for the next six months.
They expected sales, shopper traffic and employment to increase.

They also

anticipated higher employee wages, wholesale prices and retail prices.

Manufacturing
Our regular mail survey of manufacturers showed that District factory
activity and general economic conditions improved moderately in recent weeks.
Respondents reported increases in shipments, new orders and employee hours.

Prices rose, and most other indicators were stable.

Manufacturers noted that,

besides poor sales, government regulations and excess capacity were their most
important current problems.
Manufacturers' forecasts for the coming months remained optimistic.
They anticipated increases in all measures of economic activity except
inventories and employment, which they thought would be stable.
Tourism
Hotels, motels and resorts throughout the District reported that
tourist activity in July was below that in June but about the same as a year
ago.

About half of the respondents reported that bookings were slightly below

last year's levels while one-third reported increases.

Several respondents

attributed the increases to an unusually good Fourth of July weekend, while
those who experienced declines blamed general economic conditions.

About half

expected tourist activity to pick up through the remainder of the summer.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions improved somewhat over the last six weeks.
demand, while still weak, had strengthened.

Commercial loan

Consumer loan demand was steady.

Loan rates had fallen somewhat for commercial, consumer and mortgage loans.
Mortgage demand rose, but the bulk of the activity was in refinancings rather
than in originations.
Ports

Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--reported that both imports and exports increased in June from
May.

Compared with a year ago, import activity was mixed, while export

activity was generally higher.

Export activity was expected to continue

increasing at Charleston and at Hampton Roads, but to decline at Baltimore
during the next six months.
Residential Real Estate
A telephone survey of real estate agents and homebuilders indicated that
activity had been mixed in the residential market since mid-June.

Many

respondents noted that buyer inquiries had increased, but that sales had
remained generally flat.

Respondents in several jurisdictions reported growth

in the sales of lower-priced homes.

Home sales appeared to have risen more in

South Carolina than in other jurisdictions in the District.
Several respondents believed that a homebuyer's market existed and that
many sellers had lowered prices.

Most respondents said that lower interest

rates had not improved their sales.

As in previous surveys, some real estate

agents said that the concern of prospective clients about their job security
was causing them to delay home purchases.
Nonresidential Real Estate
Real estate agents surveyed by telephone said that the nonresidential
market had been flat or had grown slowly over the past six weeks.

On balance,

the reports suggested a slight pickup in traffic across the District.
District sales and leases had been flat, although weak growth was reported by
some respondents, particularly in the Carolinas.

Rents and prices on

commercial real estate had been stable, and few nonresidential construction
starts were reported.

Most respondents thought that lower interest rates were

having little effect on their markets.
Agriculture
Recent scattered rain throughout the District has brought some relief to
heat- and drought-stressed crops, according to agricultural analysts.

They

V-4
indicated that unfavorable weather in early to mid-July probably had reduced
corn yields somewhat and had slowed the development of soybeans.

Hay and

pasture conditions were said to be fair to poor, but were expected to rebound
quickly with the rain.

Vegetable crops and tobacco were reported to be in

generally good condition, with harvesting underway.
Carolinas, however, was poor.

The peach crop in the

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: Contacts in the Sixth District generally reported that the economy is slowly
but steadily expanding. Fewer retailers reported gains than in earlier months, but a growing
number of auto dealers have begun to note a pickup in showroom traffic and sales.
Manufacturers in a broad range of industries continue to record modest increases in output, and
a small number of firms have reported adding production workers recently. Developers noted
some recent leveling in single-family home building, but activity is improved over weak year-ago
levels. Commercial construction, however, has not improved. Most banks report higher quality
loan portfolios, and there were few reports of constrained credit supply. Wages and prices have
remained essentially unchanged.
Consumer Spending: After several months of broad-based increases in retail sales,
reports in June and early July were mixed. Sales of durable home furnishings and appliances
have slowed, though sales of non-durables continue to show modest strength. Retailers are being
very conservative in their sales projections for the rest of 1992 and many stores are maintaining
historically lean inventory levels. Some report that they will not commit to adding jobs until
there is a more substantial improvement in consumer demand.

Reports from auto dealers,

however, generally have been more positive: a small but growing number of dealers across the
District noted improvement in both showroom traffic and sales in the last six weeks.
Manufacturing:

Manufacturers in a broad range of industries report modest

improvement in production and new orders. Textile and apparel firms have been particularly
busy, especially producers of knits and active wear. Residential construction and remodelling
continues to stimulate carpet, home appliance, furniture, and cabinet makers; although new
orders have been slowing at some plywood producers. Producers of electronics in Georgia and

Florida report current increases in production and shipments and further expectations of
improvement in activity over the next six months.

Firms in each of these industries have

reported that they are either lengthening factory workweeks or adding new employees.
However, business remains weak in some important sectors. Companies linked to
commercial construction continue to report declines in production and new orders. Firms
dependent upon defense department contracts expect reduced factory workweeks and permanent
job losses.
Construction: Most realtors report that home sales gained modestly in June and early
July. However, some noted that gains have slowed in comparison with the first quarter of the
year. Again, first-time home buyers have contributed the most to recent sales, but some realtors
have noted improvement in the upper price ranges as well. Builders report that single-family
construction has leveled off this summer, but that new building activity remains above weak
year-ago levels. Most contacts have not observed any improvement in multifamily construction,
although there are reports of low apartment vacancy rates in certain markets.

Commercial

building remains slow, with most activity coming either from private built-to-suit or government
building projects.
Financial Services: Bankers report that loan demand was mixed in the region in June
and early July. Residential lending slowed noticeably from the first quarter of the year, although
many institutions reported a pickup in mortgage refinancing applications in the first two weeks
of July.

Many banks noted an improvement in consumer lending for new and used auto

purchases in June, but commercial loan demand remains weak. Bank loan portfolio quality
continues to improve and several banks noted that they have become more aggressive in seeking
new lending opportunities.

Wages and Prices: Most contacts reported that wages and prices remained stable in
June. Firms that were hiring during the period found that ample supplies of labor allowed them
to hire new workers at existing wage levels.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. The Seventh District economy continued to recover in June and early July, but at a
slower pace than in May. Establishment survey data indicate that the recovery in District employment
has been better than the national average, although recent reports on District labor markets were mixed.
Retailers indicated that consumer spending growth remained sluggish but positive. Manufacturing
activity continued to lead the District's recovery, and increased motor vehicle production is expected to
make a significant contribution to industrial production in the third quarter. District housing activity
regained some momentum after recent declines in mortgage interest rates. Bank lending in the District
continued to improve in recent weeks, although gains were concentrated in new residential mortgage
loans and refinancing. Timely rains have alleviated the drought concerns of District crop farmers, while
conditions faced by livestock farmers were mixed.
Employment. Establishment survey data indicate that District employment through May had
recovered roughly one-fourth of its recessionary downturn, but more recent reports on labor markets were
mixed. The employment component of most District purchasing managers' surveys generally continued
to move higher in recent months, reaching levels consistent with stable or modestly increasing
manufacturing employment. A private survey showed improvement in firms' hiring expectations for the
third quarter, with reports for firms in the Midwest exceeding the national average. Some individual
manufacturers reported plans to make significant employment increases in coming months. However,
new hiring continues to be countered by the effects of previously announced layoffs, and there was little
slowing in layoff announcements in District newspapers. Help-wanted advertising around the District has
shown modest improvement in recent months, while initial claims for unemployment insurance gradually
moved higher in most District states in June and early July.
Consumer Spending. Consumer spending growth was flat to slow in most areas of the District
in June and early July. One large retail chain reported that sales in District markets were mixed, but yearover-year comparisons generally strengthened after some softening in trend was noted early in the second
quarter. This contact reported that inventories were again in line with plan, after the unplanned increases
noted in recent months. Another large retail chain reported that sales in District markets softened during
June and early July, after exhibiting strength (relative to the national average) through most of last year
and into 1992. Consumers' efforts to pare debt levels continued to dampen sales, according to this
contact, although renewed strength in mortgage refinancing was expected to contribute to improvement in

VII-2
sales during the rest of 1992. A survey of retailers in Illinois and Indiana indicated some loss of
momentum during May, while a retailers' association in Wisconsin stated that its membership continued
to be relatively insulated from demand weakness in other parts of the country. Reports from auto dealers
and manufacturers indicated that retail sales closure rates continued to move upward in recent months.
One of the largest auto dealers in the District reported that sales and traffic strengthened through the end
of June. However, this contact noted that business softened in recent weeks, following the release of the
unemployment rate for June.
Manufacturing. Manufacturing activity continued to lead the District's recovery through June
and early July. Purchasing managers' surveys in Chicago, Detroit, Milwaukee, Iowa, and Western
Michigan generally indicated continued gains in production and new orders. Slower growth was
suggested by several of these surveys during June, but the Chicago survey for July suggested expansion
picked up further upward momentum, led by production and new orders. Reports from individual
manufacturers were mixed, with strength concentrated in production of consumer durable goods. An
appliance industry representative reported that industry shipments growth increased during the second
quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis, while orders continued their gradual recovery through June. One
appliance manufacturer reported that orders and shipments have exceeded expectations thus far in 1992,
although some concern with customer inventory building was also noted. Steel production in the District
has been flat in recent months, although one manufacturer noted that orders were building somewhat
faster than normal seasonal patterns, citing strength in orders for steel used in autos, appliances, and
residential building. Several contacts noted that third quarter motor vehicle production plans are solid,
calling for a significant increase from the second quarter.
Reports on capital goods production were mixed. A large truck manufacturer reported that
heavy-duty truck orders and production continued to exhibit marked improvement in recent months. This
contact stated that orders from customers in the District have been exceeding the national average. A
large electronics firm reported modest but consistent improvement in orders through June, citing renewed
strengthening in the market for computer hardware. Several capital goods producers noted that weakness
in domestic orders was at least partially offset by export gains.
Residential Real Estate and Construction. Reports from housing industry contacts were
generally positive, with renewed strength in sales and construction following recent declines in mortgage
interest rates. One of the largest realtors in the District reported a record month for June, in part due to
market share gains. A realtors' association stated that existing home sales had strengthened since early

VII-3
July. A homebuilders association reported that strong construction gains earlier in the year had been
followed by some softening in recent months, with relative strength noted in home improvement activity.
One homebuilder stated that cyclical swings in activity have been concentrated in the upper end of the
market, and reported renewed strength in demand for higher-priced homes following recent declines in
mortgage rates. A realtor stated that housing starts may be exhibiting higher volatility due to lower
inventories of land held by homebuilders. A large manufacturer of plumbing and furniture products
stated that orders were still increasing, albeit at a decreasing rate, while shipments in the second half of
the year were expected to continue to improve. Increased residential building activity and highway
construction has generated consistent improvement in cement shipments in the District for the past five
months.
Banking. Lending by District banks continued to improve, with gains concentrated in residential
mortgage lending. Many contacts noted that recent declines in mortgage rates have again stimulated
refinancing activity, although new mortgage lending also rose in recent weeks. Reports on commercial
and industrial lending activity were mixed. A middle-market lender reported that credit line utilization in
June and early July remained relatively flat, and stated that capital spending among its customers had
been insensitive to interest rate changes. Another middle-market lender reported that borrower demand
softened again in recent weeks. Several law firms involved in loan contract negotiations reported
increasingly aggressive lending postures among banks, but a pickup in borrower demand remained
relatively sluggish.
Agriculture. Frequent and extensive rains throughout the District during July have offset earlier
drought concerns and significantly enhanced the condition of growing crops. Reflecting this, an
unusually high proportion (about 85 percent) of the corn and soybeans in Illinois, Indiana and Iowa was
rated "good" or "excellent" as of July 20. However, the frequent rains have also delayed the completion,
and the quality, of the District's wheat harvest. Low temperatures continue to slow the pace in crop
development and add to the risk that a frost could yet cause damage to fall-harvested crops. Conditions
for the District's livestock farmers are mixed. Following a sharp downturn last year, milk prices have
rebounded considerably this year. However, the continuing upswing in pork production will weigh
heavily on hog prices this fall and well into next year. The latest estimates show hog numbers are up 5
percent from a year ago and 10 percent from two years ago, both in District states and nationwide.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Overall,

District

Manufacturing reports are mixed, while nonmanufacturing reports

slowly.

Increased government regulation is

indicate continued growth.
to

be

increase

to

continues

activity

economic

hampering

throughout

activity

business

small

District.

to the beginning of the year,

Construction activity has slowed relative

and real estate loan demand has declined recently.

Reports of demand for

are mixed.

however,

other consumer and business loans,

the

reported

District crops

in good condition because of recent rains.

are, for the most part,
Manufacturing
District

reports

manufacturing

indicate

employment overall as some firms report expansions
others

report

layoffs

and

manufacturer

will

begin

Greenville,

Mississippi,

relocations.

renovating
this

an

fall,

For
old

change

little

and growth,

example,

an

food-processing

hiring

1,000

people

in

while
apparel

plant
upon

in
its

completion next year, while a furniture maker in Mississippi is expanding
capacity,

adding 125 employees.

In addition, a Michigan-based maker of

automobile seat covers expects to employ up to 400 people by January at
its new plant in Kentucky.
Offsetting these gains,

a St. Louis-based defense

contractor,

who has been reducing

employment

additional 222 people.

An automaker announced that 500 will be laid off

for almost

at its St. Louis plant this fall as it

two years,

laid

decreases production .

off an

A steel

VIII-2

manufacturer will eliminate 150 jobs when it closes an Illinois mill next
In addition, a Louisville

year to move production outside the District.
clock maker, employing 185, closed.
Nonmanufacturing
District

nonmanufacturing

firms

continue

show

to

employment

For example, a major retailer plans to add 400 employees at its

growth.

St. Louis operation before the end of the year, while a motor freight
will

company

about

employ

150 workers

relocating its southern Mississippi hub.

in

Memphis

fall

this

A telecommunications company in
The St.

Memphis added an additional 100 employees because of expansion.
Louis

health

industry added

services

500 jobs in

May,

bringing

workforce

the

On the

industry's total increase over last year to almost 4,000 jobs.
other hand,

after

a major bank that has already been reducing its regional
decided

to

close

its

Missouri

operation

next

year

to

consolidate in Delaware because of that state's more favorable banking
and insurance laws.

Small-business

contacts

throughout

the District

report that increased government regulations have hampered growth and
driven up business costs.
Construction and Real Estate
District construction activity has slowed from its early 1992
pace.

Several contacts report that the recent level of single-family

home permits is on par with its year-ago level; this contrasts sharply
with early 1992,

Contacts

year ago.
slowdown

when the level of permits was up substantially from one

is

are divided,

a "temporary

however,

lull" or whether

housing demand has been satisfied.

about whether
it

indicates

the

recent

that pent-up

VIII-3

Banking and Finance
sheet

Recent balance

data

from two samples

Total loans

give conflicting signals as to the direction of loan demand.
District banks

outstanding at large
percent)

than

they had during

This turnaround is

increased more in

the previous

banks

of District

May and June

two months

(0.5

(0.1 percent).

attributable to strength in business loans,

which rose

0.6 percent over the period, compared with a 0.9 percent decline over the
prior two months.

Consumer loan demand,

on the other hand,

has weakened,

with loans outstanding declining 0.6 percent in May and June after a 2
percent increase in March and April.
Loans outstanding at a group of small-

and mid-sized banks

less in May and June than they had in March and April.

rose

Business loans

outstanding declined 0.6 percent over the current period after a previous
1 percent increase, while real estate loans increased much less than they
had in the prior period.

Consumer loans were the bright spot, increasing

0.5 percent after a slight decline in March and April.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Most crops,

aided by recent rainfall

are in good condition.
most District states,
good to excellent.
had to

apply twice

throughout

the District,

The winter wheat harvest is nearing completion in
with yields and test weights generally reported as

Some Mississippi cotton growers report that they have
the normal quantities

of herbicides because of dry

conditions earlier this spring and a recent outbreak of weeds.

Contacts

in Kentucky and Mississippi report higher prices for new farm machinery.
After an exceptionally
pine

rapid pace of first-quarter

production,

lumber mills report slightly lower production and exports.

prices are reported to have declined recently.

Southern
Lumber

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
Economic conditions in the Ninth District declined somewhat. Labor markets, which had
been showing modest signs of improvement, deteriorated. Retail sales continued to exhibit only
modest growth relative to last year's level. Home and truck sales were relatively strong, while
automotive sales were reported to have fallen off recently. Manufacturing was steady to positive in
the District, while conditions in the construction sector were mixed. Conditions in the agricultural
sector could become quite positive if the weather turns warmer this summer after a cool, wet first
half.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
Unemployment rates rose across almost the entire District in May relative to their year-ago
and month-ago levels. The only exceptions to this pattern were the Upper Peninsula where rates
were substantially lower than their month-ago level, and western Wisconsin where unemployment
rates were mixed. There have been a number of layoffs in the District, suggesting that unemployment may continue to be high when June and July figures become available. Also consistent with
the rise in unemployment was the moderate growth in nonagricultural employment in May. June
numbers are available only for Minnesota where nonagricultural employment was only 1 percent
higher than its year-ago level. On the slightly brighter side, a recent study ranked the MinneapolisSt. Paul area fourth best in terms of job creation in a metropolitan area over the past year; however,
this may be more a sign of national weakness than of local strength.
Reported increases in prices and wages continue to be moderate with the exception of medical
costs and, in parts of the District, construction costs. A major food distributor in the District reports
that their index of retail food prices actually declined in recent months.

IX-2
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending in the District is generally moderate with some areas of strength. Major
retailers in the District reported sales increases in comparable stores in June ranging from 2 to 17
percent relative to a year ago. Sales in rural areas are reported to be slow due in part to uncertainty
over local agricultural conditions. Montana, however, reported a decline in their Canadian business.
Canadian shopping continues to be strong in North Dakota, with retail outlets in shopping
malls reporting substantial year-to-date sales increases relative to a year ago.

The Canadian

government has sought to stem the cross-border flow. Recent regulations on appliance sales and
service are reported to be having some effect on discouraging appliance sales. Additionally, in June
the Canadian government agreed to collect provincial taxes on liquor and tobacco brought across the
border. These factors, along with the greater driving distance involved, may explain Montana's
recent declines in both Canadian sales and traffic.
New car and truck sales were reported to be stronger in the District in June than they were
in the nation as a whole. However, figures for the first part of July indicate that sales have slowed
somewhat, with some dealers reporting sales declines of over 15 percent for the first 20 days of July
relative to year-ago levels. Truck sales, which have been strong in the District, are reported to be
holding up better with sales in the first part of July reported to be slightly above their year-ago level.
Home sales which sagged in April and May after being quite strong in the first quarter, rose
in June. Existing home sales in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area rebounded by 18 percent in June,
relative to a year ago, though the median sales price was down slightly from a year ago.

The

housing market is reported to be booming in parts of Montana, due in part to the continuing influx
of wealthy out-of-state buyers.
The summer vacation season is well under way and despite the cool wet weather, indications
are generally good. Tourism in the District is being aided by special events and local government

IX-3
spending to promote it. By way of example, there was a five day International Polkafest which
attracted 10,000 people to Chisholm, Minnesota, and the Country Fest which attracted 80,000 to
100,000 people over a four day period to Eau Claire, Wisconsin. Glacier National Park is reported
to be completely booked for the summer. Though crossings over the Mackinac Bridge onto the
Upper Peninsula were off by almost 2 percent in June relative to a year ago, their year-to-date level
is still 4.2 percent higher.
Construction and Manufacturing
Construction was mixed, with reports that it was booming in Montana and North Dakota,
while from other parts of the District there were more negative reports. In Minnesota, total housing
permits in May were down by 10 percent relative to a year ago. Commercial construction in the
important Minneapolis-St. Paul area continues to show weakness due to the overhang of commercial
real estate.
Conditions improved slightly in the District's manufacturing sector.

The May level of

average weekly hours in manufacturing in Minnesota of 40.5 was above its year- and month-ago
level of 39.9.

The June level of the Minneapolis-St. Paul area's average hourly earnings in

manufacturing was up 2.5 percent from a year ago.
Resource-Related Industries
Conditions were mixed in the agricultural sector. Recent cool weather has slowed crop
growth, however the precipitation that accompanied it has been most welcome. The fall harvest
depends on how warm August turns out. There has been some hail damage in a few spots. The
North Dakota mid-June index of prices received on farm products was up 4 percent from its year-ago
level, with crop price increases of 13 percent and livestock price decreases of 8 percent.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Economic growth in the Tenth District appears to have

slackened recently.

Retail sales are sluggish to moderately improved, with

new car sales holding steady.

Housing starts are steady to slightly lower,

despite lower mortgage rates.

Farm income prospects are lackluster, and

energy activity has weakened further.

Prices have been rising only slowly,

both at retail and for manufacturers' inputs.
Retail Sales.

While some retailers report a moderate improvement in

sales over the last month, others say that sales remain sluggish.

Sales of

apparel and home furnishings, however, are strong for many retailers.

Retail

price increases have moderated due to the sluggish economy and intense
competitive pressures.

Most retailers expect to post small price increases,

if any, for the rest of the year.

Retailers are maintaining current inventory

levels because sales are expected to improve later in the year.
Automobile sales over the last month were steady in most parts of the
district.

Despite some reports of credit constraints, financing is generally

available for both dealer inventories and new buyers.

Most dealers are

optimistic about future automobile sales and are reasonably satisfied with
current inventory levels.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report that input prices were

steady to slightly higher over the last month, and should remain stable over
the next month.

No firms report any significant difficulties in obtaining

materials, and several firms are experiencing shorter lead times for supplier
deliveries.

Although few firms express much dissatisfaction with current

inventory levels, most plan to reduce their stocks somewhat further.

Recent

X-2
export performance has been mixed, but most firms expect stronger exports over
the next three months.
Energy.

District energy activity remains near the low levels reached

during the 1986 energy bust.

The average number of operating drilling rigs in

district states fell from 192 in May to 187 in June, pushing the June rig
count nearly 20 percent below its year-ago level.
Housing.

Housing starts remain significantly higher than a year ago,

but are steady to slightly lower over the last month.
to remain steady for the rest of the year.

Builders expect starts

Mortgage demand is picking up

again in response to lower mortgage rates, with much of the pick-up due to
refinancings.

Respondents expect mortgage rates to be steady and demand

relatively strong over the next few months.
lower than a year ago.

The inventory of unsold homes is

The prices of most building materials have risen

gradually except for lumber, which has jumped sharply over the last year.
Higher lumber prices and stronger housing demand contributed to rising home
prices in the district over the last year.
Banking.

Loan demand rose at most reporting banks last month, while

loan-deposit ratios were virtually unchanged.

Most banks report higher demand

for commercial and industrial loans, consumer loans, and home mortgages.
Demand for residential construction loans was mixed, and flat or down for
commercial real estate loans and agricultural loans.
All respondents lowered their prime rate half
month and reduced their consumer lending rates.

a percentage point last

All banks expect their prime

rates to remain unchanged in the near future, and most banks foresee no
further change in their consumer lending rates,
unchanged.

Lending standards were

X-3
Changes in total deposits were mixed last month, with slightly more
banks reporting increases than decreases.
while large CDs fell.

Demand deposits rose at most banks,

Changes in NOW accounts, MMMDAs, and small time

deposits were mixed, and IRA and Keogh accounts were flat.

All banks reported

reducing their deposit rates along with their lending rates.
Agriculture.

Crop conditions across the district vary widely.

The

district's winter wheat harvest is almost complete in Oklahoma, Kansas, and
Missouri but just beginning in Wyoming, Colorado, and Nebraska.
average-sized wheat crop in the district is expected.

Overall, an

Plentiful rainfall

boosted yields above normal in central Oklahoma, but an early-summer cold snap
and an extensive hail storm trimmed yields in parts of Kansas and Nebraska.
Meanwhile, growing conditions have recently improved for the district's corn,
soybean, and milo crops, although cold, wet weather slowed the early
development of the crops.
The district's cattle breeding herd continues to expand slowly, with
most district ranchers just maintaining the size of their herds.

But despite

a widely expected decline in cattle prices later this year, some ranchers are
taking advantage of excellent pasture conditions to expand herds.
District agricultural bankers report no increase in farm loan demand,
even with falling interest rates.

Many farmers may be reluctant to take on

new debt in a year when prospects for farm income are lackluster.

Weak

prospects for farm income are also restraining sales of farm equipment.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

District economic activity is increasing slowly. Most beige book contacts remain
cautiously optimistic that growth will continue, although many respondents express
uncertainty surrounding the presidential election and its impact on economic conditions.
Overall, respondents indicate very little upward pressure on prices. Manufacturing activity
continues to increase slowly. Service sector activity is weak but growing. Retail sales have
increased moderately, and auto sales are rebounding strongly. Construction and real estate
markets are slow with the exception of residential home construction which has picked up
again. The oil and gas industry continues to contract. Financial institutions report stable
loan demand, but many respondents are disappointed with the level of loan demand from
quality borrowers. Some service sector, retailand auto respondents note an increase in cash
purchases. Agricultural producers report good crop development although most commodity
prices have declined slightly.
Manufacturing activity continues to increase slowly. Apparel production has risen
with particularly heavy demand for denim products. Demand for electrical and electronic
machinery is up slightly, helping to reduce inventories which remain too large. Fabricated
metal producers report increasing sales, with demand strongest from the petroleum and
petrochemical market. Prices are rising because of increases in the price of raw steel.
Demand and prices for primary metal are unchanged overall, although demand remains weak
for products related to oil exploration. Chemical producers report a slight decline in the
demand for industrial chemicals but demand remains strong for pharmaceutical chemicals
and chemicals containing freon. Environmental restrictions have increased chemical
production costs, and some producers have moved production outside the U.S. to avoid
these regulations. Demand for paper products is unchanged. Stiff competition has held

XI-2

prices stable despite rising pulp prices. Demand for lumber has risen slightly, mostly for
producers who sell within the District.
and remodeling.

Demand is strongest for residential home construction

Lumber prices have declined, however. Stone, clay and glass production

has increased. Demand is strongest from single-family homebuilding and highway
construction. Inventories of concrete rock are low and selling prices have increased.
Domestic demand for oil field equipment has been weaker than expected because of the
weak natural gas market.

Producers are optimistic about future strength in the domestic

market, however. International demand for oil field equipment has declined and producers
are expecting continued weakness. Petroleum refining producers report weaker than
expected demand. Prices have increased but costs are rising faster. Demand for food and
kindred products is generally stable. Several food wholesalers report strong vegetable sales.
Okra and peanuts, however, face strong global competition.
Service sector activity is increasing very slowly. Accounting, legal, advertising,
consulting and temporary service respondents report slight increases in sales. Contacts are
optimistic but not enthusiastic about future activity. Overall, prices are generally stable.
Several respondents note that most transactions are occurring without the use of credit.
Retail sales are increasing moderately. Respondents say that they are becoming
more confident that sales will continue to increase, although at a slower than desired pace.
Retailers report little or no price increases, and are continuing to reduce costs. Auto sales
are rebounding strongly. Dealers note an increase in cash purchases.
Construction and real estate markets are slow with the exception of residential home
construction. Residential construction picked up in June and July after a brief slowdown In
May. Inventories are tight, and selling prices have increased in high demand areas. One

XI-3

respondent noted that homebuilding is not doing as well as might be expected given such
low interest rates. Existing homes sales have fallen. Multi-family rental demand remains
steady but below expectations. Office rental demand is steady at low levels. Office sales
have picked up, but prices are 50 percent of construction costs. The industrial market is
unchanged with moderate demand at low prices. Nonbuilding construction has increased
recently because of increased highway construction which is expected to continue rising.
Crude oil prices have been averaging between $21 and $22 per barrel, depending
upon the latest news from Iraq. The rig count has improved somewhat from an all-time-low
in June. The oil and gas industry continues to contract, however. A survey of oil companies
shows that they are cutting domestic exploration spending. A very cold spring and a heat
wave in the South have kept natural gas prices moving upward. January futures prices have
climbed to above $2.00 per million Btu, about a 69 percent increase from the January 1992
average spot wellhead price.
District financial institutions report stable loan demand. Many respondents, however,
are disappointed with the level of loan demand from quality borrowers. The residential real
estate market, however, has been supporting good loan demand from new loans and
refinancings. Liquidity remains plentiful. Loan demand is expected to remain flat over the
next three months.
District agricultural conditions have improved. Producers report good crop
development, with particularly good peach, orange and vegetable production. Most
commodity prices continue to decline. Livestock prices have remained stable for the past
month but are well below last year's prices. Severe weather conditions earlier in the year
have delayed production and raised costs In some areas.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions remain weak in California, but are improving moderately in other
District states. In California, further cutbacks are reported in aerospace and defense-related
manufacturing. In addition, the state's fiscal problems threaten layoffs in education and other
government services. Outside of California, moderate improvement is reported in retail trade, nondefense manufacturing, and residential construction. The strongest conditions remain in Utah and
Idaho, but drought is threatening agriculture in certain sections of the Pacific Northwest. Overall
business sentiment declined since our last report. Little upward pressure on wages and prices is
reported.
Business Sentiment
Twelfth District business leaders are less optimistic than they were at our last report. Only
one-third of our respondents now expect the real economy to expand during the next four quarters at
a rate of at least 2.5 percent. This proportion is down from one-half in June. Almost two-thirds of
our respondents expect output to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent. The proportion of
respondents expecting improvement in employment, consumer spending, investment, and housing
starts also declined, with the proportion expecting a decline in the unemployment rate over the next
four quarters dropping from two-thirds to one-third. Most respondents expect little change in the rate
of inflation.
Wages and Prices

Contacts continue to report little upward pressure on wages in District markets. Salaries in
some sectors of California higher education are expected to decline by 5 percent, and only nominal
increases are reported for state and city workers in Arizona. In Hawaii, proposed wage increases for

XII - 2

hotel workers may be delayed one year. In California, wage negotiations in the construction sector
are reported to have been settled with no increase in labor costs. A wage settlement in the forest
products industry, however, calls for an average 3.5 percent annual wage increase over the next two
years.
Price changes are reported to be modest except for health care and insurance. Several
respondents report retail price markdowns in department and shopping center stores. Supermarket
prices are reported at last year's levels, with slight increases in non-food items balancing declines in
food products. Drought conditions, however, are raising utility prices in certain sectors of the Pacific
Northwest. Due to the state's budget crisis, higher education fees for California's state universities
are expected to climb 40 percent.
Retail Trade and Services
Contacts with major retailing operations report gradual improvement in department and
discount store sales across much of the District. Sales were reported as "very soft" in June by one
major retailer, but picking up in July. Sluggish conditions continue in southern California. Contacts
report that auto sales are up slightly in California, but down in Arizona after a strong first quarter.
Auto dealers in Utah report good sales. Some deterioration in consumer confidence is noted by many
contacts, particularly in California where the state budget crisis and defense reductions threaten
further employment losses.
In Utah, strong expansion is reported in computer services, medical/health services, and
engineering and management services. Layoffs in the insurance industry, however, are reported in
California. Fiscal problems in California (and to a lesser degree property tax limitations in Oregon)
are having a significant adverse impact on most levels of government.
Manufacturing
Cutbacks in aerospace and defense-related industries continue across the District, with major

XII - 3

employment reductions recently announced in southern California due to production slowdowns and
consolidations. Layoffs are reported in aerospace in Utah, and defense cutbacks have been felt even
in the otherwise robust Idaho manufacturing sector. The recent weakening of airlines' financial
positions due to fare wars has raised concern about further cancellations of commercial aircraft
orders. Electronic components manufacturing remains weak in most District markets.
Outside of defense and aerospace, conditions are improving modestly. In the Pacific
Northwest, improvement is reported for fabricated metals, industrial machinery, and the region's
shipyards. In Utah, production is expanding in office furniture, food products, and automotive
airbags. Contacts report stable to declining employment in the utility industries. Railroad
employment remains strong, however, due to increasing rail traffic.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Despite some recent rains, the sixth year of drought is affecting agriculture adversely in many
parts of the Pacific Northwest. Contacts report a shift to drought tolerant (but less valuable) crops
like grains. Even so, winter wheat yields are reported at only 85 percent of average. Water quality
problems are reported, and reduced flows threaten trout streams and fish hatcheries. In Idaho, the
drought could move up the timing of the potato harvest, affecting quality. Uncertain log supply and
weak housing activity in California continues to hurt the lumber and wood industries in Washington
and Oregon. A moderate decline in lumber prices is reported for the last two months, following good
conditions earlier in the year.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity varies substantially across District markets. The
strongest conditions are in Utah, Idaho, and eastern Washington. Property sales in Salt Lake City
are reported up 25 percent from a year earlier, and the combined value of Idaho construction is up 57
percent from a year earlier. Home construction and remodeling work is reported to be expanding in

XII - 4

Oregon, where dry weather has advanced the start of the summer construction season. Home sales in
Oregon for May were reported up 14 percent from their year-earlier level. Residential construction
in Arizona continues to improve, though little commercial and industrial activity is reported. The
housing market in California, however, is reported sluggish. New home construction remains weak,
with permits for the first five months of 1992 down 12 percent from a year earlier. Sales of new and
existing homes have rebounded somewhat from the weak conditions of late 1991, but remain below
their year-earlier levels. Commercial real estate conditions remain depressed in southern California,
with transaction prices of some properties falling substantially below replacement costs.
Financial Institutions
In general, contacts in financial industries report flat to slightly improving conditions.
Downsizing continues in California due to mergers, cost containment, slow loan demand, and
increased problems in loan portfolios. Several southern California bankers expect future staff cuts.
Large California banks are reporting declines in commercial, consumer, and real estate lending. The
bulk of real estate lending is for refinancing rather than for new loans. Soft loan demand has allowed
California banks to make sizeable additions to their securities holdings. The banking industries in
Utah and Idaho continue to enjoy favorable business conditions. Mortgage and consumer loan
demand is very strong, while commercial loan demand is stable. Many banks across the District
report sizeable shifts from banks into liquid money fund accounts or into higher yield bond funds in
response to lower interest rates.

