SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

May 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUM M ARY

................................................

First District--Boston ..........................................
Second District--New York

.....................................

Third District--Philadelphia ......................................
......................................

Fourth District--Cleveland

... ...

11-1-1

...

IVI-1

Fifth District--Richmond ........................................
Sixth District--Atlanta

.........................................

Seventh District--Chicago ......................................
Eighth District--St. Louis .......................................
Ninth District--Minneapolis

.....................................

Tenth District--Kansas City

.....................................

Eleventh District--Dallas

.......................................

Twelfth District--San Francisco

..................................

..

VIII-1
IX-1

...
...
..

X-1
XI-1
XI-1
XII-1

i
SUMMARY*

According to contacts across the country, economic activity has increased further
since the last survey although conditions remain uneven across regions and sectors. The
Chicago, Atlanta, Richmond, and Cleveland districts report noticeable improvement, while the
Dallas, St.Louis, Kansas City, and Minneapolis districts report continued moderate rates of
economic expansion. The San Francisco, New York, Boston and Philadelphia districts report
continued sluggish economic activity. These districts, however, report either slightly
improved conditions or increased optimism about the near-term outlook.
Manufacturing activity has picked up in most regions of the country. Continued
growth in residential construction has been widespread. Many districts report gains in retail
sales. Several regions, however, report continued declines in commercial construction,
energy extraction and defense manufacturing. While the demand for non-mortgage loans
generally is reported as weak, there has been some pickup in demand for these loans in
several regions. Producer and consumer prices are reported as generally stable.
Retail
Retail sales have increased in most regions and many districts report improved
optimism about future sales. Sales of most product lines have improved. The Chicago and
Richmond districts note particular strength in consumer durables such as home furnishings
and appliances. Several other districts note gains in nondurables. Retail respondents in the

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and based on information gathered before
April 27, 1992. This document summarizes comments received from businesses and other
contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal
Reserve officials.

Chicago area note that much of the lost sales due to recent flooding downtown was made up
by increased sales in the surrounding areas. Auto sales have increased in many areas. The
most notable exception to improved retail sales is found in the Philadelphia district which
reported a recent decline in sales. The San Francisco, New York and Boston districts report
mixed retail performance.
Manufacturing
The most significant change since the last Beige Book survey appears to have
occurred in the manufacturing sector. While respondents in the last survey generally
described the manufacturing sector as weak, respondents have been significantly more
upbeat recently. The Chicago and Cleveland districts report some improvement in motor
vehicle and steel production and pronounced gains in orders for capital goods such as
machinery and electrical equipment. Respondents in the Richmond district note strong
increases in shipments and orders across many industries.
Respondents in the Atlanta and Dallas districts report strong gains in manufacturing
industries tied to residential construction and moderate gains in industries such as apparel,
paper and electronics. However, the manufacturing gains in the Dallas district have been
offset somewhat by continued declines in energy-related industries such as oil field
equipment. The San Francisco and Boston districts note continued weakness in defenserelated manufacturing.
Construction
Residential construction has continued to increase in most districts although the rate
of growth appears to have slowed. The San Francisco district reports widespread gains in
residential construction; the New York district reports increased optimism from home

builders; and the Philadelphia district reports an overall slight increase in home construction.
Several districts report increased pressure on home prices partly due to sharp increases in
the cost of lumber. Respondents report that lumber prices have increased because of a
sharp rise in lumber demand, harvesting restrictions and a recent trade levy on Canadian
lumber. Commercial construction remains weak in most markets.
Services
Tourism and convention activity is increasing in the Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis and
Richmond districts. Respondents in the San Francisco district report continued weakness in
newspaper advertising revenue, due partly to low levels of real estate advertising. Residential
real estate brokerage activity is reported to have increased in most markets across the
country. The Dallas district reports that the demand for legal and litigation services remains
strong and that accounting and consulting firms are seeing an increase in demand from
companies seeking to increase productivity.
Agriculture and Energy Extraction
Several districts report favorable agricultural conditions although extreme weather has
slowed planting in some areas of the country. Kansas City and St. Louis report that the
winter wheat crop is in mostly good condition. Agricultural prices have generally declined.
Although cattle prices remain at very high levels, Kansas City reports that cattle feeders
remain wary that sluggish consumer demand for beef could trigger another drop in prices
later this summer. Several districts report ample liquidity for agricultural lending.
The energy sector continues to decline. Oil and natural gas prices remain at low
levels, and the drilling rig count continues to fall. Oil and gas industry respondents in the
Atlanta district report that business activity continues to decline and that further layoffs are

likely over the next few months. St. Louis reports that year-to-date coal production has
declined about 6 percent from a year earlier.
Bank Lending
Bankers in several regions report that loan demand has begun to increase, although
demand remains uneven. Most banks across the country report an increase in mortgage
originations and a slowdown in mortgage refinancings. Most regions continue to report soft
demand for non-mortgage loans. The Richmond, Dallas and St. Louis districts report
increases in non-mortgage loans. Boston reports that some small businesses continue to
have difficulty obtaining bank credit, but contacts have found satisfactory alternatives,
particularly trade credit from suppliers.
Prices
Producer and consumer prices are generally reported as stable. Boston reports that
manufacturing prices are flat to down and that retailers are feeling pressure to lower prices.
The San Francisco district reports little upward pressure on prices, with the exception of
lumber and health care. Atlanta reports that while most contacts report relatively stable input
prices, a growing minority of factory contacts are reporting increasing material prices.
Respondents in the Kansas City district also note stable material prices, but prices are
expected to rise slightly over the next few months.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

A majority of First District business contacts express guarded
optimism that a recovery is imminent, if not already under way.

Retail

results were mixed, however, and retail respondents voice concern that
the recovery may not reduce the intense competitive pressures within the
sector.

Manufacturing contacts say that first-quarter sales were equal

to or slightly above year-ago levels.

With most manufacturers observing

mixed signals, they are somewhat less confident than the retailers; half
conclude that a modest recovery has begun, but others see no significant
change.

All intend to pursue a cautious approach towards employment and

inventory management; manufacturers' capital spending plans are more
expansive.
Retail
Sales results for First District retailers were mixed in the first
months of 1992.

Those with increases in sales attribute their

performance to a strong market position rather than to regional economic
conditions.

Other retailers report that sales are flat or slightly

lower than a year ago, and blame these declines on the delayed arrival
of spring weather.
Prices remain under pressure as consumers hesitate to spend and
retailers prepare for the entry of rivals from outside the region.
While the cost of goods is generally stable or declining, price
competition continues and is expected to intensify over the next two
years as new entrants seek market share.

At present, gross margins and

profits are stable, while inventories are closely monitored.
Employment and capital spending plans generally vary with
retailers' sales performance.

Firms with sales increases are adding new

I-2
personnel to staff new locations.

Others are limiting capital spending

to improving existing facilities while holding employment and wage
levels steady.

Even though they expect further consolidation in their

market, virtually all retailers believe the New England economy is
currently bottoming out or beginning to improve.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturing contacts indicate that U.S. sales
were either even with or modestly above year-ago levels in the first
quarter.

Reported increases ranged from 2 to 8 percent.

Most

respondents are receiving mixed signals, with pockets of strength
offsetting pockets of weakness.

Several contacts report improved demand

for housing- and auto-related products, sporting goods, and some
telecommunications equipment.

By contrast, commercial construction,

aerospace, and defense remain relatively weak markets.

Reports on

exports were mixed, with some contacts developing new export business
and others observing a slowdown in European sales.
Most contacts report that employment is below year-ago levels,
with the declines ranging from slight to 25 percent.

Half of the

respondents plan further reductions, and one has recently instituted a
hiring freeze.

By contrast, a minority are currently seeking small

numbers of skilled workers or have returned short-time workers to
standard hours or overtime.
Over half of the manufacturers plan to increase capital spending
from its 1991 level.
such investments.

A few mentioned that 1992 would be a big year for

While equipment continues to absorb the bulk of these

expenditures, half of the firms contacted are building or expanding
facilities.

By contrast, some firms indicate that capital spending is

restrained by the need to pay down debt or match cash flow.

Small

I-3
business continues to report difficulty in obtaining bank credit.
Although banks are said to be seeking new business, they are unwilling
to lend to firms with real estate collateral or classified liabilities.
Nevertheless, most small business contacts seem to have found
satisfactory alternatives, particularly supplier credit; and several
express reluctance to return to bank lenders.
On balance, input prices are described as stable.

Sales prices

are flat to down, with a few contacts achieving increases of up to 3
percent on selected items.

Several respondents point out that long-term

contracts with suppliers or customers regulate most prices.
Half the manufacturing contacts report improved demand and believe
the economy has turned the corner.

Others, citing erratic monthly data

or new sources of weakness (like the slowdown overseas), are not yet
convinced that the recovery has begun.

All expect the upturn to be

modest; thus, all intend to remain cautious on employment and
inventories.

Several expect 1992 earnings to improve more than sales.

Outlook
The nonprofit New England Economic Project (NEEP) released its
semi-annual forecast in mid-April.

According to the forecast for the

six states, total nonagricultural employment in the region will begin to
grow in the current (second) quarter, albeit very gradually.

The

recovery is expected to be more modest in New England than the nation
through 1995.

Among industries, NEEP predicts that most of the

employment growth this year will be in services; manufacturing
employment losses are expected to continue until the end of 1992.

Even

in 1993 and 1994, predicted job growth is concentrated in services and
trade.

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports on recent developments in the District remain basically mixed but with a more
positive tone about the outlook than in recent months. District homebuilders noted increased
buyer interest and office leasing activity continued at a moderate pace. District unemployment rates fell in March. March sales results varied widely at District department stores
while the surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester moved in divergent
directions. Most loan officers at small and midsized banks indicated no change in their
willingness to lend from two months earlier.
Consumer Spending
Sales results at District department stores varied widely during March from sizable
over-the-year declines to sizable over-the-year gains. Year-to-year changes ranged from
-13 percent to +13 percent and from somewhat below to substantially above plan. However,
most contacts stressed the difficulty of evaluating their results because of the different Easter
dates this year and last. In addition, several chains hold major spring promotional events
which shift from year to year between March and April.
For the first time in many months several respondents cited furniture and various kinds
of home furnishings as the best-selling items in March. Men's and women's apparel sales
were mixed. Inventories at the end of March were generally on or slightly below plan.
Groundbreaking is scheduled for the first week in May at a long-delayed shopping
mall on Long Island and plans were announced for construction of a three-level, glassenclosed mall in the Bronx close to the huge Co-op City apartment complex. Two major
department store chains have agreed to be the anchors at the Bronx mall.

II-2

Residential Construction and Real Estate
District homebuilders report increased buyer interest during recent weeks which they
attributed to lower mortgage rates and two years' worth of pent-up demand. Attendance at
spring home shows has been greater than in 1991 and in many areas sales of new and
existing homes are relatively strong. As a result, builders are more optimistic about the
housing market than they have been in quite awhile and definitely expect sales in 1992 to be
stronger than last year's. A regional builders' association is projecting an increase in New
York State housing starts this year of about 12 percent from their record-low 1991 level.
Office leasing activity continued at a moderate pace in recent weeks as firms took
advantage of lower rents and other concessions in newer buildings to upgrade their quarters.
Nevertheless, office vacancy rates rose during the first quarter in several areas including
northern New Jersey, Westchester County, and Fairfield County (Connecticut). Corporate
restructuring, moves out of the region, and, in New Jersey, a sizable amount of new
construction, were major factors putting upward pressure on vacancy rates. Despite these
trends, vacancy rates on Long Island and in downtown Manhattan showed some improvement.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates fell in March, reversing their February increases. New
York's rate dropped to 8.0 percent from 8.9 percent in February while New Jersey's declined
to 7.1 percent from 7.6 percent in February. Against March's improved unemployment rates,
the regional Bureau of Labor Statistics commissioner recently stated that, between April 1989
and February 1992, job losses in New York State totaled 500,000, the state's most severe
contraction on record. In recent months, however, job losses in both New York and New
Jersey have slowed.
The March surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester were mixed. An
increased percentage of Rochester firms reported better business conditions whereas in

Buffalo fewer firms reported an improvement in new orders and production. In both areas,
however, as has persistently been the case, the majority of firms reported stable to improved
conditions. The percentage of firms noting higher input prices declined in both areas.
A recent favorable development was New York City's announcement that it will end
this fiscal year with a surplus rather than the previously projected deficit. Due in part to
record profits on Wall Street, revenues were higher than expected. Also reflecting the
improvement on Wall Street, investment banks have reportedly hired twice the number of
MBAs as in 1991. New York City's economy is also getting a boost from the largest number
of Broadway shows in recent memory, several of which are sell-outs.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second District
indicated that they are as willing to lend as they were two months ago, although a few
respondents did report tightening their credit standards and none reported easing. The number
of banks reporting an increased willingness to make consumer loans grew slightly, to one
quarter of those surveyed, while the percentage expressing increased willingness to make real
estate or business loans declined relative to the last survey.
Loan demand was reported to be generally stable or somewhat increased. Demand for
residential mortgages remained steady, though refinancing activity slowed. Consumer loan
demand showed signs of improvement during the period, despite a weakness in the demand
for automobile loans. In addition, several respondents indicated an increase in the demand for
business loans relative to two months ago. Loan rates largely remained unchanged, although
some surveyed loan officers did indicate lowering their rates recently in response to a
downward trend evident in the market. A majority of respondents also reported no change or
a decrease in loan delinquency rates during the period, which they attributed to their increased
internal controls as well as improvements in the economic environment.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District during April appeared to be just
steady

overall,

although

were

there

some

signs

of

improvement.

Positive

indications came from manufacturers, who generally noted a second consecutive
month of growth in both shipments and orders, and realtors, who reported that
home sales were picking up and prices were firming.

A weaker situation appeared

to prevail in retailing; most Third District merchants contacted for this report
experienced a drop in sales in March and April compared to January and February.
In the financial sector, bankers generally described total loan volume as flat.
The outlook in the Third District business community is generally positive,
albeit restrained.

Manufacturers expect continued improvement and they are

planning modest increases in hiring and capital spending.

Retailers hope for a

rebound in the second half of the year, but they expect only slow growth once a
Bankers forecast moderate gains in lending in

recovery in sales gets underway.

the second half, primarily to businesses as capital spending is stepped up.
Realtors

anticipate

sustained

improvement

in

residential

markets

provided

mortgage rates do not continue to rise, but they expect commercial markets to
remain weak for some time to come.
MANUFACTURING
On the basis of reports from industrial companies in the Third District it
appeared that manufacturing activity was picking up in April.

More than a third

of the firms contacted for this report said their business was improving and
nearly

half

said

business

was

steady.

Companies

in

nearly

all

major

manufacturing sectors in the district noted improvements in orders and shipments;
the exceptions were food processors and makers of rubber and plastic products who
noted declines.
employment.

Overall, Third District manufacturers were maintaining steady

III-2
Nearly two-thirds of the manufacturers polled for
continued improvement over the next six months.

this report predict

On balance, they forecast gains

in shipments and new orders; they also expect order backlogs, which have been
stable, to increase.

While approximately half of the firms queried said they

would hold employment and capital spending level over the next two quarters, more
than one-third plan to add workers and more than one-fourth are scheduling
increased capital expenditures during the period.
RETAIL
Most Third District retailers indicated that sales in March and April ran
below the pace of January and February.

Several also said that sales were off

compared to March and April of last year.

Retailers said sales of furniture,

home furnishings, and other hard-goods were running closer to expectations than
were sales of soft goods.

Apparel, in particular, was described as weak; and

merchants attributed this partly to a late Easter and unseasonably cold weather,
and partly to the lack of a clear fashion trend in womens' wear.
The consensus forecast among Third District retailers is that recovery will
be slow and erratic.

While some look for the beginning of an upturn in the third

quarter, others believe solid improvement will not take hold until next year.
In the meantime, store executives indicated they will be focusing their attention
on cost-cutting, including employment reductions.
Auto dealers also experienced a sales slowdown in March and April.

On

balance, they expect unit sales for this year as a whole to just match last
year's results.
FINANCE
Reports from Third District bankers in late April indicated that total loan
volume outstanding at major banks had been essentially flat in recent weeks, with

III-3
gains in residential real estate lending offset by declines in business and
consumer loans.

However, several bankers said they expected residential loan

growth to taper off as a backlog of refinancing applications is worked down.
Prospects for a modest increase in commercial and industrial lending appeared to
be

improving, according

to bankers.

Several mentioned

that their regular

borrowers were considering expanded capital spending plans for the near future,
and several bankers indicated that their institutions were or would be stepping
up marketing efforts to potential business borrowers.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Residential realtors contacted in April generally indicated that home sales
were running above the year-ago pace.

Some said that the pickup in sales began

in March, largely for moderately priced new homes, and that sales of existing
homes and higher-priced houses were increasing in early April.

It was also noted

that, compared to last year, houses seemed to be selling more quickly after being
listed,

and at

their

offering prices

rather

than at

discounts.

Realtors

generally were optimistic that the pace of sales would be maintained for the rest
of the year if mortgage rates do not continue to rise.
Commercial and industrial real estate markets did not appear to be sharing
the improving health noted in residential markets.

Demand for industrial and

retail space was described as particularly weak by brokers.

Commercial brokers

continued to describe the market for office space as soft although some noted
that vacancy rates were declining in some areas.
Construction activity, overall, appeared to be flat.

While some slight

gains were indicated in residential and public construction, commercial building
activity remained at a low level.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Retail, manufacturing, and housing respondents in the Fourth

District are more optimistic than in previous months that the renewed recovery
will be sustained.

Retailers are still cautious, however, and do not plan to

build inventories.

Auto output is expected to be a small contributor to

overall output growth this quarter.

Capital goods producers are uniformly

encouraged by the recent strengthening in orders and profits.

Housing appears

to be increasing more than seasonally so far this spring and, consequently,
lenders report a rising demand for new mortgage loans, but only a scattered
pickup in business loans.

National and Regional Overview.

The recent stepped-up pace in the economy

leads Fourth District respondents to believe that renewed recovery is now on
a more sustainable growth path than was evident last spring.

A few

forecasters have raised their estimates of total output growth to a 3.5% to 4%
range late this year, but most still expect about a 3% growth rate in the
fourth quarter of 1992.
In the Fourth District, a more positive outlook is also apparent in view
of better-than-expected profits last quarter and the renewed strength in
orders, housing, and retail sales.

Purchasing agents in Cleveland, Columbus,

and Cincinnati report that gains in manufacturing activity during February and
March were as strong as or stronger than in the nation.

IV-2

Consumer Spending.

Retailers are now a little more optimistic about

near-term sales prospects in view of the unexpected spurt in sales earlier
this year.
inventories.

They are still cautious, however, and are not planning to build
Some attribute the January and February surge in sales to

temporary factors, such as aggressive clearance of winter merchandise and
income-tax refunds.

Sales in April were reported to be a little stronger than

in March, and have recently been fairly good across all lines of merchandise.
Economists associated with consumer goods expect that real consumer
spending in the second quarter will increase at about a 2% annual rate.

Most

believe that the recovery in consumer spending will be more lasting than
the revival last spring because of pent-up demand and improving
household balance sheets, but still do not see much sign of a pickup in auto
demand this season.
Most of the Big Three auto dealers contacted were more positive about the
spring selling season, while dealers of Japanese nameplate vehicles were less
upbeat than in our previous survey.

Sales of most of the Big Three dealers

have been relatively stronger in recent weeks, partly reflecting another round
of price increases for Japanese cars.
Manufacturing.

Respondents across several manufacturing industries appear

more confident than in recent months that recovery is again under way.

The

improving attitudes of management reflect a strengthening in orders and
profits last quarter.

Most manufacturers report that they are no longer

cutting inventories, but neither are they building their stocks.
Economists associated with the automotive industry estimate that new car
sales and production will improve this quarter from last, and that the
industry will be a small contributor to overall output.

Nevertheless,

IV-3

temporary layoffs may continue this quarter because of excess stocks of
specific models or because of model changeovers, according to auto sources.
Capital goods producers are more optimistic about recovery because of the
quickened pace of new orders last quarter.

A producer of small motors and

electrical equipment notes a long-awaited pickup in new orders last quarter.
A machine tool builder reports total orders last quarter were well above
those a year earlier, despite a slide in export business, and order backlogs
have been rising for the last several months.

A midsize producer of

plastic products machinery states that sales rose at a double-digit rate last
quarter from depressed conditions during most of 1991, and profits of an
industrial equipment producer soared on the strength of a rising trend in
domestic orders. Heavy-duty truck orders rose sharply in February and March,
and inquiries since then suggest another good month in April.

Consequently,

truck production is expected to rise steadily each quarter this year,
according to a major supplier.

Recovery for specialized industrial controls

apparently began last December, according to a producer who believes that
customers are gradually adding to capacity rather than simply ordering for
maintenance.

A small producer of metal castings is considering hiring more

employees in response to a recent strengthening in business, and a small
producer of electrical motors and parts for the mass transit industry reports
a surge in both orders and profits last quarter.
Economists associated with capital goods industries expect that real
investment in producers' goods will increase at annual rates at least 5% to 7%
quarterly from this quarter through the balance of the year because of revival
in traditional capital goods industries.

IV-4

Production and operating rates in the steel industry were somewhat

Steel.

better than expected last quarter, but that performance was masked by
continued weakness in steel prices and a cutback in steel capacity by a major
steel producer.

Industry sources expect steel orders and production in the

second quarter to be marginally higher than in the first quarter, although
recovery is still characterized as anemic because of weak prices and revenues.
Housing.

Housing activity in the District shows signs of a

better-than-seasonal increase, according to several mortgage lenders and
builders.

Housing starts in the Greater Cincinnati area in March were about

double the level of a year earlier, and both starts and sales in the Cleveland
area so far this spring are running well ahead of totals a year ago.

A large

mortgage lender described the market for houses below $175,000 as strong.
Land acquisition loans and loans for speculative building are said to be still
difficult to obtain, but lenders apparently have ample funds available for
builders of single-family homes.
Financial Conditions.

Banks and thrifts report a step-up in new mortgage

loans and tapering demand for refinancing from earlier this year.

A few large

banks also report a pickup in commercial and industrial loans, especially for
auto dealers, but consumer paybacks on installment loans still exceed new
loans.

One lender notes that commercial real estate activity began picking up

in April after a slower-than-seasonal period from last December through March.
Several small banks blame a tepid economy for the weak consumer and business
loan activity.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
Economic activity in the District apparently picked up steam in the last
several weeks.
broadly.

Retail activity, including sales of big ticket items, rose

Manufacturing activity also posted strong gains, as evidenced

particularly by increased production and new orders.

In the financial sector,

loan demand rose and institutions caught up with home refinancing applications
made earlier in the year.

Home sales and prices strengthened.

Commercial

leasing activity rose, although the amount of square footage absorbed was
apparently not large.

In agriculture, good weather benefited spring planting,

and agricultural bankers had ample funds to lend.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that District retail activity
continued to improve in late March and early April.

Retailers reported

increases in most indicators of activity, including sales of big ticket items.
Retailer inventories and capital expenditures were unchanged from the previous
month.
Survey respondents were optimistic about their prospects for business in
the next six months.

They anticipated that retail activity, particularly

sales and shopper traffic, would increase.
Manufacturing
Manufacturers indicated that District factory activity and business
conditions improved considerably in recent weeks.

Respondents reported strong

increases in shipments and new orders and said that most other indicators of
activity rose as well.

Producer inventories of raw materials were little

changed, and finished goods inventories apparently declined somewhat.
Manufacturers noted steady to stronger overall business conditions this month
compared to last month, nationally as well as in their local areas.
Respondents remained optimistic about their business prospects in the
next six months.

They expected increases in every indicator of activity

except inventories, which they anticipated would be flat, and they anticipated
further strengthening in general business conditions.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--reported that the volumes of exports were lower and imports
were generally higher in March than in February.
both export and import volumes were lower.

Compared with a year ago,

Over the next six months export

activity is expected to increase faster than import activity at the Port of
Charleston, while exports and imports are expected to rise at about the same
rates at Baltimore and Hampton Roads.
Tourism
Hotels, motels and resorts throughout the District reported increases in
the numbers and spending activity of tourists and convention attendees in
recent weeks.

Several respondents attributed the recent increases to the late

Easter weekend and good weather, but others were optimistic that business
would be strong in the months ahead.

They noted that their convention and

tourist bookings for the rest of the spring and summer were above last year's
bookings.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions generally improved over the last eight weeks.

Respondents

V-3
noted that rates on commercial loans moved lower and that both commercial and
consumer loan demand strengthened.
Bank respondents reported that the demand for home mortgages slowed as
mortgage rates moved up in late March.

The slowdown, they said, allowed them

to catch up with the surge in home mortgage refinancing applications that
occurred earlier in the year.

Some bankers pointed to a second, smaller surge

in refinancing activity in recent weeks as rates drifted lower.
Real Estate
Activity in both residential and commercial real estate apparently
picked up in recent weeks.

Real estate analysts and home builders contacted

by telephone reported a moderate increase in residential sales and in housing
starts in the first three weeks of April.

The prices of new and existing

homes rose slightly in many areas in the District, with some upward pressure
on new home prices said to be due to rising lumber costs.

Commercial real

estate leasing activity improved in most urban areas in the District.

Some

respondents reported that potential lessees in their areas were shopping
mainly for relatively small blocks of retail or office space.
Agriculture
Agricultural analysts and bankers in the District reported favorable
conditions for spring planting and for financing farm activity.

Analysts said

that abnormally mild weather during the first half of April had allowed
District farmers to begin spring planting ahead of schedule, but recent heavy
rains in Virginia and North Carolina may have slowed planting progress
somewhat in those states.

A late frost in the Carolinas apparently damaged

the peach crop, possibly reducing prospective yields by as much as 20 percent.

V-4
Preliminary responses to a quarterly survey of District agricultural
bankers indicated that farm credit conditions were steady in late March.

The

survey showed stable loan demand, greater-than-usual funds availability, and
falling rates on farm loans.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: Contacts around the Sixth District continue to be more upbeat in their
assessment of economic conditions. Retailers noted slightly higher sales in April, even after
adjusting for a late Easter.

Auto dealers also reported modest sales gains.

A majority of

manufacturers observed increased orders and production. Single-family home sales and new
home starts continued to improve. However, bankers reported that commercial and industrial
loan demand is spotty.

Prices and wages are generally steady, but a growing minority of

factories reported increasing prices of material inputs.
Consumer Spending: The late Easter holiday creates some difficulty in comparing
year-over-year results, but most retailers believed sales improved through mid-April even after
adjustment for this distortion.

Gains were concentrated in nondurables such as apparel, but

several department store contacts again noted stronger spending on furniture and other home
furnishings. Several district auto dealers reported modest sales increases, a clear improvement
over March. However, retailers remain generally cautious in placing new orders. Business at
a major wholesale apparel market was described as disappointing. Most retailers are waiting for
a significant and sustained recovery in sales before increasing their buying substantially.
Convention bookings and tourism in the region continue to improve.

Gains are particularly

strong in international travel to Florida.
Manufacturing:

Most manufacturing contacts reported gains in new orders and

production. Carpet makers are now seeing increased orders from residential builders; however,
commercial sales remain weak because of stagnant commercial building. Some producers of
sportswear reported strengthening orders and rising production employment. At least one apparel
company is currently building inventories in expectation of increased demand. Several paper and

packaging producers have seen increases in orders and shipments. Electronics producers noted
improved sales.
In contrast, energy extraction industries reported very discouraging conditions. Oil
and gas company contacts say that business activity continues to decline and that further layoffs
are likely over the next few months.
Construction:

Most realtors reported continued improvement in housing market

activity during March and early April. However, several noted that home buyers are interest-rate
sensitive and traffic is responding to changes in mortgage rates. Momentum is now said to be
building in the trade-up market. Resale inventories are reportedly adequate as more people place
their homes for sale in recognition of improved market conditions. Since supply has increased
with demand, few realtors report any notable increase in home prices.
New home inventories are generally declining. Consistent with this observation, most
builders reported increased single-family construction. Several expressed concern that increased
lumber costs are constraining profit margins which could potentially weaken the pace of building.
While several commercial realtors reported that the market has yet to hit bottom,
others are noting some positive signs in leasing activity and absorption. Spotty improvement in
net absorption has yet to generate a recovery in commercial development.

Most new

construction has been limited to owner-occupied or built-to-suit structures.
Financial Services: Loan demand in the region was generally unchanged from March
to April. No clear upward trend has emerged, either by type of loan, or state. Refinancing of
both mortgage and business loans continues to represent a large portion of total activity. Loan
portfolios are stabilizing in size after persistent contraction last year. Most banking contacts
report a mood of cautious optimism among businesses in their communities.

Wages and Prices: Most contacts report that input prices and wages remain relatively
stable. To date, intense competitive pressures are restraining attempts to raise finished goods
prices. However, after a year in which input price weakness was the rule, a growing minority
of factory contacts are reporting some firming of industrial materials prices.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Economic activity in the Seventh District continued to expand in recent weeks, with
some sectors appearing to gain momentum. Retail sales moved higher, and several industry contacts
offered more optimistic interpretations of sales trends than they did earlier in the year. The recent flood
in downtown Chicago resulted in lost sales and substantial property damage for area businesses. Reports
from auto dealers were mixed but generally positive, and auto suppliers expect little revision in auto
production schedules for the second quarter. Purchasing managers' surveys and reports from
manufacturers indicated a continued upward trend in industrial activity. Commercial lending activity in
the District was mixed; previous reports had been more uniformly indicative of sluggish credit markets.
Retail Sales. Retail sales activity in the District continued to improve in recent weeks, with
several retailers indicating that sales in the Midwest outperformed the national average. A large national
retailer reported a year-over-year sales gain in March despite the lack of the Easter holiday in this year's
results, and noted that sales of durable goods (which are less sensitive to Easter spending patterns) posted
a double-digit increase. A retailer specializing in women's apparel stated that sales exceeded plan in
March, and business was especially brisk (and above plan) in the first half of April. Another large retailer
stated that apparel sales strengthened in early April, joining continued solid gains in sales of home
furnishings that developed beginning in the first quarter. A large discount retailer reported sales of small
appliances and home furnishings have been particularly robust in most Midwest markets in recent
months. Reports from other businesses related to the retailing industry reinforced a picture of improving
conditions in this sector of the District economy.
However, the recent flood in downtown Chicago resulted in significant property damage and lost
output for area businesses. Retailers reported significant losses from damaged inventory and curtailed
store hours, although much of the retail sales lost in the downtown area were shifted to other local and
suburban stores. A regional analyst noted that other offsetting effects are expected to include higher
levels of construction employment in the downtown area.
Motor Vehicles. Auto industry contacts indicated some improvement in the motor vehicle
market in March and early April, especially in the light truck segment. Using its own seasonal adjustment
factors, a large automaker reported that industrywide sales of light vehicles increased in February and
March, and expected a solid gain in the second quarter. An owner of several rental car franchises noted

VII-2
that rental frequency started to improve in March, then increased dramatically in April. An auto dealer in
downstate Illinois reported that sales increased sharply in early April, after a normal seasonal pickup in
sales failed to materialize in March. This contact noted that the April gains came in spite of increasing
tension during the Caterpillar-UAW negotiations, and that the recent progress in resolving the dispute has
begun to relieve tension among area consumers. However, a large auto dealer based in Southeast
Michigan stated that a sales upturn started in March but dissipated in April, noting that consumer
uncertainty had risen following new auto industry restructuring announcements.
On the production side, a large supplier to the auto industry stated that "automakers are acting as
if second quarter is sacred," and noted that schedules for at least one large automaker are more likely to
be revised upward than downward. A supplier linked to light truck production reported that shipments in
March and April were sharply higher than a year ago. In March, heavy-duty truck order backlogs reached
their highest level since early 1990, according to an industry analyst, although build rates have not yet
shown similar improvement. Still, the orders received by a truck engine manufacturer indicated that a
heightened level of activity held through April.
Manufacturing. Surveys and contact reports suggested continued upward movement in
industrial activity in the Seventh District. The Chicago purchasing managers' survey (seasonally
adjusted) indicated expansion at a somewhat faster pace in April, and the employment component of the
survey reached a level above 50 percent for the first time since June 1990. Reflecting the slow
improvement indicated by reports from the auto industry, the Detroit purchasing managers' survey (also
seasonally adjusted) indicated expansion in manufacturing activity in both February and March. Surveys
conducted in Western Michigan and Southwest Wisconsin continued to post solid results in March. A
steel producer reported that it has become more optimistic about industry conditions than it has been over
the past 18 months, citing a noticeable improvement in orders. Machinery orders received by a large
manufacturer of heavy equipment continued to post solid year-over-year gains through March, although
much of the strength came from large individual orders from overseas. New strengthening in expected
shipments was reported by a boiler manufacturer, as customer orders were again being released after
postponements in 1991. This firm views the Midwest as its strongest market. A manufacturer of office
furniture delayed a planned layoff after some strengthening in orders. An appliance manufacturer stated
that retailers' orders have improved in recent weeks, "but they don't seem to be ordering for the back room

VII-3
yet." A machine tool manufacturer expecting a solid sales gain in 1992 reported that orders haven't
accelerated in recent weeks, noting that customers' capital spending on its products showed little
sensitivity to the business downturn experienced in 1990 and 1991.
Real Estate/Construction. Continued strength in housing activity was joined by scattered signs
of increased commercial construction. A large realtor reported that residential transactions (primarily for
home resales) continued to run at record levels through March and early April, while commercial sales
and leasing activity remain slow. At the same time, this contact stated that on the commercial side "we
are seeing some light at the end of the tunnel for the first time in 6 to 8 months," as institutional investors
have begun to indicate some willingness to consider financing new projects. A large contractor who had
been expecting no new commercial construction in his market area reported some unexpected activity had
arisen in recent months. Several financial institutions reported higher levels of activity in the residential
real estate market in the Detroit area. An association of construction contractors specializing in
homebuilding and small commercial projects throughout Wisconsin reported that the recent recession had
little impact on construction activity among its membership, and activity is now improving along a
normal seasonal pattern. The association itself recently broke ground on a new headquarters facility in
order to accommodate the need for new space. A large cement producer reported that higher levels of
bidding for small industrial construction projects joined increased public works activity in March and
April.
Banking. Reports from borrowers and lenders on commercial lending in recent weeks were
mixed, after more uniform indications of sluggish credit markets in previous reports. A large commercial
bank reported that its lending department has been marketing more aggressively in recent weeks. Much
of the new lending that has arisen has been in the residential mortgage area, although the bank has also
emphasized lending to manufacturers. A middle market lender reported sluggish demand for commercial
loans financing plant or equipment expansion. On the other hand, a law firm reported that its commercial
loan documentation business quickened in recent months, and the nature of the work indicated that banks
were making more -- and bigger -- new loans to businesses. Separately, a large bank reported that its

commercial lending (outside of real estate) has increased over the past few months. A large construction
contractor stated that its banking contacts have indicated a greater willingness to lend in recent weeks.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy

continues

to recover.

In recent weeks,

several manufacturing firms announced plans to increase employment and
expand production facilities.

Residential construction activity is being

spurred by low interest rates and good weather.
increased slightly.

District loan demand has

Preliminary estimates indicate increased acreage for

most District crops.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing employment has shown signs of increasing,
as positive

reports

from firms

continue

to outpace

negative reports.

Topping the list, a major automaker plans to spend $650 million to expand
its

Louisville

plant

and

add

1,400

new

employees

by

Northeast Arkansas continues to grow as a major steel
announcement of plant openings by two firms by January;
will hire about 300 workers.

summer

1993.

center with the
combined, they

Arkansas also will award approximately $35

million in additional highway contracts this year, an increase that is
expected

to

equipment

generate

a

manufacturer

distribution facility

in

significant
will

add

number of jobs.
150

Tennessee.

jobs

at

A construction

its

new

A major Louisville

worldwide

oil refinery

intends to hire an additional 100 persons as part of its

expansion.

In

Arkansas,

in

to

an aluminum products maker reports

meet demand,

and a

school bus

manufacturer

an increase
recalled

overtime

several

hundred

employees to resume full production.
Despite the

recovery,

throughout the District.

layoffs

and closings

continue

to

occur

A food producing plant in Evansville, Indiana,

VIII-2

announced its closing within the next year, eliminating 300 jobs.

A St.

Louis defense contractor laid off another 155 workers after cuts of more
than 11,000 in the last one and one-half years.

A maker of bathtubs and

sinks, employing 345 workers, is closing its Louisville factory by year's
end because of dwindling product demand.

An Arkansas plastics company

closed last month, eliminating more than 200 jobs.
by

some

of

children's

its

major

customers

clothing manufacturer

eliminate 310 jobs.

and
in

its

own

Because of bankruptcy

heavy

Kentucky will

indebtedness,

close

in

June

a
and

The effects of this closure may be more than offset,

however, by this winter's opening of a cookie and cracker maker in the
same town, bringing 500 jobs.
Nonmanufacturing
District

nonmanufacturing

employment

has

grown

steadily

recent months, and reports indicate continued expansion.
construction company's

contract to build housing in

doubled to $100 million.

in

A St. Louis

Israel recently was

A mortgage company intends to hire about 100

Louisville workers this year rather than the original

estimate of 75.

Health services continued to grow in St. Louis, with 400 new positions
added in February.

In

Louisville,

however,

a health organization plans

to reduce costs by cutting 275 jobs from three of its hospitals.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential
year-ago level.

construction activity continues

to improve

Favorable weather and low interest rates have

most of the recent stimulus.

from its
provided

Most builders believe, however, that the

current pace of activity cannot be sustained; nevertheless, they believe
1992 will be a good year for the industry, especially when
the two previous years.
obtaining

construction

compared with

While some builders still report difficulty in
financing,

others

report

credit

is

easier

to

VIII-3

obtain now than it was a year ago.

In Memphis, builders note that "trade

up" buyers are beginning to return to the market; earlier in the year,
most new home sales were to first-time homebuyers.

Builders also report

that new home prices

of a

have begun

to rise because

combination

of

increased demand and record lumber prices.
Banking and Finance
Loan

demand

outstanding

appears

increased

0.8

to

be

on

percent

at

the

upswing.

large

Total

District

loans

banks

from

mid-February to mid-April, while rising 1.2 percent at a sample of small
and

mid-sized

District

banks.

All

major

categories

of loans--real

estate, consumer and business--showed increases at large banks during the
period,

and

all

categories

but

consumer

loans,

which

declined

0.1

percent, rose at the small and mid-sized banks.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Early reports indicate
planted

acreage

this year

that District farmers

for corn,

rice,

intend to increase

sorghum and,

extent, cotton, but decrease acres for soybeans.

to a

lesser

Except for the northern

parts of the District, the winter wheat crop is mostly in fair-to-good
condition.

Soil moisture

is

generally adequate,

proceeding normally in most areas.
District reports

greater demand,

A major fertilizer producer in the

citing increased national corn acreage

and increased exports to the former Soviet Union.
District agricultural

lenders

suggests

virtually flat compared with last year.
March freeze

resulted only in

fruit and vegetable crops.

with spring planting

An informal survey of

that operating

loan demand

is

Despite initial concerns, the

minor damage

to most of the District's

Year-to-date District coal production is down

about 6 percent from a year earlier.

IX- 1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
The District continued to show modest signs of recovery.

Labor market conditions

generally strengthened. Consumer spending showed substantial signs of improvement with retail
sales doing fairly well, auto and truck sales picking up, and home sales showing a strong upsurge. Conditions in the District's manufacturing sector remained even, while those in the
construction sector show signs of improving. Conditions in the resource-related industries were
mixed.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
The slight reduction in unemployment rates around most of the District appears
consistent with the reduction in the number of sizeable layoffs that are being reported. The
February unemployment rate fell in Minnesota to 5.3 percent from 6.0 percent the previous
month, well below its year-ago level of 6.5 percent.

In North Dakota the February

unemployment rate of 5.0 was half-a-percent lower than the month before, but still above its
year-ago level of 4.8 percent. In Montana the February rate of 8.3 percent was substantially
below the previous month's 9.2 percent, but still above its year-ago level of 7.7 percent. In
South Dakota the February unemployment rate of 3.4 percent was below its month- and yearago level of 3.7 percent. In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan the February rate of 13.1 percent
was above both its month-ago level of 12.4 percent and its year-ago level of 12.2 percent, while
in western Wisconsin changes in various local unemployment rates were mixed relative to their
year-ago levels.
Our Directors report that wage and price pressures have generally been modest around
the District. One exception continues to be the rising cost of health care. Recently, the state

IX-2
of Minnesota enacted a health rights bill. This bill, besides providing broad insurance coverage
to 400,000 presently uninsured citizens, attempts to limit price increases for medical services.
Consumer Spending
Despite the fact that this year Easter fell in April and not March as it did last year, retail
sales in March were generally good relative to a year ago. Sales in comparable stores are
reported to range from a slight reduction to increases as high as 24 percent over March sales last
year. Inventories are reported to be in line, and retailers outlook for May and June is generally
optimistic. Part of the March sales are due to the continuing strong Canadian consumer demand
in areas close to the border.
New car and truck sales continued above their year-ago levels in the District. However,
the recent strike of mechanics at unionized car dealerships in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area has
dealers concerned that this may keep some buyers away. Dealers reports on year-to-date sales
of new trucks relative to a year ago range from even to 10 percent higher. New car sales also
have improved in the District. One major manufacturer reported that sales in the region set a
record in March. Dealers reports of new car sales in the District during the first 10 days of
April relative to their year-ago levels ranged from even to 20 percent higher, with year-to-date
sales reported to range from slightly below to 2 percent above their year-ago levels.
Home sales continue to improve in the District. March sales of existing single-family
homes in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area were up 23 percent over a year ago. The
Twin Cities year-to-date sales figure is 36 percent above its year-ago level.
We are between seasons in the tourist industry, though the general positive trend we have
been reporting appears to be continuing. Crossings over the Mackinac Bridge onto the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan established a new record for the month of March, and the total number

IX-3
of crossings in the first quarter of 1992 were up 7 percent from a year ago.

The NCAA

basketball Final Four tournament brought an estimated $40 million to the Minneapolis-St. Paul
metropolitan area.

Construction and Manufacturing
Residential construction was generally strong in the District. The level of new housing
permits issued in Minnesota surged in February, up nearly 50 percent over a year ago.
Conditions in commercial construction were mixed with the important Minneapolis-St. Paul area
continuing to show weakness due to the overhang in office space. Commercial construction was
also reported to be slow in western Wisconsin. However, commercial construction was reported
to be strong in several other parts of the District. Employment in construction in February
relative to its year-ago level was generally higher with increases ranging from 3 percent in
western Wisconsin to 23 percent in Montana. The one exception was Minnesota, which posted
a 4 percent decline.
Conditions were generally steady to improving in the District's manufacturing sector.
The February level of average weekly hours in manufacturing in Minnesota of 40.4 was slightly
higher than its year-ago level of 39.8, but down 1/10th of a percent from the previous month.
The February level of Minnesota's average hourly earnings in manufacturing was 4 percent
higher than a year ago.

Employment levels in manufacturing were unchanged in February

relative to a year ago in Minnesota and Montana, down 1 percent in North Dakota, and up 7
percent in South Dakota.

IX-4
Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in the District's agricultural sector have been fairly good though prices have
generally declined. North Dakota's mid-March All Farm Products index of prices received by
farmers declined 2 percent both relative to February and its year-ago level.

The recent cool,

damp weather has hampered planting in parts of the District, but the precipitation was generally
welcome.
The lumber industry continues to decline due to a shortage of trees available for
harvesting, particularly on public land. Minnesota is expected to sell only half to one-third of
its normal amount of timber. Nonetheless, saw mills are managing to acquire sufficient lumber
to maintain operations. The recent trade levy on Canadian lumber along with the upsurge in
housing construction has raised prices.
Production in the District's mining industry is largely unchanged from a year ago, though
copper production is reported to have risen.
minerals such as taconite and gold.

Prices have weakened with regard to certain

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy appears to be growing slowly.

Retail sales continue to improve, housing starts remain strong, and auto sales
continue to inch upward.

Activity in the energy sector remains depressed,

however, and higher cattle prices have only slightly brightened expectations
for the farm sector.

Most retailers are adding to inventories, but some

manufacturers are still cutting back on stocks of materials and other inputs.
Prices for retail goods and manufacturers' inputs generally remain stable.
Retail Sales.

Retail sales increased over the last month, and most

retailers expect continued improvement over the rest of the year.
the same or lower than a year ago.

Prices are

Retailers generally expect prices to

remain stable over the rest of the year.

While most retailers are satisfied

with their current inventory levels, they plan to increase inventory purchases
in the coming months.
Auto sales increased slightly in most district states over the last
Financing is generally available for inventories, and potential buyers

month.

are generally able to obtain loans.

Most automobile dealers continue to

expand inventories in anticipation of further increases in sales in the next
few months.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report virtually no change in

input prices over the past month, continuing the trend of relatively stable
prices over the past year.
few months.

Prices are expected to rise slightly over the next

Most firms are able to obtain materials without difficulty,

although some agents have noticed slightly longer lead times.
firms are expanding inventories, others are trimming them.

While some

X-2
Energy.

Soft prices for oil and natural gas continue to depress energy

activity in the district.

The average number of drilling rigs operating in

district states slipped from 198 in February to 194 in March.

The March rig

count was nearly 25 percent below its level of a year ago and very near the
low levels reached during the energy bust in 1986.
Housing.
ago.

Housing starts across the district are much higher than a year

Builders expect further increases during the second quarter before

starts reach a steady level.

New home sales have jumped sharply from a year

ago, while inventories continue to drop.

Mortgage demand is strong and is

expected to remain strong, although mortgage rates are expected to stay
relatively constant over the rest of the year.

While the price of lumber is

sharply higher than a year ago, the prices of other building materials have
risen only slightly.

Builders expect lumber prices to continue climbing but

foresee no difficulty obtaining materials.

Due partly to the lumber price

increases, new home prices are up sharply from a year ago.
Banking.

Loan-deposit ratios at most reporting banks were down slightly

or the same as last month, with loan demand generally mixed.

Most bankers

report greater demand for home mortgages and construction loans, and greater
or constant demand for consumer loans.
banks was constant.

Demand for home equity loans at most

Demand for commercial and industrial loans was constant

or down, while demand for commercial real estate loans and agricultural loans
at nearly all banks was down.

The level of investments at nearly all banks

was up.
Deposits were up or constant at most banks over the last month.

Demand

deposits were mostly up, while NOW, super-NOW, and money market deposit
accounts were mostly up or constant.

At most banks, IRA and Keogh accounts

X-3
and small time and savings deposits were constant.

At nearly all banks large

CDs were down.
Nearly half the banks expect to lower their prime rate in the near term.
Several banks lowered consumer lending rates last month, and a few banks
expect to lower rates in the near term.

Most banks, however, report unchanged

consumer lending rates with no change expected in the near term.

A small

number of banks report tightening their lending standards in the last month.
Agriculture.

Winter wheat yields are expected to be normal in most of

the district, although the condition of the crop varies widely.

In some

areas, the crop is in excellent condition following timely spring rains.

But

in other areas, the crop is in poor condition after a late spring cold snap.
At the same time, wet field conditions have slowed the planting of spring
crops.
Cattle prices have rebounded to near record levels after falling sharply
last year.

Still, cattle feeders remain wary that sluggish consumer demand

could trigger another drop in prices later this summer.

Thus, many feedlots

are operating below capacity and carefully avoiding a buildup of fed cattle
inventories.
After steady gains in recent years, farmland prices this spring are
generally unchanged from a year ago.

In most of the district, last year's dip

in farm incomes appears to have taken the steam out of the farmland market.
But farm rents have edged up in isolated areas, suggesting some possible gains
in farmland prices.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

District economic activity is increasing moderately. Growth has been broadbased with
the exception of the energy extraction and agricultural sectors.

In general, prices are stable

and inventories are in line with expectations. Manufacturing activity has increased modestly.
Single-family construction is accelerating, stimulating the demand for construction-related
materials. Offsetting some of this strength, however, is continued weakness in the oil and
gas industry. Declines in oil and gas drilling have reduced the demand for products such as
oil field equipment and drill pipe. Service sector activity has increased and is becoming more
broadbased. Retail sales have increased and many retailers report better than anticipated
Easter sales. Non-residential construction remains weak. Financial industry respondents
report a slight increase in loan demand. Agricultural conditions have deteriorated somewhat.
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly. Although there are some exceptions,
generally selling prices have remained stable. Demand is strongest for construction related
materials such as lumber and wood products, stone, shell, clay, glass and aluminum.
Demand for paper, apparel and food and kindred products has also increased. Demand for
electronic and electrical machinery has increased recently although respondents remain
cautious that increases may not continue. Steel demand and prices have weakened because
of reduced commercial and industrial construction and oil and gas activity. The depressed
natural gas market continues to reduce the demand for oil field equipment. Domestic
demand for oil field equipment is now significantly below last year's level. International
demand is constant. Although international growth has ceased, respondents are optimistic
about future sales. Production capacity for oil field machinery has decreased.

Petroleum

XI-2

refining and petrochemical producers report little change in demand since last surveyed.
Nonetheless, demand remains significantly below last year's level. Demand for
pharmaceutical chemicals, however, has increased modestly. Chemical demand is expected
to increase.
Demand for services has increased and is becoming more broadbased. Demand for
legal and litigation support services remains strong. Transactions activity--such as real estate
and those of the Resolution Trust Corporation--have been picking up some steam lately.
Advertising has increased. Demand for transportation services has been flat recently, but
remains above last year's level. Hotel occupancy has increased.

Accounting, consulting

and temporary firms report an increase in demand from companies trying to find new ways to
increase productivity.
Retail sales growth has increased. Many retailers report better than expected Easter
sales. Respondents are generally more confident that sales growth will continue, and a few
retailers have increased their expectations for future sales. Sales growth continues to be
strongest in the non-metropolitan areas, particularly along the Mexico border. Dallas-Fort
Worth area sales growth remains weak. Retail selling prices remain stable and several
retailers report they are obtaining some merchandise at a lower cost. Many retailers report
they have reduced their cost of labor compared to last year. District auto sales have picked
up significantly.
Homebuilding construction activity continues to increase. Single-family building
permits have risen to their highest level in over a year. Home sales and property values have
also increased. Apartment construction has increased but remains below last year's level.

XI-3

Commercial construction has improved slightly but remains at very low levels. Office
construction remains weak.
Economic conditions in the energy sector have taken a turn for the worse. Oil and
gas prices have been low, and could fall even further in the second quarter. The price of
West Texas Intermediate is around $20 per barrel. Natural gas prices are about $1.40 per
thousand cubic feet, recently getting a boost from the cold March weather. Our respondents
do not expect natural gas prices to move up much. As a result, oil and gas drilling has
deteriorated. The U.S. weekly rig count has fallen to a record low of 623 rigs in April.
Financial industry respondents report a slight increase in loan demand.
Respondents continue to report they have plenty of liquidity. Mortgage refinancing and
mortgage originations continue to increase.
District state governments continue to report fiscal problems and have instituted
formal and informal hiring freezes.
Agricultural conditions have deteriorated slightly. Wet weather has restricted
planting activity for some farmers and increased costs for some livestock producers. After
peaking in late March, livestock prices have declined modestly. Overall, Texas crop prices
remain unchanged from a year ago. Higher prices for corn, grain sorghum, soybeans and
wheat offset lower prices for cotton and hay.

XII- 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions are improving very slowly in much of the Twelfth District, with
moderate growth in intermountain areas offset by weakness in California. Retail and auto sales
are reported soft in several markets, and continued layoffs are reported in defense-related
manufacturing. Nonresidential construction remains weak in most District markets, although
residential construction and home sales show some pick-up. Mortgage refinancing activity
appears to have peaked, and overall loan demand remains flat. Continued drought threatens
agriculture in Idaho and eastern Oregon, while prospects for California have improved with
recent rainfall. Wage and price increases are modest, with some exceptions such as lumber and
health care.
Business Sentiment
Economic expectations of Twelfth District business leaders were little changed since our
last report, with most respondents expecting sluggish growth. As in March, almost two-thirds of
respondents expect the economy to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent. Only 5 percent of
respondents expect output to decline in at least two of the next four quarters, down slightly from
9 percent in March. Expectations are most optimistic for housing starts. A large majority of
respondents expect inflation to decline or remain stable.
Wages and Prices
Contacts report little upward pressure on wages and prices in most District markets,
although lumber and health care are notable exceptions. Wholesale lumber prices have risen to
record levels due to extremely tight supply conditions associated with harvesting restrictions and
the recently adopted tariff on Canadian lumber. Health plan costs are expected to increase at

XII-2

double-digit rates in 1992, but the rate of increase does appear to have moderated somewhat
from last year. Energy prices remain low. One oil industry contact expects several years of little
or no price growth.
Retail Trade and Services
Contacts report retail and auto sales as soft in most District markets. Sales of new cars
in Utah are reported to be "spotty", with buyer confidence affected by recent layoff
announcements. A contact in Idaho reports some deterioration in auto sales since the last
report, with traffic down 20 percent since mid-March. In contrast, auto dealers in Oregon
report that after an extremely weak February, auto sales improved in March. Auto sales in the
Puget Sound area also were above their year-earlier level in March. Contacts from large
department stores report generally soft conditions. Signs of improved retail activity, however,
are reported in Arizona following weakness early in the year, with auto, eating and drinking
establishments, and general merchandising sales leading the way. District-wide food store sales
are reported flat.
In southern California, the slump in ad revenue and circulation has claimed one of only
two daily Spanish-language newspapers in Los Angeles. One media contact reports that
employment and real estate ads are down 11 and 19 percent, respectively, from their weak yearearlier levels. Auto advertising, however, shows an increase of 9 percent over the previous year.
Circulation and help wanted advertisements in Oregon and the Puget Sound area have begun to
show modest gains.
Manufacturing
Job losses continue to be reported in defense-related manufacturing firms across the
District. Arizona manufacturing had significant losses in February, principally in aircraft and
missiles. Defense-related manufacturing has fallen in Utah as well. The Boeing company has

XII - 3

estimated that employment will be reduced by 6,500 during 1992, reflecting the cutbacks in
defense and a slowing of the 737 production line. Orders continue to climb for Boeing 777s,
however, which are scheduled to enter passenger serve in mid-1995. Some nondefense
manufacturers in Utah, however, are reporting a leveling off of the long slowdown in orders.
While large job orders are still down, an upturn in small orders is having a leveling effect on the
total volume of sales. Medical equipment manufacturers also are reporting an apparent leveling
off in their sales slide of the past six months.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Parts of Idaho and eastern Oregon are suffering one of their worst drought years on
record. Crop shortages are possible in potatoes, beans, sugar beets, and alfalfa, and utility costs
are expected to rise. Prospects for crops in California have improved due to recent rainfall.
Low ocean salmon counts--in part due to the drought--are causing severe curtailment of the 1992
ocean commercial and sport salmon fishing season. Supply conditions in lumber remain
extremely tight due to environmental restrictions. In the last 30 days, however, there has been
some softening of demand for wood products, and inventory levels have increased at the
distribution and mill levels.
Construction and Real Estate
While home sales and residential construction activity are reported up in most District
markets, prospects for nonresidential construction continue to look weak. In Hawaii, for the
first time in years, construction employment is declining, in part reflecting a drop in Japanese
investment. In Washington, government construction spending is off substantially, and Boeing's
major facilities program appears to be slowing with construction schedules for projects being
extended. Recent mergers of financial institutions are expected to put further upward pressure
on vacancy rates in several District markets.

XII - 4

Financial Institutions
Demand for loans is reported to be weak to moderate in most District markets.
Applications for mortgage refinancing in Utah have tapered off since January. Several southern
California bankers are beginning to see real estate values affecting small business credit
availability, since real estate holdings remain a primary source of collateral for small business
loans. Nonperforming loans are reported to continue increasing modestly.

