For use at Noon, E.S.T.

Summary

of
Commentary

Wednesday
November 4, 1992

on

Current

Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

October 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

... .

.................... ............ .... .....

First District

-

Boston

.

i

I-i

...........................

Second District

New York .....

.............

Third District

Philadelphia

.............

11-1

Fourth District

Cleveland

..

.............

IV-I

Fifth District

Richmond

Sixth District

Atlanta

.....

.............

Seventh District

Chicago

.....

.............

VII-I

Eighth District

St. Louis

... .............

.VIII-I

Ninth District

Minneapolis

.............

Tenth District

Kansas City.

.. ....................

Eleveith District

Dallas

Twelfth District

San Francisco

.... .............

V-I
VI-':

.

i

...........................
....................

-I

X-I
XI-'
XII-I

Summary

Economic activity has continued to increase in most of the
districts, but at a slow and uneven pace. Boston, Cleveland,
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City,
and Dallas all reported some improvement, ranging from a slightly
more positive tone in Boston to a modest expansion in St. Louis.
Developments in New York, Philadelphia and San Francisco were
described as mixed, with improvement in some sectors and
sluggishness in others.

Retail sales grew in most districts

though the extent of the gain varied. Activity in the
manufacturing sector apparently lost some momentum in much of the
nation as several districts noted a slower pace of expansion or
declining demand.

An improvement in residential construction and

sales was noted in several districts, with gains generally
concentrated in the low-to-middle-income range of single-family
housing.

Several districts have reported a slight increase in

overall loan demand.

Cool and damp weather continued to delay

harvests in much of the nation although yields on many crops were
very good.

The few reports received this time on wage and price

developments referred to generally stable conditions, though with
*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and based
on information collected before October 27, 1992. This document
summarizes comments received from businesses and other contacts
outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views
of Federal Reserve officials.

ii
scattered price increases reported on a few individual items.
Consumer Spending
District reports indicate that retail sales improved in most
areas in recent weeks, though the extent of the gain varied.
Moreover, some retailers stated that the selling climate remained
difficult and that discounting and other promotional efforts were
needed in order to achieve the latest increases.

Sales gains

varied from slightly improved in Boston and Philadelphia to
markedly improved in Cleveland.

Sales of nondurables were strong

in New York, Atlanta, and Kansas City while Philadelphia and
Cleveland registered gains in most items.

Retail activity

remained sluggish in California, however, as defense-related
employment cutbacks continue.

Districts reporting on automotive

sales were evenly divided between those experiencing some
softness and those with a pickup in demand.

With the exception

of some excess auto stocks, retail inventories remain at
generally satisfactory levels in most districts at this time.
Respondents in four of the districts expect at least somewhat
higher holiday sales this year than last.

Tourist activity has

slowed in the Richmond District, primarily because of fewer
convention bookings, but remains a bright spot in Atlanta and
Minneapolis.
Manufacturing
Activity in the manufacturing sector apparently lost some
momentum in much of the nation as several districts, including
Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland, New York and Philadelphia, noted a

iii
slower pace of expansion or declines.

Richmond, St. Louis,

Dallas and the San Francisco District outside of California noted
some improvement, however.

Aircraft and defense goods,

nonelectrical machinery, rubber and plastic products and primary
metals were cited as products for which demand has slowed.
Respondents pointed to the weakness in foreign economies and
dampened consumer confidence in this country as sources of
concern.

On the other hand, manufacturers of building supplies,

carpeting and other home furnishings have seen an increase in
demand as a result of the post-hurricane rebuilding in the South
and an uptick in housing demand in some other areas.

Dallas

reports strong demand for fabricated metals and electrical and
electronic machinery and San Francisco notes that demand from
Latin America and Pacific Basin counties is supporting
manufacturing activity in that district.

St. Louis reports that

manufacturing employment gains continue to outnumber reports of
losses.

With regard to the outlook, Boston states that

manufacturers are cautiously optimistic, and those in
Philadelphia believe that the upturn which began last spring is
still on track.

Manufacturers in Cleveland are optimistic about

the next six months.
Construction and Real Estate
An improvement in residential construction and sales was
noted in several districts with gains generally concentrated in
the low-to-middle-income range of single-family housing.
reported that the real estate market has stopped declining

Boston
in

iv

most New England states and that the volume of sales is up
substantially from a year earlier.

Cleveland and St. Louis noted

that residential contracts and permits were well above the yearearlier pace and Richmond reported strong sales to first-time
homebuyers.

Single-family homebuilding is

providing the only

source of strength in the Dallas construction industry as was
also the case in Kansas City.

In Florida, a good deal of

hurricane-related residential rebuilding is

now taking place.

San Francisco reported sluggish sales and declining prices,
particularly on more expensive homes,
jump in

in

California and a big

foreclosures in the southern part of the state where

defense-related job cutbacks are still occurring.

However,

stronger residential markets exist in other district states such
as Oregon,

Utah and Idaho.

A majority of districts noted that

multi-family housing starts have been flat.
relatively slow

Most banks report

nonresidential construction activity, a major

exception being Minnesota where there has been a substantial
increase in awards for infrastructure such as roads,

bridges,

and

water/sewer construction and where the building of casinos and
new motel space is

underway.

Financial Institutions
Several districts have reported a slight increase in
loan demand in
however,

recent weeks.

overall

Mortgage refinancing activity,

seems to have peaked in a number of areas.

noted that some banks saw a recent pickup in

Philadelphia

commercial and

industrial loans and that consumer lending was level or

increasing.

Atlanta banks reported loan demand as flat or

slightly higher with some increase in consumer loan activity.

A

few large banks in Cleveland saw a step-up in business loans in
recent weeks though, as in several other districts, the most
active part of the market continued to be residential mortgages.
St. Louis and Kansas City also reported a recent increase in
loans outstanding with business, real estate and consumer loans
up in St. Louis and most categories stronger in Kansas City.
Overall loan demand remained sluggish in New York where demand
for business loans declined, and Dallas noted a softening of loan
demand that some bankers attributed to business borrower caution
about the near-term economic outlook.
mixed in the San Francisco District.

Financial conditions were
There was weakness in

California, where consumer loan demand continues to drop and
commercial loan demand is weak, but brisk demand for mortgage
loans in Utah from consumers upgrading their housing and from
continued migration into the state.

With regard to the outlook,

bankers in Dallas expect business loan demand to rise slowly and
Miami anticipates some increase in loan demand from the process
of hurricane rebuilding.

Philadelphia bankers say the outlook is

uncertain and none predicted accelerated growth.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Cool and damp weather continued to delay harvests in much of
the nation.

In Richmond the harvesting of summer crops and the

planting of small grains were slower than normal as unseasonably
cool weather delayed the maturing of corn and soybeans.

vi
Minneapolis notes that an unusually cool and wet growing season
delayed crop maturity and continues to retard harvest operations,
but that yields for all major crops except soybeans are generally
excellent.

Cool weather also impaired the growth of late-planted

crops in Dallas and production estimates have been reduced
slightly as a result.

In Kansas City, however, corn, soybean and

milo yields are generally larger than normal while cotton and
peanut yields are near normal.

In addition, the planting of

winter wheat is nearly complete in that district and the crop is
generally in good condition.

The soybean harvest was at a near-

normal pace in the Chicago district except in Michigan where rain
slowed harvesting.

Progress with the corn harvest has been

considerably slower than normal due to the high moisture content
of this year's crop.

The cotton harvest in St. Louis was

hampered by adverse weather conditions, but good to excellent
yields are reported for corn, soybeans and rice.

California

reports that while parts of the district are experiencing
drought, sunny weather has helped tree crops such as apples and
cherries whose production is well above last year's levels.
Mining has been lackluster in Minneapolis with low prices
for gold and copper and slack demand for iron ore.

Aluminum

production remains high in California despite sharply falling
prices but the output of forest products continues low.

The

surge in domestic demand for plywood resulting from recent
hurricane damage has apparently subsided and shipments to Japan
and other Pacific Basin countries remain down.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District business conditions have acquired a slightly more
positive tone, according to contacts reached in the third week in
October.

Half the retail respondents report that sales in September and

early October were flat compared with year-ago levels; for the rest,
sales rose at a close-to-normal pace.

The majority of manufacturing

respondents also indicate that sales and orders were even with or
slightly above year-ago figures.

In most New England states,

re idential real estate markets have stabilized; prices are flat and
volume is rising.

Contacts in nonbank financial services report mixed

trends, but most have seen increases in assets under management.
Retail
First District retail contacts have seen a slight improvement in
prevailing conditions.

Retailers who faced mixed results in past

months noted some recent steadying in sales, while those who previously
reported increases did so again.

None attributes this modest

strengthening to improved consumer optimism.

All believe their firms'

promotional efforts were especially effective.
With no change in the cost of goods sold, retail contacts continue
discounting to attract bargain-conscious consumers.

Inventories remain

closely monitored, but four respondents plan to expand the number of
store locations.

Employment is increasing only to staff new locations,

while wages are unchanged or rising modestly.
Manufacturing.
Demand for manufactured goods has been mixed in recent months.
The majority of respondents report changes in sales and orders compared
to a year earlier ranging from zero to 7 percent.

A couple had

significantly better results, while others experienced declining demand.
Sales of electronics and some housing-related products increased.

Sales

of automotive products were highly variable, while those for aircraft
and defense goods declined.

Markets in Japan and Europe (especially the

United Kingdom) were described as weak, although several manufacturers
report doing quite well overseas because of gains in market share.
Manufacturing contacts report that their selling prices range from
below to very slightly above year-ago levels.

Increased input prices

for paper, rubber, some chemicals, and imported goods have put pressure
on margins for some companies.
About half the respondents have cut U.S. employment in the past
year, by up to 16 percent.

At the others, employment has been

increasing, by as much as 5 percent.

Capital spending was most often

described as flat, and has been concentrated in cost-reducing or
efficiency-improving equipment.
On balance, manufacturers expressed cautious optimism about the
economy over the next year.
slightly better than 1992.

Most project 1993 to be similar to or
Respondents indicate concern over weakness

in foreign economies and dampened consumer confidence in the United
States.

Positive factors include a pent-up consumer demand for autos

and housing and improved business and household balance sheets.
Residential Real Estate
The residential real estate market in most New England states has
stopped declining, with prices flat since spring, and volume up as much
as 20 to 30 percent over year-ago numbers.

A large stock of properties

continues to overhang the market, and transactions are still
concentrated at the low end of the market, although selected areas are
seeing an increase in "trade-up" activity.

Connecticut is the

exception, with prices still falling, especially in areas which are
seeing additional layoffs in defense-related industries.

Most contacts

attribute the current real estate stagnation to high unemployment and

low

consumer confidence, although many realtors believe that consumer

confidence will pick up after the election, regardless of the outcome.
Nonbank Financial Services
Insurance companies report mixed sales trends, but firms seeing
increases slightly outnumber those with declines.

Most respondents

experienced decreasing employment for the year, with the rest reporting
little change.

Wage costs have kept up with general inflation.

A

majority of respondents saw decreases in their pension business, which
they attribute to employer sensitivity to continuing weakness in the
insurers' commercial real estate portfolios.

Sales of personal life

insurance and retail investment products, such as annuities and mutual
funds, rose.

Investment management companies surveyed also report

increases in assets under management.

Respondents attribute growth in

investment products to consumers' switching away from bank deposits
because of low interest rates.
Outlook
The nonprofit New England Economic Project (NEEP) released its
semi-annual forecast on October 21.

According to this forecast, total

nonagricultural employment in the region will stabilize in the first
quarter of 1993 and begin to grow in the second quarter, albeit very
gradually.

NEEP predicts that half the net jobs added in the region in

the first year of recovery will be in services; another third of the job
growth is

expected to be in trade.

Manufacturing employment is not

expected to improve until the third quarter of 1993.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments in the Second District since the last report remained basically mixed. Most
contacts at District department stores reported stronger-than-planned sales in September and positive
over-the-year changes.

Moreover, office leasing activity showed some improvement as firms

continue to avail themselves of lower rents and other concessions in order to upgrade their quarters.
The residential construction market was mixed, however, with homebuilders in upstate New York
reporting somewhat stronger buying interest than those in downstate communities.

New York's

unemployment rate rose in September while New Jersey's fell following August declines in both
states. The latest Buffalo and Rochester purchasing managers' reports were less favorable than
earlier.

Most senior loan officers at small and midsized banks indicated no change in their

willingness to lend.
Consumer Spending
Most contacts at District department stores reported stronger-than-planned sales in September
and positive over-the-year changes. However, while generally pleased with the results, some retailers
cited the later back-to-school shopping this year and extra promotional activity as major factors in
September's strength. No one thought a turnaround in consumer sentiment had occurred and most
said they were cautiously optimistic about what lies ahead.
Year-to-year sales increases in September generally ranged from 4 to 16 percent. One chain
reported a smaller-than-expected over-the-year decrease.

Categories registering the greatest

improvement were sports apparel, outerwear and bed and bath items. Inventories are reportedly in
good shape--either on plan or a little below.

Residential Construction and Real Estate

The residential construction market remained mixed in recent weeks with homebuilders in
upstate New York reporting somewhat stronger buying interest than those in downstate communities.
In some New Jersey areas, plans are being revived and revised for projects that have been in default,
and in New York City, several moderate-income housing developments have recently been started
or soon will be underway. Developers report continuing problems in obtaining acquisition and
construction loans, however, and observers note that most new homebuilding involves substantial
amounts of internal financing or government subsidies.
Office leasing activity showed some improvement as firms continue to avail themselves of
lower rents and other concessions in order to upgrade their quarters. In addition, most areas report
little or no new office space under construction at this time. As a result of these developments.
several areas, including Long Island, Fairfield and Westchester counties and mid-Manhattan, have
experienced a recent decline in office vacancy rates, although they remain at high levels.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates moved in opposite directions during September following August
declines. New York's rate rose to 9.0 percent from 8.5 percent in August while New Jersey's rate,
also at 9.0 percent in September, fell from 9.4 percent. Two developments are likely to boost
construction employment. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey recently announced that
it will build an additional international terminal at Newark Airport and that major projects are
planned or already begun at La Guardia and Kennedy airports, including the first new passenger
terminal at Kennedy since the 1960s. In another major construction project, New York City has
embarked on a huge program to build or renovate 32 court facilities throughout the five boroughs
over the next several years. In other news, a large discount chain has agreed to acquire and reopen

II-3
6 of the 11 Alexander Department Stores in the New York metropolitan area which closed earlier
this year. Remington Products announced the it will remain in Bridgeport, Connecticut, thereby
retaining 1100 jobs and probably repatriating some jobs from abroad as well. On the negative side,
I.B.M. will reduce production of semiconductors and mainframe computers, probably resulting in
layoffs at its factories in the District
The September survey of Buffalo purchasing managers showed much smaller percentages of
firms reporting a rise in new orders and production following substantial improvements in these
categories during August. The latest survey of Rochester purchasing managers also showed a sizable
drop in the percentage anticipating an improvement in business conditions over the next three
months.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second District
indicated that their willingness to lend remained steady relative to two months ago, although the
percentage of officers citing an increased willingness was somewhat higher than in the last survey.
Almost all bankers reported that they would not ease their standards in response to the recently
revised federal guidelines recommending less rigid loan-to-value ratios for construction and land
development loans.
A majority of respondents noted that overall loan demand remained sluggish. Largely due
to refinancing activity, demand for residential mortgages continued to increase and consumer loan
demand improved slightly. However, demand for commercial and industrial loans and nonresidential
mortgages weakened. Almost all respondents reported either maintaining or lowering interest rates.
A majority of officers indicated that delinquency rates for residential mortgages and commercial and
industrial loans were unchanged to slightly lower during the preceding two months.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District appeared mixed in early October.
Activity in the manufacturing sector eased, according to surveyed firms, while
retail and banking contacts reported some improvement.

While half of the area

manufacturers contacted recently said new orders were running at a steady rate,
the number of firms that indicated drops in orders slightly exceeded the number
noting gains.

Area retailers reported a modest increase in sales, on balance,

in the first half of October, continuing an upward trend they noted in September.
Auto dealers gave mixed reports, but it appeared that sales were running at a
steady rate.

Bankers generally reported continuing gains in residential mortgage

lending for both refinancings and purchases,

and steady to slightly growing

consumer lending. Some bankers said commercial and industrial lending had picked
up recently.
The outlook among Third District business contacts is modestly positive.
Despite recent signs of softness, a majority of the manufacturers polled look for
improvement

over

the winter, and nearly

a third

plan

to

step

up

hiring.

Retailers expect the current trend of rising sales to result in a slightly better
fourth quarter this year compared to last.

Bankers' expectations are muted; most

of those queried said loan growth would remain slow in the months ahead.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity
somewhat in recent weeks.

in

the Third District appears

to

have

slipped

Of those industrial firms contacted in early October,

the number who reported that they had experienced some slowing in business in

III-2
recent weeks slightly exceeded the number who noted gains.

On balance, Third

District manufacturers said new orders were running at a slower rate in October
than had been achieved in September, with drops especially noted among makers of
transportation equipment, nonelectrical machinery, rubber and plastics, and metal
products.

Printing firms also reported declines in orders.

Employment indicators at Third District manufacturing plants also showed
some deterioration in October compared to September.

Although two-thirds of the

firms contacted for this report were keeping employment steady, more companies
were

cutting

back

their

workweeks

and

reducing

employee

levels than

were

extending hours or hiring more workers.
Despite

these

recent

signs

of softening business,

most

Third District

manufacturers believe that the upturn in the region's manufacturing sector that
began in the spring of this year is still on course.
business

to

increases in

improve over the next six months,
new orders for their

products.

More than two-thirds expect

and nearly two-thirds

While half

forecast

indicated they will

keep

employment at current levels, nearly a third plan to hire more workers over the
winter.

One-third of the region's manufacturers contacted for this report also

plan to step up capital

spending while half will maintain such outlays at the

current rate.
RETAIL
Third

District

retailers

contacted in

early

and mid-October

generally

indicated that the slight pickup in sales they had experienced in September was
continuing, resulting in year-over-year gains of a few percentage points for the
first half

of October,

in dollar

terms.

These

increases,

although

slight,

appeared to extend to most types of stores and most lines of merchandise.
merchants

noted

that

the

selling

environment

remained

difficult,

Some

requiring

III-3
discounting and other promotional efforts. Auto dealers gave mixed reports, but,
on balance, the sales rate in the first weeks of October appeared to be steady.
Store officials said they were unable to give specific forecasts for the
important fourth quarter, but most of those contacted expected sales to exceed
the year-ago
inventories

In general,

level slightly.
lean and

looking

for cost

merchant

savings

anticipate that growth in sales will be slow.

to

said they were keeping
bolster profits

as

they

Auto dealers generally believe

that sales will just inch up during the balance of the year as 1992 models are
cleared out.

Some dealers expect stronger growth next spring.

FINANCE
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks
October was slightly above the month-ago level.
this

report

continuing.

indicated that the

in early

Most of the banks contacted for

growth of residential

mortgage

lending was

Some indicated that the pace of refinancings was slackening while

purchase mortgage lending was still moving up at a steady rate.

Some bankers

also noted that commercial and industrial loan demand had picked up in recent
weeks.

These bankers indicated that companies in a variety of industries were

seeking new credit facilities.

Most of the commercial bank lending officers

surveyed said consumer lending at their institutions was level or moving up very
slightly.

Most of the

gains appeared to be in home equity loans and credit lines

while other installment loans and credit card lending was flat.
In general, bankers said the outlook for lending is uncertain, and none
predicted accelerating growth.

Bankers who noted recent gains in commercial and

industrial lending said this was an encouraging development, but they were not
convinced a sustained upturn had begun.
month
this

Similarly, most of the bankers contacted

do not expect strong growth in consumer lending.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary. Business activity in the Fourth District continues to edge upward
unevenly. Respondents anticipate further slow growth in both consumer spending and
manufacturing over the next few months. A strong revival in manufacturing output is
being checked by persistent tight management of inventories and by volatile sales and
production of cars. Residential construction still outpaces last year, but nonresidential
construction is generally weak, and builders anticipate little near-term improvement.
Strength in bank loans remains centered in mortgages, with only scattered signs of a
pickup in business loans.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales in the District strengthened in mid-September
and have improved markedly in October, according to several sources. The recent revival
followed less-than-expected sales volume during the summer, which caused some retailers
to resort to aggressive price promotions to liquidate seasonal merchandise. A retailer
notes stronger sales for a broad range of merchandise, except for women's apparel, which
he speculates as reflecting a shift in consumer buying from discount to department and
specialty stores.
Some retailers now anticipate that sales will post further small increases through
the balance of this year, and that the 1992 holiday season will show larger year-over-year
gains than they forecast just a few months ago. Consequently, they plan on carrying larger
inventories, and have begun to step up factory orders.
Auto dealers, however, report that sales of new cars flattened in October following
a September rise. Several dealers state that aggressive pricing of 1992 models at below
cost brought their inventories down to desired levels. Stocks of 1993 models are said to
be between 60 and 70 days, and dealers are generally holding back on new factory orders.
Substitution of light trucks, especially minivans, for cars appears to be unabated, but

IV-2

several dealers indicate that stiffening competition from Japanese producers may have
peaked the market share for U.S. vehicles.
Manufacturing. Shipments and production in the District are rising at a slow and
uneven pace. A commercial bank survey of 500 midsize and small business firms located
mainly in Ohio shows that their business is still rising, but by less than expected in their
spring survey and at a slower pace than last spring. Capital spending plans are virtually
unchanged since that time, but businesses plan to cut instead of build inventories.
The latest Cleveland purchasing agents' survey also shows a slower pace of
expansion in September, and preliminaryinformation for October suggests a marginal
increase. Little growth in employment is anticipated over the next few months.
Most manufacturers contacted report a slow but steady rise in orders and
shipments again last quarter, which combined with further cost-cutting and lower interest
rates, boosted earnings. With few exceptions, order backlogs are not accumulating,
primarily because of a tendency toward smaller but more frequent placement of new
orders. New hirings continue to be selective.
Several capital goods producers report that orders last quarter continued to climb,
although their anticipations for the fourth quarter range from "excellent" to "flat." A
heavy-duty truck supplier comments that a surge in the annual rate of new orders last
quarter exceeded the 1988 peak and that a sizable order backlog is being built.
Production this quarter should match or exceed last quarter's pace. A producer of medical
equipment reports a further steady improvement in business last quarter that should be
followed by another increase this quarter. Shipments of industrial metalworking
equipment and supplies also rose a little in the third quarter, with further improvement
expected in the final three months of the year, even though export orders are expected to
fall again. Another producer of industrial parts also expects its domestic business to

expand this quarter from last because of strong demand for maintenance and repair work.
Machine tool orders surged in September and in the third quarter, although a producer

IV-3

speculates that pace may not be matched this quarter or next because of weakness in the
aerospace industry and uncertainty in the auto outlook.
Domestic auto producers estimate new car sales at about a 6.3 million-unit annual
rate this quarter, up from a 6.15 million-unit rate in the third quarter. Little, if any, pickup
in production is anticipated because of generally adequate inventories of 1993 model cars.
Better-than-expected sales of the Jeep Cherokee in recent weeks have helped to retain a
700-worker second shift at an assembly plant in Toledo that was scheduled for a cutback.
Real Estate. A recent private survey of more than 100 builders in Ohio shows that
the bulk of the respondents anticipate no pickup in construction for another year. A
lender that specializes in small construction projects, such as shopping strip malls, notes
scant demand for construction loans. In Pittsburgh, however, the newly opened $750
million airport has already generated a boost in both retail stores and residential
development in the adjacent area.
Residential contracts in the District continued to climb in August, well ahead of the
pace a year earlier, but recent growth slowed from earlier in the summer. In Cincinnati,
new home sales in August rose at less than a double-digit rate for the first time so far this
year.
Banking. Only a few large banks in the District indicate a step-up in business loans
in recent weeks, but little change in demand is generally noted even among small and
midsize business firms.
The most active part of the loan market continues to be in residential mortgages.
Banks and thrifts report strong but easing demand for mortgage refinancing. Thrifts say
that many 30-year fixed-rate mortgages are being refinanced with 10- to 15-year
mortgages, and one thrift reports that a one-year adjustable-rate mortgage has become
more popular than the 30-year fixed-rate loan. According to a major lender in Cleveland,
new mortgage loans through most of October held up'better than usual for the month.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District business conditions were uneven but, on balance, improved
between mid-September and late October.
activity edged higher.

Retail sales rose, and manufacturing

The residential real estate market improved somewhat,

although the commercial real estate market remained sluggish.

Tourism

declined and was expected to remain weak throughout the fall.

Activity at

District ports fell.

Loan conditions were unchanged, and District governments

reported that tax revenues were meeting their projections.

In agriculture,

slow-maturing summer crops delayed harvesting activity and the fall planting
of small grains.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that District retail activity improved
in recent weeks.

Respondents reported that sales and shopper traffic

increased and that retail prices rose. Retailers indicated that employment was
steady, but employee wages increased. Inventories apparently declined.
Respondents were optimistic about their prospects for the next six
months.

They expected increases in all indicators except employment, which

they believed would be unchanged.
Manufacturing
Manufacturers indicated that District factory activity strengthened
slightly during the past six weeks.

Respondents saw little change in most

indicators, but they reported increases in shipments, new orders, and exports.
Prices paid for raw materials rose, but the prices received by manufacturers

were unchanged.

Excess capacity continued to plague District manufacturers.

Manufacturers were upbeat about their prospects for the next six months.
Manufacturers expected increases in orders, shipments, and backlogs. Increases
in employment, capital spending, and prices were also anticipated.
Tourism
Hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District indicated that
tourist activity for October declined compared to September and to a year ago.
Respondents reported that fall bookings were below those of a year ago,
primarily because of fewer convention bookings.

Looking ahead, respondents

expected tourist activity to remain weak throughout the fall.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that both imports and exports were lower in
September than in August.

Compared with a year ago, however, imports and

exports were generally higher.

During the next six months, exports were

expected to increase at Charleston but to be unchanged at Baltimore and
Hampton Roads.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions were little changed in recent weeks.
that commercial and consumer loan demand were steady.

Respondents reported
Rates on commercial

loans were unchanged while rates on consumer loans were lower.

Banks noted

that residential mortgage activity, consisting mostly of refinancing,
strengthened in September but weakened in October.

Respondents reported that

mortgage loan rates began to rise significantly in mid-October.

Residential Real Estate
Residential activity picked up modestly during the past six weeks
according to a telephone survey of District realtors.

Home prices were

stable, and respondents noted that sales of homes in the mid-to-low price
range, particularly to first-time homebuyers, were strong.
upscale homes, however, apparently remained soft.

The market for

The residential market in

Raleigh, North Carolina, was characterized as particularly strong, and the
strength was apparently spilling over into the nearby Durham market.
Commercial Real Estate
Commercial activity remained sluggish, but realtors suggested that
leasing activity had picked up somewhat in many areas of the District.

The

absorption of commercial space improved, particularly in suburban areas, but
respondents noted that little new commercial development was underway.
Leasing activity in Washington, D.C., however, decreased because of reduced
demand for space by government agencies.
State Budgets
Government analysts contacted by telephone indicated that third quarter
tax revenues were close to estimates in most District jurisdictions, lessening
the likelihood of budget shortfalls.

Revenue growth in West Virginia and in

the District of Columbia, however, remained weak.
Tax receipt growth varied by jurisdiction and type.

Personal income

withholding tax collections increased substantially in most District states.
Sales tax collections, compared to a year ago, were stronger in Maryland,
North Carolina, and Virginia, steady in South Carolina and West Virginia, and
weaker in the District of Columbia.

Corporate tax receipts, however, were

reported to be lower in several jurisdictions.

Agriculture
District agricultural analysts reported that the harvest of summer crops
was progressing more slowly than normal in some states.

Harvesting of corn

continued to be hampered by the slow maturing of the crop because of
unseasonably cool weather.

Soybeans also were maturing late, delaying their

harvest and increasing the risk of frost damage.
almost complete, and yields were about normal.

Tobacco harvesting was
Small grain planting was

underway, but progress was slowed by the delays in harvesting summer crops.
Livestock was reported in good condition.

A large hay crop and good

pasture conditions were expected to provide adequate forage for the winter
months.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview; According to contacts in the Sixth District, economic activity edged higher
in September and October, though the pace was more sluggish than in August. Manufacturers
indicated that industrial production slowed somewhat across the District. Apartment development
and commercial construction remained slow, but home builders and realtors again reported
healthy activity in single-family markets. Retailers reported moderate increases in sales of both
durable and nondurable goods. Business and consumer loan demand has been fiat, and contacts
reported that the recent wave of mortgage refinancings has begun to subside. Wages and prices
have remained stable and several firms indicated that recent attempts to raise product prices have
not been successful.
Consumer Spending: Retailers reported moderate sales increases in September and
early October. Consumer expenditures continue to be concentrated on purchases of nondurable
items, but retailers noted that sales of durable goods have also shown some improvement.
Although most merchants expect upcoming holiday sales to surpass weak year-ago levels, they
are monitoring inventories closely and are determined not to enter the holiday season with excess
accumulations. Auto dealers continued to report mixed results, but a growing number saw sales
increases in September compared with month-ago and year-ago levels.
Tourism remains a bright spot in the Sixth District economy. Contacts reported that
air passenger traffic, particularly international arrivals, is significantly above year-ago levels.
Convention attendance has exceeded 1991 levels and industry contacts indicated that advanced
bookings through mid-1993 offer the promise of another good year.

VI-2
Manufacturing: With some notable exceptions, factory activity in the District has
slowed somewhat in recent weeks.

According to industry contacts, economic weakness in

Europe has reduced the demand for exports while cutbacks in federal contracts from the
Department of Defense and NASA have also dampened the demand for manufactured goods.
Contacts also cited the slow pace of the national economic recovery as an additional source of
the poor demand for industrial products. Nevertheless, a majority of manufacturers contacted
remain optimistic that business conditions will improve over the next several months and
relatively few firms have reported reductions in labor force levels.
Although there has been a general lull in industrial production across the District, there
are some exceptions. Producers of building supplies, carpeting, and other home furnishings have
seen an increase in new orders as a result of the hurricane rebuilding effort.

Apparel

manufacturers have also reported increases in new orders and production for moderately priced
goods, particularly denim products. However, rather than hiring new workers to meet higher
production levels, most firms reported that they have simply increased the number of hours
worked by existing employees.
Construction:

After taking into account seasonal variations, realtors reported that

single-family home sales have been relatively good in most parts of the District. Sales are still
concentrated in the low-to-mid price range, and contacts noted that there is persistent weakness
at the upper end. Abundant inventories of existing homes for sale have kept prices relatively
stable. Builders reported that single-family home construction has continued at a steady pace,
and some builders have seen an increase in speculative building.
cautiously optimistic for the fourth quarter.

Builders and realtors are

VI-3
Multifamily construction remains slew in most areas. Even though several contacts
noted improvement in occupancy rates, effective rental rates remain too low to justify new
building. Similarly, new commercial construction activity remains weak, with speculative office
building close to zero.
In south Florida, realtors reported that the hurricane rebuilding effort is underway.
According to contacts, a majority of activity is concentrated in residential construction, and some
expect it to take up to three years to rebuild all destroyed homes. Contacts also reported that
vacancy rates in Miami's central business district have fallen temporarily as firms have taken
short-term leases while damaged facilities are repaired.
Financial Services: Bankers around the region reported that loan demand was flat or
up slightly in September and early October. The recent wave of mortgage refinancings has
peaked, but many loans remain in the processing pipeline, waiting to be closed.

Contacts

reported that commercial loan activity was flat in most areas of the District but that consumer
lending activity has increased slightly. Contacts in Miami have seen an influx of new deposits
from insurance settlements related to hurricane damages, but as of yet there has not been much
change in commercial or consumer loan demand.
Wages and Prices:

Most firms reported that their materials input prices were

unchanged in recent weeks. Although some firms have attempted to raise the prices of their final
products, competitive pressures have made it difficult to sustain these increases. And because
of the relative slackness in District labor markets, there have been no reports of increasing wage
pressures.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. The composition of Seventh District economic expansion shifted in September and
early October, as disruption in the auto industry combined with a sense of uncertainty to contribute to
mixed reports from the District's manufacturing sector. In contrast to earlier in the year, when
manufacturing activity led the District recovery, consumer spending now seems to be supporting income
gains in the region. Growth in retail sales and housing activity continued in September and early October.
Reports on commercial and industrial loan demand were mixed. A record corn and soybean harvest is
well underway. Many contacts shared the perception that the nearing election has played a role in
dampening economic activity, but they differed on the reasons why.
Retailing. Retailers indicated that sales growth continued in much of the District in September
and early October. However, sales of durable goods were mixed, as growth in sales of housing-related
products was offset by some reports of sluggish demand for cars. A large retailer expected its fourth
consecutive monthly increase in same-store sales in October on a seasonally adjusted basis, led by
durable goods linked to housing activity. This firm also reported that growth resumed in its outstanding
customer credit in recent months, as new credit sales offset the continuing liquidation of existing credit
balances. A large discount store chain reported little change in a trend of modest improvement in most
District markets in recent months. A store chain selling mid-priced apparel experienced significant sales
gains in September and October, and a regional analyst's survey of commissioned salespeople in
department stores also indicated higher growth in sales and customer traffic. A large appliance
manufacturerreported better-than-expected growth in retail sales of its own products, but gains remained

restricted to inexpensive models within various categories.
Autos. Slower-than-expected growth in car sales combined with labor disputes to lead to a
decline in District auto production in September and early October. One large automaker expected
domestic sales of light vehicles in the fourth quarter to be flat to down slightly from the third quarter (on a
seasonally adjusted basis). Another automaker reported that retail sales of its cars generally remained

sluggish relative to pre-recession levels, but noted that sales in most markets in the Midwest continued to
hold up better than the national average. One of the largest auto dealers in the District reported that sales
weakness has persisted after a slowdown was first reported late in the summer, and this dealer recently
lowered reorders for 1993 models from the levels that were planned earlier this year. An auto dealer
exchange reported that used car prices continued to rise in recent months, even as the volume of trading

VII-2
among dealers declined, and this contact expressed frustration with an unexpected shortage of used cars
in its market. After labor disputes contributed to an underbuild in third quarter production, one industry
analyst expects modest production gains for light vehicles in the fourth quarter on a seasonally adjusted
basis.
Manufacturing. While reports were mixed by area and industry, overall District manufacturing
activity lost some of its upward momentum in September and October. Purchasing managers' surveys in
Chicago, Detroit, and Southwest Michigan generally indicated that expansion continued through
September, albeit at a slowing pace in several areas. The Milwaukee survey for September showed
especially strong results, but other data and reports from individual firms largely indicated softer
conditions in more recent weeks. A large manufacturer of heavy machinery reported modest growth in
orders and shipments over a weak year-earlier period, but expressed growing concern with conditions in
several of its markets. A producer of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment reported that
demand softened in recent months. A manufacture of construction and industrial equipment reported
that shipments growth slowed since the summer. The firm is still
expecting a sales gain for the fourth
quarter, but distributors' sensitivity to price indicated that underlying demand remained sluggish. A
machine tool manufacturer reported that bookings growth slowed during the third quarter, but expected

higher growth during 1993. A large manufacturer of electronics reported that growth in industry orders
has lagged previous economic recoveries, but stated that the industry is "still seeing good growth," and
noted that its own orders have significantly bettered the gains shown in national statistics. A large truck
producer stated that orders for its heavy-duty trucks recently flattened out, and some other industry
contacts expressed concern about the vulnerability of heavy-duty truck orders to cancellations. An
association of machining companies reported slowing production in September and October, citing
production cutbacks by a large automaker. A large steel producer reported that its order book for fourth
quarter production is full, but the order book for first quarter 1993 production has been slow to build due
to weakness in orders from the auto industry.
Real Estate/Construction. Reports from realtors, banks, and other contacts were largely
consistent with statistical evidence of improvement in the District's housing market, although several
regions and market sectors remained soft. One of the largest realtors in the District reported a record
month for sales in September, partly (but not entirely) due to market share gains. This contact also noted
a modest upturn in its commercial mortgage business. A realtor based in a healthy market reported some

VII-3
slowing in transaction volume on a seasonally adjusted basis, but only after strong gains during the
summer. This realtor expected growth to resume in 1993. A large association of homebuilders reported
that an uptrend in sales and building activity was little changed over the last three months (after
accounting for seasonal factors). Traffic slowed in recent weeks, however, and the association does not
expect acceleration in growth in the fourth quarter: a contact noted that "there is a lot of optimism among
members about sales prospects in 1993." One large homebuilder stated that traffic was falling off
somewhat fasterthan normal for this time of year, but expected demand to improve after the election. A
large manufacturer of construction materials stated that production increases led to a further rise in its
capacity utilization in September and October, although price increases became more difficult to
implement. A large bank reported that residential mortgage activity continued to exceed plan, due both to
refinancings as well asnew lending.
Banking. Reports on trends in commercial and industrial loan demand were mixed. A middlemarket lender reported that loan demand recently fell below expectations, stating that "clients' planning
horizons skipped the third and fourth quarter -- many people seen to have decided to wait out the
election." A regional bank holding company noted that loan demand from retailers in its market remained
sluggish, despite a pickup in retail sales activity. A bank reported a pickup in demand for loans from
small and medium-sized manufacturers and wholesalers, "mainly because borrowers are trading money
between banks, not because there is any surge in capital spending." Reports from two middle-market
lenders indicated that demand for loans from commercial borrowers in Michigan was little changed in
recent months, while another lender reported increased growth in loans to borrowers in Wisconsin. The
leader of an association of small banks reported that loan demand remained sluggish, and stated that low
confidence levels were the most important reason for the continued insensitivity of loan demand to lower
interest rates. A large bank revealed increased loan demand from companies expanding production and
distribution capacity in Mexico.
Agriculture. The fall harvest is well underway. The soybean harvest has progressed at a nearnormal pace and is now nearing completion in most areas, except for Michigan where rain has slowed
harvesting. Progress with the corn harvest has been considerably slower than normal because of the high
moisture content of this year's crop. The latest U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates suggest the corn
and soybean harvest will be up a fifth from last year and modestly above the previous high set in 1985.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
District economic activity continues
Employment

at

employment
Single-

manufacturing

nonmanufacturing

at

amily

firms

housing

to expand,

appears
firms

construction

year-ago level throughout the District.

to

has

remains

albeit modestly.

have

increased,

shown

little

substantially

while
change.

above

its

All categories of loans at large

District banks showed increases during the past two months.

Record corn,

soybean and rice yields have been reported in many areas of the District.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing
with reports
example,

of employment

an apparel

plant and hire

maker

firms

continue

growth outnumbering
announced

an additional

that

it

1,000 workers,

to

increase

employment,

reports of decline.
will expand its
but a maker

For

Kentucky

of household

appliances, citing sluggish sales, will lay off 680 Louisville workers
next month.

In addition, a truck and tractor manufacturer in Kentucky

plans to shift production from abroad, increasing employment by 140 in
the District.

Two paper manufacturers

adding 650 jobs.

will open new plants in Kentucky,

In Indiana, another household appliance concern laid

off 850 workers for both seasonal and cyclical
carton-printing plant will close,
manufacturer

increased

from California.

reasons.

eliminating 100 jobs,

employment by 195 because

its

In Tennessee, a
while a fireplace

headquarters moved

A St. Louis auto plant laid off 100 more workers than

originally anticipated, but an area plastic container maker announced

VIII-2

that it will triple the size of its plant, resulting in 200 additional
jobs.

is

A northeast Mississippi sportswear manufacturer

expanding

its

productive capacity and increasing its workforce by 100.
Nonmanufacturing
Most

District

changes;

employment

significant

no

report

a few noteworthy exceptions exist.

however,

Louis,

a major telecommunications

of its

corporate headquarters

announced the

organization

Texas,

to San Antonio,

In Louisville,

jobs and employees.

firms

nonmanufacturing

In St.

relocation

moving about 500

a credit card processor will double

its employment to 160 within the next year.
Construction and RealEstate
in

Builders

most

parts

of

the

District

continue

to

report

substantial year-over-year increases in single-family housing permits.
Although

activity

recently slowed,

in

the

booming

corner

northwest

of

housing construction throughout the state

remain strong through year-end.

Arkansas
is

has

expected to

In light of the low level of interest

rates, some contacts note that sales activity is not especially vigorous;
one agent attributed this to the difficulty potential buyers have raising
a down payment.
Banking and Finance
District banks rose modestly in

Loans outstanding at 12 large

August and September after declining slightly in June and July.
loans

on the books of these

September
Business

after
loans

declining
rose 3

banks rose 2.2 percent
0.6

percent,

percent
real

during

estate

the

loans

Total

during August and
prior
rose

consumer loans were up 2.5 percent in August and September.

1

two

months.

percent

and

In contrast,

business loans declined 2.3 percent and real estate loans declined 1.7

VIII-3

Consumer loans are up almost 5 percent since

percent in June and July.
the end of May.

Agriculture and Natural Resources
Harvest

reports

throughout

the

District

excellent yields for corn, soybeans and rice.
yields are expected in Arkansas,
report

record

continues

to

corn
be

yields.

hampered

good

to

Record rice and soybean

and contacts in Kentucky and Tennessee

The
by

indicate

cotton harvest,

adverse

weather

on

the

other hand,

conditions;

likewise,

harvesting of the corn crop remains well behind normal in the northern
parts of the District.

Crop and livestock prices across the District are

generally below last year's levels.
report that farm machinery
last year.

Year-to-date

Contacts in Arkansas and Mississippi

and equipment
Southern Pine

sales are down slightly from
lumber exports,

while down 27

percent from an unusually high June level, are up 16 percent from the
same period last year.

With the exception of western Kentucky, District

coal production on a year-to-date basis is down slightly from last year.
Transportation
Contacts report that barge activity has slowed recently because
of the late fall harvest.
however,
future.

is

The prospect of bumper corn and soybean crops,

expected to increase barge activity measurably in

the near

Aircraft operations on a year-to-date basis are up moderately at

most major District airports,

and the St.

Louis airport is

record year in terms of passenger movements.

anticipating a

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
The Ninth District economy improved slightly in early fall following essentially steady to
slower conditions in late summer. Weather threats to crops did not materialize and Ninth
District directors report good cash returns in agriculture. They also report that the 1992
summer tourist season was strong. Retail chains reported stronger sales. Construction is
also an area of tentative strengthening, particularly in infrastructure such as street and
sewer improvements. Motor vehicle sales, however, are essentially steady and
manufacturing and mining are slow. Labor markets appear to have stabilized.

Consumer Spending
General merchandise spending in the District shows some signs of strength. Some
regional retailers report September sales increases of 15 to 25 percent compared to the
previous year Such reports are more positive than Minnesota and South Dakota sales tax
remittances for September, which are reported to be "as projected" at levels slightly above
a year ago.
Motor vehicle sales essentially match sales a year ago. Year-to-date figures for a
major domestic distributor show car sales down 2 percent from 1991 but pickup trucks up 4
percent. South Dakota new vehicle titles issued in September and year to date were
essentially unchanged from 1991.
The summer tourist season ended on an upbeat note. Directors, an industry
association and newspapers report that the season had been "good" to "excellent" in all
areas. Sources in South Dakota and Montana rated the season as excellent, though down
slightly from records set in 1991. Early news reports from the Upper Peninsula note
expectations of favorable game populations and weather conditions leading to good
hunting-related business for the fall season.

IX-2

Home Sales and Construction
Construction shows some signs of reviving. in Minnesota and the Dakotas, substantial
increases in contract awards for infrastructure such as roads, bridges and water/sewer
construction more than offset slight declines in other building. In Minnesota, construction of
Native American-owned casinos is a major activity with over $100 million of projects in
progress or completed so far this year. Congress recently authorized $19.2 million
maintenance and renovation projects at Air Force bases in Grand Forks and Minot, N.D.
The strong tourist season was cited as motivation for construction of 300 new motel rooms
in Billings, Mont.
Home sales are reported strong in most metropolitan areas. Eau Claire, Wis., and Rapid
City, S.D., reported 1992 housing starts 17 percent and 35 percent above 1991 respectively.
Duluth, Minn., was an exception, reporting a construction slump and sluggish sales.
Despite these encouraging reports, Minnesota's construction employment declined
slightly in September as several major projects were completed, according to employment
service officials.

Manufacturing activity appears to be slow. Hurricane-induced demand for bulding
materials, which continues to support forest-product manufacturing, is an exception
reported by directors. A computer manufacturer announced layoffs and the closing of one
plant caused by disappointing sales. Manufacturing employment numbers for Minnesota in
September were slightly above a year ago.
Mining is lackluster, with low prices for gold and copper limiting profitability in South
Dakota and Montana and slack demand for iron ore affecting northern Minnesota. A major
gold mine in western South Dakota announced plans to scale back production and offer
early retirement to 132 workers.

IX-3

Labor Market Conditions
Labor markets are largely unchanged. Unemployment rates for August were slightly
higher than the previous month and in August of 1991. Fewer large layoffs were reported
in District media since the last Beige Book. Layoffs did include 650 employees of a
computer manufacturer, 480 airline employees, 115 defense workers and 142 employees
of a hospitality company.
Agriculture
Weather concerns cited in previous reports did not materialize and conditions in
agriculture are generally reported to be good. An unusually cool, wet growing season
delayed crop maturity and continues to retard harvest operations, but yields for all major
crops except soybeans are generally excellent. Crop prices are generally stable with
wheat and small grain prices generally higher than last year but corn and soybeans
somewhat lower. Overall, gross revenues per acre are reported to be above 1991 for all
major crops except soybeans. Wheat growers in Minnesota and the Dakotas reported
above average yields. Montana's 1992 wheat crop was down 11 percent from 1991 due to
slightly lower yields and fewer acres planted.
Livestock profitability was generally unchanged to slightly lower. Prices for slaughter
livestock were a marginally lower compared to the same period in 1991. September dairy
prices were higher than in 1991, while poultry and eggs were largely unchanged. Prices for
feeder livestock in Montana and the western Dakotas were strong.
With the exception of localized areas affected by frost, hail or drought, agricultural
bankers responding to a quarterly survey of agricultural credit conditions reported that
farmers generally were able to service their operating loans and continue with debt
retirement. Directors noted that investment in new machinery was largely limited to new
harvesting machinery needed to cope with the late, unfavorable harvest conditions. Some
ranching areas of west-central South Dakota are extremely dry and much of Montana's
pasture and range continue below normal condition, but soil moisture in nearly all cropproducing areas of the region is excellent going into the winter.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.
modestly.
sales.

Economic growth in the Tenth District continues to improve

Retail sales are increasing, despite a slight drop in new car

Housing starts and new home sales are up again as mortgage rates

remain low.

Higher natural gas prices are boosting energy activity.

loan demand is gathering strength in most categories.

And bank

Farm income is likely

to be about unchanged from a year ago, however, as strengthening livestock
prices continue to offset weakening crop prices.
Retail Sales.
over the last month.

District retailers report continued improvement in sales
Demand is especially strong for apparel.

Prices overall

continue to be stable and are expected to remain steady for the next few
months.

While respondents are satisfied with their current inventories, most

plan to increase inventories in expectation of better Christmas sales.
Automobile sales over the last month were down slightly from last month.
but most dealers expect sales to improve gradually.

Financing is generally

available for both dealer inventories and potential buyers.

Dealers are

expanding inventories of the new models, but by less than in recent years.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report stable input prices over

the past month and expect no significant changes next month.

Some firms whose

inputs come from the steel industry report slightly longer lead times for
obtaining materials.

Most firms are trimming inventories in response to

seasonal factors or sluggish sales.

Firms are generally operating slightly

below capacity.
Housing.

Starts of single-family houses in the district are

substantially higher than both last year and last month, but multi-family
starts remain flat.

Builders expect housing starts to remain strong over the

X-2
rest of the year.

Sales of new homes are also strong and inventories are low.

Mortgage demand remains very strong due to low mortgage rates, with much of
the strength reflecting refinancing.

Mortgage demand is expected to moderate

over the rest of the year, as mortgage rates stabilize and seasonal factors
take effect.

New home prices are up slightly, partly reflecting rising lumber

prices.
Energy.

Higher natural gas prices continue to boost the district's

energy industry.

The average number of operating drilling rigs in district

states increased from 222 in August to 250 in September.

Moreover, the rig

count continued to rise sharply in the first three weeks of October to an
average of 282 rigs, or 13 percent more than a year earlier.
Banking.

Loan demand strengthened last month, with half of the

respondents reporting increases in demand and half reporting no change.

Most

categories of loan demand were stronger, although there were few reports of
changes in commercial real estate and agricultural loans.

Loan-deposit ratios

showed no clear pattern, with about a third of the respondents reporting
decreases, a third reporting increases, and a third reporting no change.
None of the respondents changed their prime rate in the last month, and
only one expects any change in the near term.

Half the respondents lowered

consumer lending rates in the last month, and another one-fourth expect to
lower then in the near term.

Lending standards were unchanged.

Deposit behavior varied across the respondents.

Half of the respondents

reported increases in deposits while half reported either no change or
decreases.
to up.
to down.

Demand deposits, NOW accounts, and MMDAs were generally constant

Large CDs and small time and savings deposits were generally constant

X-3
Agriculture.

The fall harvest is in full swing across the district.

Corn, soybean, and milo yields are generally larger than normal, while cotton
and peanut yields are near normal.
Planting of winter wheat is nearly complete in the district, and the
crop is generally in good condition.

In Oklahoma, however, dry weather has

slowed wheat planting and the development of winter wheat pastures.

Rain is

needed soon both to ensure an adequate forage supply for the winter months and
to promote development of next year's wheat crop.
Recent gains in cattle and hog prices have bolstered the income outlook
for district livestock producers.

Relatively high feeder cattle prices are

encouraging district ranchers to sell this year's calf crop to feedlots
earlier than normal.

Stronger hog prices and low feed prices have pushed up

profits for district hog producers.

Still, bankers see little expansion

underway in district hog production.
Nonfarm business activity in many of the district's rural communities is
picking up, although some communities continue to struggle.

Overall, most

rural bankers are optimistic about business conditions in their communities.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy continues its slow expansion.

Although there is

wide variation across industries, orders to the manufacturing sector are
increasing slightly.

Service sector sales growth is light, but persistent,

while retail sales have begun to accelerate.

Auto dealers report that demand

remains above a year earlier, but that sales have recently leveled off.
Construction activity is sluggish and banking conditions remain weak.
natural gas prices have motivated increased drilling activity.

Higher

Cool weather

has impaired growth of late-planted crops, while agricultural prices are up 3
percent from a year earlier.
Sales of manufactured products are up slightly, with most of the
strength in durable goods and most of the weakness in nondurables.

Among

durable goods, demand growth is highest for fabricated metals and electrical
and electronic machinery.

Respondents are optimistic about future sales

growth and some producers of electronic and electrical machinery say they are
increasing capacity.

Growth in homebuilding continues to boost orders for

brick, cement, and lumber and wood products.
moving up.

Prices for these products are

In contrast, demand for primary metals has declined slightly since

the last Beige Book survey and is now well below a year earlier.

Some glass

producers report that their orders are falling because of slipping automobile
production.

Among nondurable goods producers, demand for chemicals is

unchanged while sales of refined petroleum products remains below a year
earlier.

Respondents expect further consolidation in the refining industry.

Demand for paper and boxes remains unchanged since the last Beige Book survey,
although box sales are up from last year's levels.

Pulp prices have fallen

XI-2

significantly in recent months and some respondents anticipate temporary
layoffs.

Although orders for apparel are above a year earlier, demand growth

has recently slowed.

In the food and kindred products industry, sales remain

stable.
Service sector sales continue to increase slowly.

While respondents are

cautiously optimistic, employment expansion remains slower than last year.
Selling prices have shown little recent change, but several surveyed firms
plan to attempt price increases early next year.

In the Houston area,

weakness in industries that purchase business services have lowered demand to
that industry.
Retail sales growth has accelerated overall and respondents are
increasingly optimistic that expansion will continue.

Several companies

surveyed noted that District retailing remains very competitive and they
mentioned that they are looking hard for ways to reduce costs.
are said to be stable.

Selling prices

Automobile sales remain above a year earlier although

demand growth has recently softened.
Overall, District construction activity is sluggish.

New single-family

homebuilding continues to provide the only source of strength.

Some

respondents express concern that the homebuilding expansion will not last much
longer.

Apartment construction remains slow.

Highway construction has

dropped off recently and the outlook for future highway funding is said to be
very uncertain.
After considerable weakness earlier in the year, District rotary rig
activity has risen more rapidly than its usual seasonal uptick, and it now
remains essentially unchanged from a year ago.

Increased rotary rig activity

XI-3

has been spurred by rising natural gas prices, which are now at a seven-year
high.

Firms say that gas prices are up for three reasons:

Andrew has caused production curtailments.
replenish below-normal storage volumes.

(2)

(3)

(1)

Hurricane

Purchasers are attempting to

Anticipations of severe weather

this winter have motivated additional heavy buying.

In contrast to natural

gas prices, oil prices have remained relatively stable at around $21 per
barrel.
District banking conditions remain weak.

Loan

demand has softened

although it is said to be stronger than a year earlier.

Bankers attribute

this softness to business borrower caution about the near-term economic
outlook.

Bankers expect loan demand to rise slowly.

Agricultural conditions have worsened slightly.
weather has slowed the growth of some late crops and,

Unexpectedly cool
as a result,

agricultural officials have slightly reduced their production estimates.
District agricultural prices are unchanged from a month ago but prices are up
3 percent over a year earlier.

Price increases over the last year are the

result of upturns in livestock prices, which rose 4 percent.
declined by 1 percent.

Crop prices

XII - 1
TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions are mixed in the Twelfth District, with continued weakness in California
offsetting modest growth in other states. In California, weakness is reported in trade, finance, real
estate markets, and construction activity. Moreover, health and welfare programs are beginning to
feel cutbacks in state and local government spending resulting from the recent state budget agreement.
In the southern part of the state, weakness persists in aerospace and defense-related manufacturing.
Conditions in other District states are improving modestly, with the strongest conditions reported in
Utah and Idaho. However, most contacts expect sluggish overall economic growth. Agricultural
conditions are mixed, with drought affecting certain sections of the Pacific Northwest. Little upward
pressure on wages and prices is reported.
Business Sentiment
The sentiment of Twelfth District business leaders was little changed from our last report,
with most contacts expecting sluggish growth. Only 20 percent of our respondents expect the real
economy to expand during the next four quarters at a rate of at least 2.5 percent. This proportion is
about the same as in September but down from one-third in July and one-half in June. Almost threequarters of our respondents expect real output to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent.
Wages and Prices
Contacts continue to report few upward pressures on prices in District markets. Lumber and
roofing materials prices have risen due to recent hurricanes, but the surge in demand for plywood
appears to have ebbed and prices are reported to have dropped 15 percent in recent weeks. Retail
consumer prices in Utah and Idaho rose at a 4.5 percent annual rate during the first three quarters of
1992. A contact in the telecommunications industry reports generally declining prices and price
concessions by suppliers.

XII - 2

Boeing Company machinists approved a new three-year contract with the company on October
2. The deal included a 12 percent lump sum bonus check this year followed by 3.5 percent pay
increases during the next two years. Labor wages in the rail industry are reported to be increasing by
3 percent for less than a third of employees, with the rest receiving no increase.
Retail Trade and Services
Consumer sentiment appears severely affected in southern California, where contacts report
general pessimism due to continuing employment cutbacks. One contact reports that while general
merchandise retailers saw business pick up nationally in September, no significant change from
sluggish conditions is apparent in California. Contacts from several states report that discount and
outlet stores are doing well and expanding operations. In Arizona, retail sales rebounded during the
summer, showing a 4.3 percent increase in August over a year earlier. One contact reports that
durable goods sales in Arizona are suppressed by low consumer confidence, but that auto sales in
August were up 6 percent from a year earlier. An auto industry contact from Idaho also reports that
sales have improved somewhat since our last report.
The fall-out of the California state budget settlement reached in September is
beginning to be felt. All public state agencies experienced major reductions in funds, with health and
social welfare programs particularly hard hit. To offset lower finding levels, public colleges and
universities are reducing employment and raising fees.
Manufacturing

District manufacturing conditions are mixed, but defense-related employment reductions
continue in southern California. Contacts in Utah and Arizona report some increases in aerospace
activity due to shifts from California, and employment cuts in defense appear to be over in Idaho and
Utah. One contact reports that the aerospace industry has been helped by the avoidance of a strike at
Boeing and continued strong airplane orders from Pacific-Rim airlines. However, Boeing is cutting

XII
-3
back the production rate of its 737 model this year, and plans to slow production of the 757 in
September 1993. Aluminum production is reported to remain high, although prices have fallen
sharply.
Outside of aerospace and defense, conditions are mixed. One contact from Silicon Valley
reports that the price war continues in the personal computer industry, and that a significant shake-out
in the industry is expected. High-tech manufacturers are reporting some cancellations of orders from
Japan, but in general export demand from Latin America and Pacific Basin countries is supporting
manufacturing activity across the District. One contact from Arizona reports that business is booming
for suppliers to Mexican firms.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Eastern Oregon and most of Idaho are still in the grips of drought as irrigation water has been
shut off for quite some time and reservoirs are at extremely low levels. Tree fruit crops, however,
have been helped by sunny weather. Apple production in Oregon is 54 percent above last year's
crop, and cherry production in eastern Washington is up 30 percent from a year earlier.
Forest products production continues weak. Lumber exports are 25 percent below 1991
levels, due primarily to declines in shipments to Japan and other Pacific Basin countries. While
damage from the recent hurricanes caused plywood demand to surge, a contact reports that the shortterm jump in demand has subsided.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction and real estate conditions are mixed. Contacts in California report
sluggish sales, with prices decreasing in some areas, particularly for higher priced houses. A contact
in southern California notes that home foreclosures are up 74 percent since the beginning of 1992,
and another contact reports concern tht people cannot sell homes. Weakness in construction activity
in California is reflected in a 5.1 percent decline in lumber shipments to California during the first

XII-4
half of 1992 versus a year earlier. Stronger conditions exist in other District states. Contacts in
Oregon report a strong real estate market with a wave of construction activity in August. House sales
in Salem were 31 percent above their year-earlier level in August. Housing sales, construction and
prices are up in Tucson, but Phoenix still is reporting weakness. Contacts in Utah and Idaho are
reporting continued strong growth in housing demand. Nonresidential construction remains weak in
most District markets.
Financial Institutions
Financial industry conditions are mixed in the District, with weakness reported in California.
One California banker reports that consumer loan demand continues to drop, and that commercial
loan demand remains weak, although loan officers report some recent pickup among high-tech
industries in northern California. Another contact reports that loan demand remains weak as
consumers and businesses continue to be focused on debt reduction. Demand for mortgage loans in
Utah remains brisk, with demand coming from consumers upgrading their housing and from
continued migration into the state. Contacts in Oregon report that, despite recent mergers,
employment in financial services is growing due to relatively strong economic conditions.
Commercial loan demand in Utah and Arizona, however, is described as flat.

