SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

June 1992

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

SUMMARY.....
First District -- Boston

.

.

.

.

Second District -- New York

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.

.III-I
II-1

.

I-1
1-1

Third District -- Philadelphia
Fourth District -- Cleveland
Fifth District -- Richmond .
Sixth District -- Atlanta

.

.

.

. IV-1
V-l

.

VII-1

Seventh District -- Chicago
Eighth District -- St. Louis

VIII-I

.

Ninth District -- Minneapolis .
Tenth District -- Kansas City
Eleventh District -- Dallas
Twelfth District -- San Francisco

.

.

.

.

. IX-1

.

.

.

.

. .

..

XI-1

.

XI-1

.

XII-1

i
SUMMARY
Economic

activity

continues

to

improve.

The

sector appears to be strengthening in all districts.

manufacturing

The Chicago, Dallas

and St. Louis districts report gains in nonmanufacturing sectors as well.
All districts except Boston,
increases

in

consumer

New York and San Francisco report moderate

spending.

Residential

construction

activity

remains well above year-ago levels in most districts, and new home prices
have risen in several regions.
most districts.

Loan demand appears to be increasing in

Price stability in

the retailing and manufacturing

sectors seems to be the rule across districts.

Adverse weather has

affected agricultural prospects in many districts.
Manufacturing
All districts report improving manufacturing conditions,
for the defense and aerospace industries.

except

The Boston, Cleveland, Dallas,

Philadelphia, St. Louis and San Francisco districts report that orders
are increasing modestly,
gains.

while Atlanta and Chicago note much sharper

Most of the increases come from durables-producing

within each district.

industries

Employment at manufacturing firms continues to

rise in the Chicago, Philadelphia and Richmond districts.

The Atlanta

district reports that some firms have increased hours in

response to

increased demand.

The Boston,

New York,

Philadelphia

and Richmond

districts also report that at least one-fourth of the surveyed firms will
hire new employees during the next six months.

The Chicago district adds

that an increase in orders for new cars is expected to require additional
shifts and/or overtime.

The St. Louis district reports employment

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and based on
This document summarizes
information collected before June 9, 1992.
comments received from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal
Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

declines

because

Francisco

of plant

district

reports

closures

and

significant

relocations,
declines

while

because

of

the

San

defense

industry cutbacks.
Reported inventory levels are mixed.
firms report no inventory concerns,

while

San Francisco district
firms

in

the Kansas

City

district find their inventories either satisfactory or slightly high.
Richmond district firms experienced no changes in inventories or backlogs
and foresee no changes in the next six months.
Demand for exports
because

of manufactured

of weakening foreign economies.

goods seems to be waning
For

example,

the

Boston,

Minneapolis, Richmond and San Francisco districts report a drop-off in
the volume of durables

exports,

especially electronics

to Japan and

appliances to Canada.

The San Francisco district, however, reports that

exports of electronic

components

to other Pacific-Rim nations remain

strong.
Nonmanufacturing
The St.

Louis district reports strengthening in the growth of

nonmanufacturing employment.
experienced

a large

loss

Southern California, on the other hand, has
of retail and service-related

aftermath of the Los Angeles riots,
significant
stores

in

retail job

jobs

in

the

and the New York district will post

losses by this fall when 15 major department

the New York metropolitan area

are

closed.

Outside

of

retailing, the Chicago and Dallas districts report increased activity in
business-related services.

The San Francisco district indicates growth

in advertising but declines in telecommunications.
Consumer Spending
Most districts report increases in non-auto merchandise sales.
All districts except Boston, Cleveland, New York and San Francisco report
modest gains in April and May, while the Minneapolis, Philadelphia and

iii
St.

Louis

note year-over-year

districts

gains as well.

growth is attributed to the late Easter season.
and Richmond districts
Atlanta

concurs

by

identify big-ticket
stating

The Dallas, Philadelphia

items as

that nondurables

durables.

The Dallas district

upper-scale

stores than at discounters,

notes

Much of this

are

greater

slow movers,

and

selling better

than

improvement

at mid-

to

while San Francisco indicates

increases at both department and discount stores.

Contacts in the Boston

and New York districts blame unseasonably cool weather and the news of
potential

additional

layoffs

for

their poor

traffic and sales are increasing steadily in

sales.

Auto

dealership

most districts;

the Dallas

and San Francisco districts, however, report slower or "spotty" growth.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential

construction activity continues

strength in most districts.

to be a source of

While construction has stabilized or dropped

off slightly in some districts since its first-quarter surge, contacts in
the Atlanta,
describe
prices

Kansas City,

Minneapolis,

Richmond and St.

Louis districts

the pace of residential building activity as strong.

are reportedly higher in

the Dallas,

New home

Kansas City and Richmond

districts because of increased lumber costs and low inventories.

New and

existing home sales are mixed, with the Atlanta and Minneapolis districts
reporting
Richmond

a

slight

downward

districts

trend

reporting

a

in

sales

continued

and

the

increase

Kansas
in

City and
No

sales.

appreciable improvement in commercial real estate markets is reported.
Banking and Finance
Loan
districts.
Richmond
demand.
St.

demand
Contacts

appears
in

to

have

the Atlanta,

and San Francisco

districts

increased

slightly
City,

in

Dallas,

Kansas

report

stable-to-stronger

most

New York,
loan

The Philadelphia district describes loan demand as soft, and the

Louis district reports

that loan demand appears to have weakened in

recent weeks.

The source of increased demand varies by district; some

report increases in consumer loan demand,
in business loan demand.

while others note improvements

The Kansas City and San Francisco districts

report increases in both categories.
Prices
Inflationary expectations
relatively subdued.

Contacts in

in retailing and manufacturing remain
the Boston,

Dallas and Philadelphia

districts report retail prices as stable, while contacts in the Chicago,
Kansas City, Minneapolis, Richmond and San Francisco districts report
slight-to-moderate price increases.

Manufacturing and retailing wage

pressures remain moderate-to-low across most districts.

Manufacturing

materials prices remain relatively stable across districts,

although

steel producers in the Chicago district report higher input prices.
Agriculture, Energy and Natural-Resources-Related Industries
Many

districts

report

that

unseasonably

cool

weather

and

inadequate soil moisture have hampered the planting and development of
many crops.

In the Chicago, Kansas City and St. Louis districts, adverse

weather has affected the corn, cotton, soybean and winter wheat crops.
Declining livestock prices have recently led cattle and pork producers in
the Kansas

City district to curtail

district reports that,

production.

except for grains,

The San Francisco

agricultural exports to Mexico

and the Pacific Rim (excluding Japan) have been strong lately.
the recent

firming of oil and gas prices,

the Dallas,

Despite

Kansas City,

Minneapolis and San Francisco districts indicate that the energy sector
remains weak.

Lumber production is up significantly in the St. Louis

district, but down in the San Francisco district.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District manufacturers contacted in early June were more
positive about the recovery than were retailers, although both remain
cautious.

Retailers expressed disappointment at recent fluctuations in

economic conditions.

They reported that the slight strengthening of

consumer demand witnessed earlier in the year appeared to fade in May.
By contrast, most manufacturing contacts were pleased to report small
year-over-year increases in sales and orders, thanks, in several cases,
to unexpectedly strong demand from the auto industry.

Nevertheless,

anticipating a subdued recovery, manufacturers, like retailers, were
keeping their investment and employment plans modest.

Retail
First District retailers contacted in the first week of June
reported that earlier sales gains, especially noticeable in April, were
reversed in May.

They attribute the slowdown to poor weather conditions

that limited demand for summer apparel and home improvement items.

In

addition, continued news of layoffs in other New England industries was
thought to have intensified consumer caution.

Only one of the retailers

contacted experienced a significant rise in sales, and the contact
attributed the increase to the firm's market position rather than
economic conditions.
With few exceptions, the cost of goods to retailers remains fairly
constant, as are the prices offered consumers.

Inventories remain

intentionally low, as retailers feel uncertain about the direction of

I-2
Recent sales results have even convinced one contact to

the economy.

cancel plans for opening a new store.

Others have restricted capital

spending plans, typically to remodelling existing facilities.
With one exception, no contact plans to hire new employees.
However, neither do the retailers contacted anticipate employment
reductions, as staff levels had previously been reduced to a minimum.
Two employers recently instituted small wage increases for all
employees.

Virtually all retailers are cautious about the summer ahead,

and some express concern that, as in 1991, the positive results of
earlier months may be followed by weakening.

Manufacturing
Two-thirds of the First District manufacturers contacted in early
June indicate that sales and orders are modestly above year-ago levels.
In all cases, the reported increase was 5 percent or less.
Nevertheless, several respondents have experienced unexpectedly strong
orders from the auto industry as well as improved demand for products
related to residential construction.

By contrast, defense, commercial

real estate, and parts of commercial aerospace are said to be relatively
weak markets; general-purpose capital goods remain sluggish as well.

In

addition, most First District manufacturing contacts say that their
major foreign markets continue to weaken.

Inventory-to-sales ratios are

generally below year-ago levels; according to a few respondents, ratios
should continue to improve.
Manufacturing contacts indicate that materials prices are stable
or under downward pressure.

In the case of selling prices, a minority

have achieved small increases on some or all products; the rest
reportedly face a tough pricing environment.

I-3
Reports on employment are mixed.

For the majority, the work force

has shrunk from year-ago levels, with the declines ranging from slight
to 7 percent.

By contrast, a few contacts have hired or are now hiring

small numbers of workers.

Within the foreseeable future, one-third

expect to reduce employment while another third expect to expand.

As

for compensation, one contact just announced a 2 percent wage
increase, while another recently reduced wages and restructured the
benefits package.
Capital spending plans are described as modest.

According to

several respondents, capital spending will remain flat or will equal
little more than depreciation.

Investment objectives include increasing

efficiency, introducing new products, and providing required
maintenance.

One-third say that they have excess space.

First District manufacturing contacts believe that a subdued
upturn has begun.

However, they all expect that persistent problems in

important markets will restrain the pace of the recovery.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports on recent developments in the Second District continue to
be basically mixed, but marginally more negative in tone than in recent
months.

On the plus side, office leasing activity in Manhattan

continued at a moderate pace and a survey of District manufacturing
firms showed business conditions have improved significantly since last
November.

In contrast, however, District homebuilders noted a recent

slackening of activity and department store contacts reported some
slowing in sales growth.

Labor market developments were also

unfavorable, with state unemployment rates rising in May and with
layoffs of over 7,000 retail employees expected by summer's end.
Senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized District banks
indicated no change in their willingness to lend from two months
earlier.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilders in upstate New York and northern New Jersey
generally report a recent slackening of activity after the rise in
sales earlier this year, although sales remain above last year's
levels.

A builders association projects new single family homes in

western New York will total between 2,300 and 2,400 units this year,
above last year's level of 2,100, but well below the more than 2,800
homes built in both 1988 and 1989.
Manhattan office leasing activity has continued to rise, but
growing inventories of available space have led to increases in overall
vacancy rates.

In the market for sublet space in Midtown Manhattan,

however, declines in asking rental rates have so increased leasing
activity that the inventory of available space has finally begun to
decline.

II-2

Consumer Spending
Second District department stores reported that sales growth was
slightly stronger in April than in May.

Although the range of year-to-

year sales growth was quite similar for both months -- flat to
+15 percent in April as compared to -3 percent to +15 percent in May -more stores were clustered near the bottom of the range during the most
recent period.

Easter boosted sales of children's clothing in April,

while unusually cool weather slowed apparel sales the following month.
All contacts reported inventories on plan.
Fifteen New York metropolitan area department stores are
scheduled to close by summer's end, resulting in the loss of 7,200
jobs.

Several of the stores are the last remaining retail anchors in

older downtown areas; the Fordham Road section of the Bronx and downtown Newark and New Rochelle are expected to be particularly hard hit.
On a more positive note, a major New Jersey shopping mall has announced
plans for expansion and renovation, including three new luxury
department stores to replace two anchors which had previously closed.
Other Business Activity
A May survey of 15 Second District manufacturing firms suggests
that local business conditions are now significantly more positive than
they were when the same firms were surveyed last November.

Ten of the

firms anticipate sales will increase over the next six months, with
seven of the ten having recently become more optimistic.

Only three

firms are anticipating layoffs, as compared to six firms in November.
The most recent purchasing managers reports from Buffalo (for May) and
Rochester (for April) suggest that general business conditions have
been basically stable over the latest month reported.
Labor market developments in the Second District have generally
been unfavorable.

The unemployment rate in New Jersey rose sharply,

from 7.8 percent in April to 9.0 percent in May; New Jersey now has the

II-3
highest unemployment rate of any major industrial state.

New York

State experienced a much smaller increase, from 7.6 to 7.9 percent.

In

addition to the expected loss of 7,200 District retail jobs, Bethlehem
Steel and MONY announced the elimination of 350 and 267 positions,
respectively.

In contrast, Prestolite Electric will consolidate its

national operations in upstate New York, creating 320 local jobs over
the next three years.
Standard and Poor's has placed New Jersey on negative CreditWatch
in response to the state's burgeoning FY1993 budget gap.

A combination

of factors -- including a one percentage point reduction in the sales
tax rate, the loss of anticipated federal medicaid reimbursements, and
lower than expected receipts -- have led to a prospective budget shortfall in excess of $1 billion for the

fiscal year beginning July 1.

Financial Developments
Nearly all senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized
banks in the Second District indicated that they are as willing to lend
as they were two months ago.

Borrowers who had weathered the recession

were perceived by some officers as having improved their credit
worthiness.

Most respondents reported either maintaining or lowering

loan rates.

Loan demand was reported to be generally stable or

somewhat stronger.

Part of the strength in demand was attributed to

the increase in new customers whose former banks had either failed or
merged.

Demand for consumer loans and non-residential mortgages

remained steady.
A majority of respondents reported no change in delinquency rates
for all types of loans during the past two months.

Most officers did

not indicate a marked increase in problem real estate loans.
however, express a preference for restructuring, rather than
foreclosing, existing troubled loans.

They did,

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from Third District business contacts in early June suggested that
business conditions were improving slowly.

Manufacturing activity continued to

move up, on balance, and hiring at Third District industrial plants appeared to
be on the increase.

Retailers generally reported steady or slightly higher sales

for May compared to the prior month and year.

Bankers described loan volume as

steady, with slight gains in mortgage and auto loans being offset by continuing
declines in commercial and industrial lending.
Looking

ahead, Third District business

Manufacturers are relatively optimistic.

contacts

forecast slow growth.

They predict a continuing increase in

activity and they plan to step up hiring and capital spending in the second half
of the year.

Retailers anticipate improvement in the fourth quarter, but not

strong gains.

Bankers expect consumer lending to move up slowly but they believe

business loan demand will remain soft.
MANUFACTURING
Reports

from

Third

district manufacturers

in late

May and

early June

indicated that, on balance, industrial activity continued on an uptrend.

One-

third of the firms contacted said they were stepping up shipments while one-half
said their shipments had been running at a steady pace.

Reports on new orders

paralleled the shipments situation.

Durable goods producers indicated somewhat

more

nondurables

positive

conditions

than

did

companies generally reported gains in business.

producers,

although

chemical

The manufacturing employment

picture appeared to be brightening; although two-thirds of the firms contacted

III-2
for this report were maintaining steady payrolls, one-fourth were adding workers.
Looking ahead, almost two-thirds of the manufacturers contacted said they
expect further gains in the second half of the year while nearly one-third said
they anticipate just steady business. Overall, managers at Third District plants
foresee increases

in orders and shipments during the next six months.

The

positive outlook is apparently leading manufacturers in the region to step up
hiring and capital spending plans; nearly four-out-of-ten said they will add
workers and increase outlays for plant and equipment in the second half of the
year.
RETAIL
Third District retailers generally indicated that sales in May were even
with, or slightly up compared to both April sales and sales in May of last year.
Store

officials

expectations.
well as

said

the

recent

sales

pace

had

been

in

line

with

their

There were some reports that big-ticket items were not selling as

other goods.

Nearly

all the

merchants

contacted for this

report

characterized their selling efforts as highly promotional, involving extensive
discounting from list prices.
Looking ahead, most Third District retailers expect sales during the summer
to be seasonally slow.

They are hoping that sales will improve in the fourth

quarter of this year, but they do not anticipate a strong upturn because they
expect only a very gradual increase in consumer confidence.
FINANCE
Third District bankers

contacted in early June described overall loan

volume outstanding as virtually flat.

Gains in mortgage and consumer lending

were being offset by continuing declines in commercial and industrial loans.
Bankers said they were booking new business loans but the amounts were less than

III-3
the amounts being paid off by existing borrowers.

Lending to middle-size and

small businesses was described as particularly soft by several bankers who said
loan demand in these markets was weak.

As to consumer lending, several bankers

said credit card balances were being paid down but there had been an upturn in
auto loans, pushing total personal loan volume up slightly in recent weeks.
Most of the bank lending officers contacted for this report expect loan
demand from businesses to remain soft.

They believe firms are still focusing on

cutting costs rather increasing sales to boost profitability.

They also said

consumer lending is likely to grow only slowly, as they foresee slow economic
growth and a sluggish advance in consumer confidence.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.
slowly.

Economic activity in the Fourth District continues to expand

District respondents believe that economic growth will be sustained

in both the District and the nation, despite the recent slowdown in retail
sales and housing.

Retailers attribute the flatness in May and early June

sales to unseasonably cool weather.

Manufacturing output has been reviving

and is expected to strengthen further next quarter as a result of inventory
rebuilding and a broad-based pickup in capital goods and automotive
industries.

New mortgage loan activity eased in May and early June, following

a stronger-than-seasonal rise earlier this year, and business loan demand is
showing only scattered signs of strengthening.
Recovery in the District continues to be mild and uneven, but respondents
expect a stepped-up pace of business over the next few months, led especially
by manufacturing.

In Ohio, the unemployment rate rose to 7.3 percent in May,

because the labor force increased more than employment.

The composite leading

indicator for the state rose for the third straight month in March, which
suggests to some analysts that the pace of activity in coming months will

accelerate.
Nationally, total output is forecast to increase at about a 3 percent
rate, accompanied by a similar rate of inflation, from 1992:IIIQ to the end of
1993, according to the June survey of Fourth District economists.

The group

IV-2

anticipates a gradually improving consumer sector, but has shaded predictions
for nonresidential construction from last January because of a longer-term
correction in commercial building.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales in May and early June were generally

flat, but several retailers believe that the unusually cool weather this
spring has dampened sales of seasonal goods, including women's and men's
apparel and garden supplies.

Some are concerned that inventories of seasonal

merchandise may expand more than desired, which will result in
greater-than-usual clearance sales before and after the July 4 holiday.
Nevertheless, most retailers believe that consumer spending will continue on a
slowly rising trend through the balance of the year.

Except for the

disappointing showing of seasonal products, a large retail chain reports that
sales of home furnishings and major appliances in the last two months have
posted sizable year-over-year gains.
Manufacturing.

Fourth District respondents estimate that production in

1992:IIQ will rebound from declines in the last two quarters.

Some of the

revival is attributed to an ending of the runoff in inventories, and in some
industries, to a slight rebuilding of stocks in response to improving sales.
Only scattered recalls of workers who were laid off have taken place in recent
months, and several manufacturers, while more optimistic about their sales
outlook than earlier in the year, still have not lifted a freeze on hiring.
More anticipate, however, that they will add rather than lay off workers in
the third quarter.
A variety of "traditional" capital equipment producers report recent
increases in profits, production, and orders, although unfilled orders have
begun to increase in only a few industries.

Producers of components for

IV-3

heavy-duty trucks, industrial controls, industrial equipment, and electrical
motors and equipment all report a slowly reviving order book in recent months
that is boosting production this quarter from last, and that is anticipated to
support a somewhat stronger pace of industrial production next quarter than
this.
Steel producers in the District estimate their operating rates at about 83
to 85 percent of capacity, which is a little better than their predictions for
this quarter a few months ago.

They note improving orders from the appliance,

automotive, and steel warehouse centers, but demand for construction steel
remains weak.

A steel producer reports that higher domestic content in new

cars and a higher share of domestic steel consumed by the transplant firms are
supporting a rise in orders from the auto industry.
New car sales and production in the third quarter are anticipated to rise
to a 6.5 million to 6.7 million annual rate, and to a 7 million zone in the
fourth quarter, according to some automotive analysts.

Factory orders are

said to be somewhat higher than dealer sales, although dealers contacted
acknowledge that they will promptly cut back orders if sales prove to be
slower than they now anticipate.
Housing.

Lenders in the District report a less-than-seasonal increase in

new mortgage loans in May and early June.

Nevertheless, new loan applications

are generally well ahead of the pace of a year earlier.

A few major thrift

institutions have recently lowered interest rates for a 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage to 8-1/4 percent, and a few lenders are offering even lower rates.
Mortgage loans for new and existing homes are said to be strong for houses in
the $150,000 to $200,000 price range, but are described as being "very weak"
for homes priced over $400,000.

Loan refinancing has accounted for about 20

IV-4

percent of loans recently written, which is well below the proportion earlier
this year.
Financial Developments.

Bankers contacted report growing loan demand for

mortgage and home equity loans, but only scattered evidence of strengthening
in commercial and industrial loans.

Those few banks that are reporting slowly

rising demand for business loans also expect an accelerating pace in the
months ahead in response to an anticipated step-up in inventory building.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District activity from late April through May generally continued to
improve at a modest pace.

Growth was reported in retailing, manufacturing,

housing and port activity.

Contacts in the tourist industry gave mixed

reports, but most were optimistic.

Weather was blamed for slower agricultural

activity in recent weeks.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that District retail activity
continued to improve in May.

Shopper traffic and sales increased, although

sales of big ticket items relative to total sales apparently decreased.
Respondents reported increases in wholesale prices, retail prices and
inventories over the survey period.
Retailers were optimistic about their prospects for the next six months.
They expected sales, wages and prices to rise. They anticipated no change in
retail employment.
Tourism
Hotels, motels and resorts throughout the District indicated that
tourist activity in May was mixed compared with April and with a year ago.
About half of the respondents reported that bookings were slightly above last
year's while a third reported declines.

Several respondents attributed the

increases to a good Memorial Day weekend, while respondents with decreases
attributed the declines to bad weather and to the economy.
tourist activity to pick up throughout the summer.

Over half expected

V-2
Manufacturing
Manufacturers surveyed by mail indicated that District factory activity
continued to improve in recent weeks.

Respondents reported increases in most

indicators, particularly shipments and employment.
backlogs were little changed.

Inventories and order

Manufacturers noted that excess capacity and

the burdens of government regulation were important current problems.

Most

respondents expected profits in the first half of 1992 to be moderately higher
than profits in the first half of 1991.
Manufacturers remained optimistic about general business conditions and
about their own prospects over the next six months.

They foresaw increases in

all indicators except for finished goods inventories, which they anticipated
would be flat.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions improved modestly over the last six weeks.

Commercial loan

demand apparently strengthened slightly, while consumer loan demand was
steady.

Banks noted that they had kept their commercial loan rates steady in

recent weeks but had reduced their mortgage rates slightly.

Respondents

reported that the demand for new residential mortgages had picked up while
refinancing activity had continued to tail off.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, Hampton Roads
(Norfolk)--indicated that both imports and exports were generally higher in
May than in April.

Compared with a year ago, import activity was higher while

export activity was lower.

Exports were expected to continue increasing at

the Port of Charleston and at Hampton Roads but to remain the same at

Baltimore during the next six months.
Housing
A telephone survey of real estate and homebuilding contacts suggested
stable to improving housing activity in much of the District.

Several

respondents said activity in their areas was at its highest level in two to
three years.
prices.

Overall increases were reported in traffic, sales, starts and

There were exceptions to the general tone of optimism, however,

especially in the Washington, D.C. area.

Speculative homebuilding remained

very slow.
Agriculture
According to agricultural analysts, bad weather slowed planting and crop
development over much of the District in recent weeks.

Rain in late May

slowed planting, which is now behind last year's pace, and below-normal
temperatures held back the development of small grains.

The District's peach

crop was in poor to fair condition because of late frosts in mountain areas.
West Virginia was an exception to the rest of the District.

Sparse

rainfall in May allowed planting to progress on schedule but left many parts
of the state short of soil moisture.

VI-1

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: Contacts around the Sixth District reported that economic conditions have
continued to improve at a slow but steady pace since mid-April. Retailers noted a moderate gain
in sales of both consumer durables and non-durable goods. Auto dealers saw an improvement
in showroom traffic and sales. Manufacturers observed increased activity in an expanding range
of industries. Developers noted steady single-family home building activity, though commercial
construction has not improved. Bankers reported modest gains in business loan demand and
somewhat greater improvement in consumer loan activity. In general, wages and prices have
remained flat.
Consumer Spending: Most retailers in the District reported moderate sales increases
through early June. Contacts said that sales were again strongest for nondurable items such as
apparel, but several noted gains in furniture and appliance purchases. Auto dealers also reported
increased showroom traffic and sales. Still, retailers have remained cautious in placing new
orders and have maintained lean inventory levels.

Contacts do not anticipate significant

inventory rebuilding in the near future. Convention- and tourism-related activity has also shown
improvement.

In commenting on the recent airfare price war, agents reported that price

reductions had boosted individual travel, but they had little impact on family vacations and
business travel.
Manufacturing: Manufacturing activity in the District continues to improve. Increases
in new orders and production were noted in a broad range of industries, with firms linked to
residential housing activity recording the biggest gains. Carpet and home appliance producers
saw strength in new orders. Several furniture and cabinet manufacturers stated that they have

VI-2

boosted hours worked to meet increased demand for their products. Lumber and wood producers
have added to employment rolls in response to expanding residential construction activity.
Shipments have continued to pickup for a producer of mens wear. New orders have
increased steadily for a firm producing sports apparel. One large textile firm producing for
institutional customers reported that it was building inventories in anticipation of future increases
in demand. However, several textile and apparel manufacturers noted that retailers continue to
keep inventory levels low.
Business activity generally remains weak for firms in the energy sector. However,
some suppliers of equipment and services to the oil and gas industry believe that this longtroubled market may be stabilizing with the recent firming of natural gas prices. Defense and
aerospace industry contacts also reported a slowdown in industry activity as orders have been

canceled and delivery times pushed back because of defense cutbacks. These cutbacks spread
acquisitions over a longer period of time.
Construction: Most realtors reported steady home sales in May and early June, but
activity has slowed from the rapid pace recorded earlier this year. Sales remain strongest in the
low-to-middle price ranges. Resale inventories remain adequate as more people have put their
homes up for sale in response to improved market conditions. As a result, realtors have not seen
much change in the price of existing homes.
Contacts report that new home inventory levels are relatively low. Consistent with this
observation, most builders stated that residential home building activity has continued to improve.
Multifamily construction, however, is still weak despite reports that occupancy rates are
relatively high in some areas.

VI-3

Commercial construction activity remains at a minimum. Although some commercial
realtors have seen an improvement in leasing activity and a firming in rental rates, contacts in
several cities say that markets remain over supplied. Excess office space reportedly has kept
rental rates at levels too low to justify new building.
Financial Services: Loan demand in the region increased slightly in May from April
levels. Most bankers observed a small increase in business loan activity and a somewhat larger
increase in consumer loan demand. The surge in residential mortgage refinancings that occurred
earlier in the year, however, has almost worked its way through the system. Most contacts
reported improved quality in loan applications of all kinds.
Wages and Prices: Most contacts report that input prices and wages remain stable.
Firms that have expanded their employment rolls in the last month report that ample supplies of
labor have allowed them to hire new workers at existing wage levels.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Manufacturing activity in the Seventh District generally continued to post gains in
recent weeks, while conditions in service-related industries were more mixed. Reports from
manufacturers, supplemented by business surveys, depicted a widening of the recovery in the District's
industrial sector, with renewed gains for capital goods producers joining continued strengthening in
production of consumer durable goods, primarily autos. The lengthening recovery in the motor vehicle
sector has been accompanied by improved results reported by a wide variety of producers of auto parts
and capital goods. Business-related services offered increasingly optimistic reports, while some
consumer-related services indicated a slower pace from earlier this year. Cool, dry weather has adversely
impacted the early development of many District crops. Price increases generally remained modest, and
most contacts noted that efforts to raise prices have been strongly resisted.
Manufacturing. The manufacturing sector continued to strengthen in recent weeks, as reports
from manufacturers and business surveys indicated further gains in industrial activity in the Seventh
District. A large steel producer reported that orders have been building faster than the normal seasonal
pattern, and year-to-date bookings are substantially above a weak year-earlier period. A manufacturer of
hydraulic equipment expected a modest but continuing recovery, with a boost from Caterpillar's return to
production. Strengthening in production of off-highway vehicles was also indicated by a motor vehicle
parts supplier, who stated that orders have turned higher since the first quarter. A large chemical
producer reported that orders have been "very positive," singling out engineered plastics used in
automobiles. A large manufacturer of machine tools reported that the firm's bookings have risen
substantially since the beginning of the year, with strength in orders from motor vehicle manufacturers
joined by improvements in demand from producers of industrial machinery, farm equipment, and
construction machinery. However, retail sales of farm equipment remained soft through May, according
to a large manufacturer, and the firm recently shaved its forecast for 1992 shipments.
Recent surveys supported anecdotal evidence of further strengthening in District manufacturing
activity. The composite index for the Chicago purchasing managers' survey climbed higher in May, led

VII-2
by production and new orders. The new orders component has posted marked improvement in recent
months and has risen to levels well above those that prevailed prior to the onset of the recession. The
overall index for the Detroit survey was essentially unchanged in May, after climbing to its highest level
in the past three years during April. Purchasing managers' surveys in Milwaukee, Southwest Michigan,
and Indianapolis have also been posting results consistent with a recovery in recent months. Finally, an
April survey of metalworking firms indicated solid gains in production, orders, and employment, with
above-average results posted in a key activity considered to be a leading indicator for metalworking firms
as a whole.
Motor Vehicles. Domestic motor vehicle sales and production generally continued to strengthen
in recent weeks. One large automaker reported that "dealer orders continue to look good," implying
production in excess of 100 percent of capacity (at straight time) at some plants in coming months. Auto
dealer optimism has improved faster than actual showroom traffic, because closure rates and traffic
quality have been rising. Another automaker reported that fleet purchases continue to take a lower share
of deliveries, while program cars are accounting for a lower share of the retail sales mix. Used car prices,
a good coincident indicator of retail sales of new cars, have climbed higher over the past few months.
Light truck sales have exceeded forecast, and there is "no sign of weakening here." One producer noted
that light truck production has increased substantially during 1992.
Reports of improving activity from motor vehicle suppliers generally reinforced these
observations. For example, one manufacturer reported a pickup in sales as well as production planning,
and the firm has reached the point where "we can't do the work we have to do with the labor force we
have." A manufacturer of power train components stated that its strongest market now is heavy-duty
trucks, where orders have shown a substantial acceleration in the past several months, although efforts to
hedge against a price increase anticipated later this year may be playing a role in recent gains. However,
this contact also noted that the medium-duty truck market still faces soft demand in some customer
classes, notably construction contractors and state and local governments.

VII-3
Business and Consumer Services. Suppliers of business-related services reported higher levels
of activity in May, but some softening in retail sales growth has followed a robust first quarter. A large
temporary help firm stated that "we are very much encouraged by recent trends." Demand began to turn
up toward the end of last year and momentum has moved higher in recent weeks. While the national
improvement has been broad-based, demand by industrial firms for temporary employees is aboveaverage. With its large manufacturing base, employment in the Seventh District has been outperforming
other regions. After a trough in January, industrial power sales in Western Michigan continued to post
solid increases in recent months, reflecting improvement in appliance and motor vehicle production.
Another large utility in Michigan reported that a leading indicator of business conditions in the Detroit
area continued to improve through May. One large retailer reported that year-over-year sales gains
continued to soften in recent weeks, although sales of durable goods continued to hold up relatively well.
Last year at this time, sales were picking up after the end of the war, leading to some softening in the
current year-over-year comparison, but the firm's inventory has again risen above plan after progress was
reported in shaving it to desired levels earlier in the year. Some concern with the effect of softening in
sales on inventory levels was also expressed by another major retail chain, where sales in May and early
June were essentially flat compared to last year.
Agriculture. Rapid progress in May culminated in a "faster-than-normal" completion of the
spring planting season for most District farmers. However, early-season development of most crops has
been slow due to cool temperatures and very dry conditions. Northern portions of the District were hit by
a frost in late May, causing modest damage to corn and soybeans and more extensive damage to fruits
and vegetables. In some cases, farmers may be able to offset the frost damage by replanting.
Prices. Reports indicated that price increases, on balance, remained modest. A steel producer
reported that an attempt by the industry to reduce sales discounts "fizzled out" in April, but producers are
still experiencing price increases on purchased materials, and have announced the intention of increasing
sheet prices in July. A large automaker stated that there was little sign of price pressures from parts
suppliers and does not expect the recently announced steel price hike for July to hold. However, new car

VII-4
sales volume (in units) has been held back somewhat by a 2 percent quality-adjusted increase in prices
over the past year, primarily for foreign nameplates. An auto parts manufacturer acknowledged some
price pressures from its own suppliers and, in turn, reported seeking price increases from large
automakers. Another auto parts manufacturer reported that obtaining price increases is "extremely
difficult." Crude oil and natural gas prices have firmed in recent weeks, according to a large refiner,
primarily due to increased demand. A chemical producer reported that a cyclically-sensitive index of
product prices has been relatively flat since last August, although some strengthening has been evident in
recent weeks. A large personnel company reported that wage pressures have been minimal, and stated
that "we don't see pricing coming back," despite improved demand in recent months.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
Manufacturing
gains

and

others

activity

remains

reporting

mixed,

declines

in

with some

both

Nonmanufacturing employment continues to grow.
to be on a steadily increasing trend.

and

employment.

Consumer spending appears

Single-family home construction

still is up sharply from year-ago levels.
weakened over the past two months.

sales

firms reporting

Loan demand appears to have

Dry soil has delayed planting and

adversely affected crop conditions in many parts of the District.
Manufacturing
Expectations

for

continued

manufacturing

growth,

based

on

reports of increased sales and employment by many District firms, were
moderated by reports of layoffs and plant closures at other firms.

In

one indication of growth, a survey of Arkansas paper producers reveals
year-to-date

sales

increases

of

8

percent

to

20

percent.

A

food

producer's expansion in Tennessee will add 600 jobs to the local economy.
A

district

manufacturer

significantly
expects

increased
orders

manufacturer

of

heating

orders

for heating

of industrial

this

and

quarter

cooling

for cooling

components

indicates

reports

equipment and

to be as

equipment next quarter
hydraulic

systems

strong.

that

A

domestic

and foreign orders are quite vigorous and that the firm has a substantial
backlog.
Offsetting
recently
eliminate

announced
more

than

these
its

gains,
third

1,400

a
round

jobs

by

Missouri-based
of

plant

September.

shoe

closures,
A

maker

manufacturer
which

will

of hospital

VIII-2

thermometers

will

close

its Missouri

and

Illinois

plants

and move

production to Mexico over the coming six to 18 months, affecting about
135 jobs.
project,

A St. Louis defense contractor laid off 134 workers on one
even though it

continues to hire new employees for a different

project.
Nonmanufacturing
Employment growth in District nonmanufacturing firms continues
to

strengthen.

As

part

of their

Little

Rock

consolidations,

information services firm and a telecommunications
hire about 300 local employees.

an

firm together will

By August, a dockside casino will open

in northern Mississippi, employing more than 400.
national temporary employment service reports

On a broader note, a

that 37 percent of the

surveyed Memphis firms, 28 percent of the surveyed St. Louis firms and 13
percent of the surveyed Little Rock firms will increase employment during
the third quarter.
Consumer Spending
Non-auto
Although

the

sales

late

are

Easter

moderately
season

is

higher
cited

than

for

the

one

year

strong

preliminary indications point toward continued strength in May.

ago.
sales,
After

a slow start in the first quarter of 1992, increased sales in the last
two months appear to have started a trend that many retailers expect to
continue through the end of the year.
change from one year ago,

Quarterly auto sales show no

although a few dealers note increases over the

last few weeks.
Construction and Real Estate
Single-family home construction continues to rebound strongly.
Little Rock, Louisville and St. Louis builders all report double-digit

VIII-3

increases

in

April housing permits from one year ago;

Memphis builders

were an exception, reporting an increase of only 1 percent.
construction

activity,

except

Observers note,

stagnant.

for

however,

public

works

Commercial

projects,

remains

that office occupancy rates in

both

St. Louis and Little Rock have edged up slightly since the end of 1991.
Banking and Finance
Loan demand,
District banks,

as

indicated by changes

in

loans outstanding

at

appears to have weakened somewhat since the last report.

Total loans outstanding at large District banks rose just 0.1 percent in
April

and May,

after

Loans

mid-April.

District banks

on

a

0.8

percent

the books

rose 0.8 percent,

of

increase

a sample

mid-February

small

after a 1.2 percent

At both sets of banks,

previous period.

of

from

to

and mid-sized

increase

in

the slowdown appears

the

to be

concentrated in the consumer and real estate loan portfolios.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Inadequate
Missouri

farmers

rainfall

has

caused

some

Illinois,

Kentucky

to delay soybean planting and has produced weed and

insect problems in some Arkansas cotton and rice fields.
Mississippi's
weather in

cotton

crop

is

in

poor

condition.

One-third of

Unseasonably

late May hampered the growth of corn and soybeans

northern parts

of

and

the District.

Despite these

District crops are in fair condition.

concerns,

in

cool
the

most other

Southern pine lumber mills report

that exports, production and orders all are up significantly from last
year.

Nonetheless, weather conditions in parts of the Midwest and New

England have recently reduced lumber demand slightly.
remain substantially above year-ago levels.

Lumber

prices

IX-1
NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
Economic conditions in the District were generally steady. Labor markets continued to show
signs of mild improvements. Retail sales continued to exhibit growth relative to last year's level,
while home sales showed some signs of retrenchment after a very strong first quarter.
Manufacturing was steady to positive in the District, while conditions in the construction sector were
mixed with poor conditions in commercial construction offsetting the strong performance of
residential construction. Conditions in both the agricultural and mining sectors were mixed.
Employment, Wages, and Prices
There is some evidence that labor markets are modestly stronger.

The latest reported

unemployment rates were generally lower around the District. For example, in April, Minnesota's
5.0 percent unemployment rate was slightly below its year-ago level, but substantially below its
March level. Directors report that more recent conditions in labor markets continue to show signs
of improvement. There is also some evidence that labor markets will continue to improve. A recent
survey of business intentions in Minnesota indicated that while slightly fewer firms were planning
to increase employment than a year ago, fewer firms were planning reductions. On net the reduction
in declines outweighed the decrease in expansions.
Price and wage increases are reported to be moderate with the exception of medical costs
and, in parts of the District, construction costs.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending around the District is generally moderate with some areas of strength.
Major retailers in the District reported sales increases among comparable stores in May ranging from
5 to 9 percent relative to a year ago. Canadian shopping continues to be generally strong in areas

IX-2
close to the border, with retail outlets in shopping malls reporting year-to-date sales increases of 17
to 30 percent. However, at least with regard to appliance sales, recent new regulations on appliance
sales and service by the Canadian government are reported to be having some effect on discouraging
appliance sales.
New car sales were mixed in May and ranged from up 20 percent to down 12 percent relative
to a year ago. New truck sales in May ranged from up 1 percent to up 14 percent relative to levels
of a year ago. Auctions of "nearly new" fleet cars are reported to be particularly strong in the
Minneapolis-St. Paul area, attracting many bidders and sometimes aggressive bidding. Dealers are
generally optimistic about new car and truck sales for the remainder of the year.
Home sales which were generally quite strong in the first quarter, showed some downward
adjustment in parts of the District. After a record-setting first quarter, used home sales in the
Minneapolis-St. Paul area dropped 2.7 percent. However, the housing market is reported to be
booming in parts of Montana, due in part to the continuing influx of wealthy out-of-state buyers.
The summer vacation season is only just beginning, but indications are generally positive.
Glacier National Park is already reported to be completely booked for the summer. Bridge crossings
over the Mackinac Bridge onto the Upper Peninsula set a record for April, up 6.2 percent relative
to a year ago. Recent changes in airfares are expected to have some positive impact through the
summer months. However, this stimulus to tourism will be less felt in this District than in many
others, since a high fraction of our District's tourists travel by auto.
Construction and Manufacturing
Residential construction was generally strong in the District. Permits for single-family homes
were up 18 percent in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area relative to a year ago. Some areas, such as
Great Falls, Montana, report that rising building costs are restraining growth.

Conditions in

IX-3
commercial construction were mixed with the important Minneapolis-St. Paul area continuing to
show weakness due to the overhang of office space.
Conditions continued to be steady in the District's manufacturing sector. The April level of
average weekly hours in manufacturing in Minnesota of 40.0, while down slightly from the month
before, was slightly above its year-ago level.

The April level of Minnesota's average hourly

earnings in manufacturing was up two-tenths of one percent.
Resource-Related Industries
Conditions were mixed in the agricultural sector. The North Dakota mid-April index of
prices received on farm products was unchanged from its year-ago level with crop price increases
of 6 percent offset by livestock price declines of 7 percent. Moisture conditions appear to be mixed
in the District. North Dakota's pastures are greener than they have been in years, but continuing
dry weather could change that, while parts of Montana and Minnesota report inadequate moisture.
Farm land prices were mixed, with the January value of land and buildings up 4 percent in South
Dakota and down 3 percent in North Dakota.
Conditions in the District's mining and lumber industries were mixed.

While mining

production generally remains steady, some prices have fallen. The price of copper is off by 9
percent since the first of the year. Oil production is generally lower in the District, though the
number of active drilling rigs, while small, is up. Concern remains about the availability of timber
to District saw mills.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to grow slowly, led by

consumer spending and residential construction.

Retail sales, including new

car purchases, continue to improve, and single-family home building remains
strong.

Demand for most types of commercial bank loans rose last month.

But

district energy activity remains depressed, and lower livestock prices are
restricting improvement in the farm sector.

Retail prices have been rising

only slowly while prices for manufacturers' inputs are generally stable.
Retail Sales.

Retail sales improved slightly over the past month, and

most retailers expect this trend to continue for the rest of the year.
prices in the district have been rising slowly.

Retail

Over the rest of the year,

retailers expect only modest price increases because value-oriented consumers
will resist any large price gains.

Most retailers expect to expand their

inventories later this year due to rising sales.
Automobile sales over the last month improved in most parts of the
district.

Dealers and buyers are generally able to obtain financing.

Most

dealers are satisfied with their current inventory levels and are optimistic
about sales prospects for the summer.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report that input prices were

stable over the last month but are higher than a year ago.
the next month are also expected to be steady.

Input prices over

Most firms report no problems

with availability or lead times for their materials inputs, nor do they report
production bottlenecks or shortages of skilled labor.

Half of the respondents

are satisfied with their inventory levels, while the other half find their
stocks somewhat heavy.

X-2
Energy.

Energy activity in the district remains depressed despite some

recent increases in oil and natural gas prices.

The average number of

operating drilling rigs in district states rose slightly to 192 in May from
188 in April.

Nonetheless, the May rig count was about 15 percent below its

year-ago level and still near the low levels reached during the energy bust in
1986.
Housing.

Housing starts in the district are substantially higher than a

year ago and generally up from a month ago.

The improvement is concentrated

in the single-family sector, and most builders expect further gains in singlefamily housing starts over the rest of the year.
and inventories are low.

New home sales are also up,

The prices of new homes are higher than a year ago

but unchanged over the last month.

The prices of many building materials,

especially lumber, continue to rise.
Mortgage demand is strong, even though mortgage refinancing has slowed
somewhat.

Mortgage demand is also likely to remain strong over the rest of

the year, with mortgage rates expected to fluctuate in a narrow range.
Banking.

Total loan demand rose at most reporting banks last month,

pushing loan-deposit ratios higher than last month and a year ago.

Bankers

report generally higher demand for commercial and industrial loans, consumer
loans, home mortgages, and agricultural loans.

Demand for construction loans

and commercial real estate loans at most banks was unchanged.
Changes in total deposits were mixed last month, with slightly more
banks reporting decreases than increases.

Demand deposits rose at most banks.

Changes in MMDAs were mixed, but NOW accounts, IRA and Keogh accounts, large
CDs, and small time deposits were all constant to down.
Almost all respondents left their prime rates unchanged last month,
while about half reduced their consumer lending rates.

Nearly all banks

X-3
expect these rates to stay unchanged in the near future.

Lending standards

were unchanged.
Agriculture.

Crop conditions vary widely across the district.

In parts

of Colorado, Kansas, and Nebraska, a recent cold snap may have reduced winter
wheat yields by nearly a third while slowing development of the recently
planted corn crop.

In Oklahoma, however, the winter wheat crop is in good

condition and normal yields are expected.

But wet weather in the state has

temporarily delayed the start of the wheat harvest and the planting of the
cotton crop.
District cattle feeders have trimmed inventories in expectation of
falling cattle prices.
below capacity.

As a result, most district feedlots are operating

Meanwhile, the recent expansion in district pork production

appears to be slowing in response to low hog prices.

Most large-scale pork

producers are maintaining the size of their breeding herds, while some smallscale producers are dropping out of the industry.
Rural lenders report a modest pick-up in business activity in rural
communities during the past year.

While activity was up overall, main street

merchants continue to struggle against increased competition from large retail
chains.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic activity in the District continues to expand at a mild pace.
Manufacturing respondents report slight gains in orders.

Service firms report

Construction and real estate firms say

a gradual, broad-based rise in orders.

that conditions remain good, although activity has declined somewhat following
a strong surge in the first quarter.
levels.

Commercial construction remains at low

Retail respondents say that sales continue to grow slowly and that

the outlook has improved. The oil and gas industry continues to decline.
District banks report plenty of liquidity and a slight rise in loan demand.
Agricultural conditions are mixed.
Most manufacturers report a slight increase in orders.

Respondents in

the primary and fabricated metals, and electric and electronic component
industries report that weakness in other countries has suppressed demand for
their products.

Respondents in these industries say that overall orders are

flat or slightly increased.

Paper producers continue to see a generally slow

improvement in orders, although the demand for containerboard and corrugated
boxes has increased significantly.
report continued strength.

Construction-related industries generally

Orders for cement and brick have been increasing

strongly and selling prices are rising.

Lumber and wood producers note a

recent slight decline in orders due to reduced home construction in areas
outside the District and weakness in commercial construction.
oil field equipment report that orders are generally unchanged.

Producers of
Domestic

demand for oil field equipment has flattened out at low levels while growth in

XI-2

international demand has slowed sharply.

Chemical producers note some gradual

rise in demand.
Respondents in the service sector report moderately improved activity.
Business services respondents expressed increased optimism that demand from
their clients will continue to grow moderately in the second half of 1992 and
pickup further in 1993.

Several business services respondents report an

increase in banks' willingness to lend.

Temporary employment agencies report

gradual increases in demand coming from residential construction, mortgage
finance and manufacturing companies.

Respondents in the legal industry report

a recent slight increase in business transactions activity.

Several

accounting firms note that activity began to improve during May.

Advertising

agencies report rising demand from small local companies.
Construction and real estate activity is mixed.

Residential

construction and sales have been stable in recent months following a surge in
the first quarter.

Home prices are reported to be increasing due to high

lumber prices, steady home demand and low levels of new homes on the market.
Multi-family construction is generally flat although respondents in Houston
say that multifamily construction is increasing slightly due to increased bank
lending.

Multifamily occupancy and rents are stable in most markets.

Industrial rents are flat and selling prices are reported to be up about 5
percent from last year in Dallas.

Areas near the Mexico border are reporting

an increase in the demand for commercial and industrial space.
District retailers report modest gains in sales and improved confidence
that growth will continue.

Inventories are generally at desired levels

although a few retailers report that inventories are too high.

Selling prices

XI-3

remain competitive.

Mid-to upper-scale retail stores have recently seen more

improvement than discount stores.

Sales in the Houston area have been weaker

than in the rest of the District.

Auto sales remain slow.

Conditions in the oil and gas industry continue to be weak.

The

District drilling rig count declined in May and is currently near historical
lows.

Natural gas prices have risen in recent weeks due to a cold spring and

low inventories.
several months.

Respondents expect natural gas prices to fall over the next
Oil prices rose at the end of May but respondents say that

the outlook for oil prices remains cautious.
District financial institutions report stable to slightly rising loan
demand.

In general, respondents were again upbeat about near- and long-term

loan demand prospects.

All respondents report plentiful liquidity.

Several

respondents note that they are increasing output per worker either through
attrition or resisting new hiring.
Recent wet weather has replenished ground water, and improved
agricultural conditions in many areas.
to provide excellent forage.
the cotton crop in some areas.

Range and pasture conditions continue

Excessive rain has delayed planting and damaged
The peach crop is reported to be in very good

condition although insect and disease problems have increased.

The majority

of commodity prices have declined from last year's averages, most
significantly, cotton prices have fallen 44 percent since May 1991.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic conditions remain weak in California, but are improving moderately in other
District states. In California, particularly in the south, cutbacks continue in aerospace and defenserelated manufacturing, state government, and higher education. Tourism has also fallen in southern
California following the Los Angeles riots. Outside of southern California, moderate improvement is
reported in non-defense manufacturing, residential construction, retail trade, and agriculture. The
strongest conditions remain in Utah and Idaho. Exports to Latin America and Pacific Rim countries
are growing moderately, except to Japan where a weaker economy has reduced demand for several
District products. Overall business sentiment has improved since our last report. Little upward
pressure is reported in wages and prices, although the proportion of contacts expecting lower inflation
has decreased.
Business Sentiment
Economic expectations of Twelfth District business leaders improved since our last report.
Over half of our respondents now expect the real economy to expand during the next four quarters at
a rate of at least 2.5 percent. This proportion is up from one-third in April. In contrast, almost no
respondents expect output to decline during the next four quarters, compared to 5 percent in April and
almost 33 percent in January. Most respondents expect improvement in investment, consumer
spending, and housing starts. Although few respondents expect inflation to accelerate, the proportion
expecting a reduction in inflation has fallen to one-fifth from over one-half in late 1991.
Wages and Prices
Contacts report little upward pressure on wages and prices in District markets. Wage
increases are reported in be in the 3 to 3.5 percent range, with smaller increases reported for some

XII - 2

public-sector workers due to budget cutbacks. Price changes are reported to be modest except for
health care and insurance. In California, gasoline prices in April were up 15 percent from a year
earlier, partially as a result of new environmental restrictions. In Utah, gasoline prices were reported
up about 10 cents a gallon since April. Aviation fuel prices, however, are reported down during the
past two months. Lumber prices peaked in April and are now off one-third. Standing timber prices,
however, have not come down as much as end-use product prices. Prices of materials are reported
stable or declining slightly.
Retail Trade and Services
Contacts with major retailing operations report gradual improvement in department and
discount store sales across much of the District, but sluggish conditions in southern California. A
contact in Idaho reports some increase in customer traffic for auto dealers, but continued "spotty"
sales. Consolidation in the legal profession is beginning to taper off in Washington, with one contact
projecting some moderate new hiring by the end of 1992. Demand for telecommunications services is
weak, particularly in southern California. A media contact in California reports that advertising
activity seems to be picking up, although it is still below last year's level. State government budget
problems in California threaten layoffs of state workers and in public higher education. In Hawaii,
tourism was down 6 percent in April from a year-earlier, driven by an 18 percent decline in mainland
visitors.
Violence in Los Angeles has led to the loss of over 5,000 retail jobs in the area. Over the
longer-run, tourist activity is a major concern. Hotel occupancy rates have fallen and massive
summer reservation cancellations are reported by some hotel managers.
Manufacturing

Cutbacks in aerospace and defense-related industries continue across the District. Job
reductions of 6,500 are projected for Boeing this year in Washington, and McDonnell Douglas has

XII - 3

announced the closing of a 2000-worker production facility in southern California. Defense cutbacks
have been felt even in the robust Idaho manufacturing sector.
Outside of defense and aerospace, conditions are improving modestly. A machinery
manufacturer in Utah reports that construction equipment sales are better this year, with only a few
final sales lost due to recent labor disputes. Conditions in the electronics manufacturing sector are
improving modestly, with no capacity constraints or inventory problems reported. Employment
emphasis in electronics has switched from downsizing to holding steady. Pronounced weakness,
however, is reported in orders from Japan for electronic components, leading to layoffs in Arizona.
Continued demand for electronic components is reported from other Pacific-Rim nations. California
high-tech firms exporting circuit boards and other electronic components are finding a strong market
in Taiwan, where computer assembly work is active.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
A contact in the timber industry reports that lumber and plywood sales are down, as are
product prices, and that inventory levels are adequate-to-high. Orders for paper products and for
boxes were strong in April and May. In early 1992, lumber exports were down 21 percent from a
year earlier, and shipments to Japan (America's largest overseas market) were off 22 percent.
Exports of printing and writing paper, however, were up 30 percent. Exports of fishery products
have improved somewhat, but overall demand and prices for seafood remain weak. New orders for
export grain have slowed, but exports of other agricultural products to the Pacific Rim and Mexico
are reported strong. Export demand from Japan, however, has fallen for produce and beef. Citrus
fruit crops in California have rebounded strongly from last season's freeze damage.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity varies substantially across District markets. Utah and
Idaho are experiencing a boom in residential construction, with single-family starts up 39 and 65

XII - 4
percent, respectively, in the first four months of 1992 from a year earlier. Home sales activity is
reported mediocre-to-good in Alaska, but home construction is flat. In Arizona, a contact reports that
while residential sales activity has risen during the past year, mortgage loan applications for new
purchases have declined noticeably in recent weeks. In the Puget Sound area, residential real estate is
characterized as improving slowly. Closed sales, however, declined markedly between February and
April. In Hawaii, home sales are brisk in lower-end markets (below $350,000), but slow in more
expensive markets. Bids for public sector construction projects in Hawaii are coming in much lower
than anticipated. The housing market in California is reported mixed. New home construction
remains relatively weak, while sales of new and existing homes have rebounded somewhat from the
weak conditions of late 1991. Commercial real estate conditions remain depressed in southern
California.
Financial Institutions
In general, contacts in financial industries report slightly improving conditions. The banking
industries in Utah and Idaho continue to enjoy favorable business conditions. Mortgage and consumer
loan demand is very strong, while commercial loan demand is stable. A contact in California reports
modest improvement in consumer and business loan demand, although overall loan demand remains
weak. California savings and loans are experiencing an uptick in lending. Mortgage applications in
the Puget Sound area have cooled from the refinance-driven pace, but are leveling out about eight
percent ahead of last year. Loan demand in Oregon is reported strong for single-family mortgages.
Financing for residential construction is reported available, but land development loans are difficult to
find.

