SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

JANUARY 1993

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . .

. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . ....

First District - Boston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .
Second District - New York

. .

i

-1

......
.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .....

Third District - Philadelphia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .

II-1
. .III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . .

. .IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . .

. .V-l

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . .

. .VI-1

Sixth District - Atlanta
Seventh District - Chicago

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . .

Eighth District - St. Louis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . .

. .VII-1
. .VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . .

. .IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . .

. .X-l

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . .

. .XI-1

Eleventh District - Dallas

Twelfth District - San Francisco

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .XII-1

i
SUMMARY*
Reports from the twelve Federal Reserve districts indicate continued
improvement in economic conditions across much of the nation.

Conditions are

mixed, however, in the San Francisco district where weakness in California
continues to offset moderate growth in other district states.

Retail sales

during the holiday season were significantly better than a year earlier in
most districts, generally fulfilling or exceeding retailers' expectations.
Manufacturing activity is steady to increasing moderately in nearly all
districts, but this improvement may not be reflected proportionately in labor
markets.

District reports contain little evidence of significant upward

pressure on prices.

While the residential sector continues to improve in most

districts, commercial real estate markets generally remain weak.

Overall loan

demand at financial institutions is rising slightly in most districts.

In

agriculture, record yields of fall crops have pushed prices down, but gains in
the livestock sector are expected to help boost overall farm income slightly.
Retail

Sales in the holiday season posted significant year-over-year gains in
most districts, with mixed results in the San Francisco district and in the
Northeast.

Sales gains were smaller in California than in other states in the

San Francisco district, and a minority of retailers in the Boston district
reported flat sales.
than expected.

Retailers in several districts reported sales better

In a number of districts, merchants noted that sales gains

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve
gathered before January 12, 1993.
from businesses and other contacts
commentary on the views of Federal

Bank of Kansas City based on information
This document summarizes comments received
outside the Federal Reserve and is not a
Reserve officials.

ii
were achieved without the heavy promotions and aggressive price cutting of
recent years.
A wide range of merchandise apparently sold well, with some regional
variation.

In the St. Louis district, sales mainstays included jewelry and

smaller appliances and electronics items.

Atlanta reports significant

increases in sales of goods ranging from apparel to big-ticket durables.

In

Merchants in the Chicago

the New York district furniture and rugs sold well.

district noted that sales held up well in the post-holiday period, especially
sales of big ticket durables, including major electronics, appliances, and
furniture.

Retailers in the Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Kansas City

districts expressed optimism for further sales growth in early 1993.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity is reported to be steady to increasing moderately
in nearly all districts.

Activity appears to be flat to expanding modestly in

the Boston, Philadelphia, and Richmond districts.

Stronger but less than

robust activity is reported by Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and
Dallas.

San Francisco reports that Twelfth District manufacturing activity

continues to contract, due to further weakening in aerospace and defenserelated industries in southern California and Washington; manufacturing shows
some improvement, however, elsewhere in the district.
Manufacturing activity in the Cleveland and Chicago districts has been
boosted by increased motor vehicle production and related increases in the
output of steel and tires.

As a result, Cleveland reports rising capacity use

ratios for some steel producers, while strong demand has pushed production
close to capacity for some tire producers.

Boston, Atlanta, and Dallas report

some increases in the production of housing-related products, such as

iii
furniture and construction materials.

Capital goods producers reported an

uneven but rising trend in their business, with uncertainty about a possible
investment tax credit leading to some postponements of orders.
The moderate improvement in manufacturing activity may not be reflected
proportionately in labor markets.

Boston reports that half of its respondents

expect their work forces to remain at the current level, while the remaining
respondents expect to implement reductions.

Most of the manufacturers

contacted in the Philadelphia district were holding employment steady.

In the

Cleveland district, most manufacturers believe they can increase production
with their existing work forces.

Some firms in the St. Louis district expect

to add jobs, however, and a major home appliance manufacturer has recalled a
large number of laid-off workers and expects to add substantial new hires.

In

the Minneapolis district, layoffs by two computer equipment firms and an
airline have been partly offset by new hiring elsewhere in the district.
Construction and Real Estate
The residential sector continues to improve in most districts.

Home

sales, as well as housing starts and permits, were generally better in 1992
than in 1991.

Lower mortgage rates, increased consumer confidence, and pent-

up demand were cited as responsible for the improvement.

Boston reports slow

but steady improvement in its residential real estate market.

While Kansas

City notes a recent slowing in housing activity, Minneapolis reports its
busiest winter construction season in six years.

Some glimmers of hope for

multifamily construction also appear, as both Atlanta and Dallas report rising
occupancy rates and firming rents.
its residential sector.

San Francisco reports mixed conditions in

House prices have weakened further in southern

iv

California and softened in parts of Washington, but have risen in Oregon and
Utah.
Commercial real estate markets remain generally weak, but there are some
positive signs here and there.

The office vacancy rate in downtown Buffalo,

while still high, fell in 1992 for the first time in four years.

Activity in

the Richmond district's nonresidential sector has increased in recent months,
with vacancy rates falling in some areas and more inquiries from businesses in
Nonresidential construction has been expanding in

strong financial condition.

the St. Louis area, primarily in public works and new factories.

Minneapolis

also reports a sharp rise in public works contracts, as well as in
construction of some new shopping malls across the district.

One of the new

malls was built in a border town to cater to strong demand by Canadian
shoppers.

Nonresidential real estate markets remain weak in much of the

Dallas and San Francisco districts.

Vacancy rates are still high in Dallas,

but prices there have fallen enough to bring a pick-up in property sales.
Several markets are weak in the San Francisco district, where commercial rents
and property values are depressed by high vacancy rates and continued
employment losses.
Financial Services
Financial institutions report a further slight increase in overall loan
demand in most districts.

Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, St.

Louis, and Kansas City report slow growth in business loans.
slow growth in business loans by small and midsized banks.

New York reports
Most districts

note a drop-off in mortgage lending, reflecting reduced demand for
refinancing.

Dallas reports little change in loan demand, and San Francisco

notes mixed conditions in the Twelfth District.

In California, loan demand is

weak and the volume of outstanding loans continues to fall.

Some growth in

loan demand is evident, however, in Arizona, Utah, and Washington.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Despite some unseasonably wet weather in parts of the Richmond, St.
Louis, and Kansas City districts, fall crop yields have been near record
levels.

Large supplies of corn and soybeans have pushed prices down, thus

restricting income gains for crop producers.

But lower crop prices also mean

lower feed prices and likely income gains for livestock producers.

Overall,

farm income is expected to be up slightly in 1993 and farm operators are seen
as likely to maintain their solid financial condition.
Metal mining continues to be weak in the Minneapolis district, where
slack orders have led to two iron mine shutdowns and substantial layoffs.
Dallas reports a slowing in energy industry activity, although Kansas City
cites a recent rise in the number of operating drilling rigs in its district.
Both districts agree that drilling is likely to drop sharply in the near term,
however, because certain tax incentives for drilling expired at the end of
1992.

Dallas also notes that low margins have led many refiners to reduce

their capacity.
Conditions in the lumber and wood products industry vary somewhat across
the nation.

St. Louis notes that orders at southern pine lumber mills are

down slightly, although production remains well above last year's level.

San

Francisco reports that orders for wood products are firm and inventories are
low, while Minneapolis reports strong demand for lumber and for plywood
substitutes.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District was increasing very
Retailers reported mixed holiday results:

modestly at the end of 1992.

while sales improved for a majority of contacts, a minority experienced
flat results.

Most manufacturers report that sales were level or only
Sales volumes were up for residential

slightly above year-ago levels.
real estate and insurance.

Although the majority of contacts expect a

modest business upturn in 1993, they do not intend to hire and may even
reduce their work forces.
Retail

Although media reports indicated a robust Christmas season, not
all First District retailers experienced improvements over year-ago
results.

Sales gains ranged from substantial to none.

Some of the

variation is geographic; the strongest sales advances were made by
retailers serving national markets.

Further, several retailers who

reported no increase in sales attributed their weak performance to store
locations in New England but outside the Boston metropolitan area.
Some contacts promoted heavily or resorted to markdowns, and
margins varied approximately in line with these activities.

Inventories

are now even with or slightly above last year's levels; only one contactbelieves that inadequate stocks reduced holiday sales.
Some firms experiencing sales gains added permanent employees or
granted wage increases.

Similarly, capital expenditure programs
These plans range from equipment

parallel recent sales activity.
upgrades to major expansions.

Most retail contacts do not expect

dramatic changes in the economy or their own performance in 1993.

Manufacturing
About one-half of this month's manufacturing contacts report that
recent sales are flat relative to year-earlier levels.

Most of the

remaining companies indicate that their overall business has improved
modestly.

Many consumer and housing-related products and business

services have experienced an increase in demand.
remain mixed.

Automobile markets

The press has reported that a New England-based military

contractor has received a large order from Saudi Arabia, but our
contacts indicate that other defense business is weakening.

Orders for

aircraft parts, large electronics systems, and government work also are
softening.

Japanese and European markets have been weak for several

manufacturers.
Respondents report that they face a highly competitive pricing
environment.

Business customers in the retail, aircraft, and automotive

industries in particular are pressuring suppliers to reduce prices.
The majority of the manufacturers polled expect that continued
growth in the U.S. economy will have a positive, though relatively
modest, impact on their companies in 1993.

Most manufacturing contacts

have reduced employment in the past year, with declines ranging from 1
to 25 percent.

Only one, relatively small, manufacturer indicated that

a significant increase in production jobs is likely this year.

Roughly

half the sample expect that their U.S. work forces will remain at about
the current level, while the remaining firms intend to continue to
implement reductions.
Capital spending trends and plans are mixed.

Many contacts

indicate that they are investing in new computers.

Although most

manufacturers contacted have pared down inventories over the past year,

I-3
some believe that they can make further progress by adopting better
inventory control methods.
Residential Real Estate
The market for residential real estate in the First District is
continuing to show signs of slow, steady improvement.

Sales volume is

above year-ago levels, inventories are down slightly, and permits are up
a bit.

A New Hampshire contact reported November sales that were at

1987 levels.

A Connecticut contact was less optimistic about reported

sales increases, noting that many may be due to foreclosures and
distress sales rather than marketplace improvements.

Single-family home

prices seem to be flat, while condominium prices may still be falling.
Nonbank Financial Services
Insurance companies have experienced a modest increase in sales in
the last several weeks.

However, most report sales flat over the year,

with only a few citing increases compared to year-end 1991.

Mutual

funds, variable annuities, and individual life insurance products
continue to be strong sellers.

Respondents continued to retreat from

personal property-casualty lines, especially for automobiles and for
properties in the Northeast.

Most contacts have either reduced

employment in the last quarter or foresee a reduction in 1993.
plans a small increase in employment this year.

Only one

Assets under management

have shown mixed trends, but most firms have strengthened their capital
positions for the year.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT-NEW YORK

On balance, economic developments seemed slightly more positive in recent weeks, although
some negative reports continued to be received. Most District retailers had sales results that were
either on or better than plan in November and December. Solid gains were posted for apparel of all
types, and year-end inventories were described as generally in good shape. Unemployment rates in
New York and New Jersey continued their seesaw pattern but are somewhat lower than their October
levels.

Office leasing activity proceeded at a fairly good pace in midtown Manhattan but remained

sluggish in downtown Manhattan. Meanwhile, downtown Buffalo recorded the first decline in its
office vacancy rate in four years, and a larger percentage of Buffalo purchasing managers reported
higher new orders and/or production. Homebuilding activity was relatively slow, but new home sales
were generally above year-earlier levels. Most senior loan officers at small and midsized banks
indicated no change in their willingness to lend.
Consumer Spending
Most District retail contacts reported sales results that were in line with or better than
projections in November and December. A severe storm closed District stores for one or two days
in mid-December due to hurricane-force winds, widespread flooding and heavy snows, but apparently
sales were recouped, at least in part, during the remainder of the month. While the sales environment
has remained highly competitive, retailers stated that they engaged in less promotional activity and
price-cutting than during the 1991 holiday season with somewhat higher profit margins as a result.
Most contacts noted more enthusiasm and a less conservative attitude on the part of consumers, but
our contacts were reluctant to assert that a turning point has been reached. Over-the-year sales
changes ranged from -9 percent to +8.5 percent in November and from flat to +12.5 percent in
December. The Retail Council of New York State's annual survey of about 200 stores found sales
gains averaging 6 to 8 percent above the 1991 level for the post-Thanksgiving through post-Christmas
period.

II-2
A wide variety of merchandise sold well during November and December though reportedly
the best sellers were practical items such as cold weather gear (especially after the December storm),
furniture, rugs, and accessories. Children's books, video games and remote control toys were also
popular.
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding activity has been relatively slow in most of the District due both to the season
and to the unwillingness of potential buyers in some areas to commit themselves given their
continuing uncertainty about jobs and the economy. For 1992 as a whole, new home sales were
generally above the sluggish, year-earlier levels with the gains varying widely within the District.
Most builders anticipate some further improvement in 1993. Renewed sales activity was reported at
previously stalled projects in Westchester County and central New Jersey. Developers intend to
expand these projects if buyer interest continues. Restoration and rebuilding of homes that were
damaged or destroyed in a severe December storm will provide a further impetus to building activity,
especially in flood-ravaged coastal areas.
Office leasing activity continued at a fairly good pace in midtown Manhattan, but has
remained sluggish downtown. Vacancy rates moved up in both parts of Manhattan. Net absorption
of space remained negative as a result of the completion of a new office building in midtown and the
continuing additions of existing space in the downtown market due to corporate restructurings. An
annual survey of office space in downtown Buffalo found an almost three percentage point decline
in the vacancy rate between year-end 1991 and 1992. Although the rate remains high, this was the
first decrease in four years.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates continued their seesaw pattern since the last report, but on
balance declined somewhat. In December, New Jersey's unemployment rate was 8.0 percent, down
from 8.7 percent in November, but New York's was 8.4 percent, up from 8.0 percent one month
earlier. However, both rates are somewhat below their October levels. Although District payroll
employment has not shown any real improvement, personal income tax receipts in New Jersey

II-3
and payroll income data in New York show good to moderately strong growth, suggesting that the
District's economy may be somewhat stronger than indicated by the employment statistics.
The survey of Buffalo purchasing managers showed an increase in the percentage of firms
with improved new orders and/or production during December. Fifty-nine percent of the surveyed
managers expect an improvement in general business conditions during the new year, compared to
only 18 percent a year earlier.
Two recently announced corporate restructurings will affect District employment. In the initial
implementation of its plan to cut employment by 25,000 in 1993, I.B.M. said 3000-3500 jobs will
be eliminated at three of its Hudson Valley plants at the end of March. While voluntary incentive
packages will be offered, layoffs may occur as well. On the other hand, a Long Island firm plans
to close an out-of-District plant and consolidate its operations on the Island, adding 300 workers this
year and several hundred more in the future.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the Second District
indicated that their willingness to lend has not changed over the last two months. The majority of
respondents indicated that overall loan demand remained slow. The demand for residential mortgages
weakened as refinancing activity softened. However, the demand for commercial and
industrial loans improved slightly. Almost all respondents reported that their loan rates had not
changed during the preceding two months. Delinquency rates for all types of loans were unchanged
to slightly lower.
With regard to recent media reports and editorials urging an easing in the "regulatory burden"
on banks in order to stimulate lending, almost all loan officers indicated that capital requirements
were not constraining their lending. However, several lenders at small and midsized banks suggested
that reductions in the number of regulations and in the amount of time spent complying with them
would permit them to initiate more loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from business contacts in the Third District in early January
indicated that economic activity was expanding at a modest rate.

Manufacturers

noted continuing gains in shipments and new orders and rising levels of unfilled
orders.

Retailers said results for the Christmas shopping period were in line

with or above expectations. They reported year-over-year gains averaging around
five

percent,

reductions.

in

current

dollars,

without

significant

Auto dealers reported rising sales.

last-minute

price

Bankers generally said loan

volumes outstanding were rising modestly, due mainly to growth in consumer
lending.
The outlook in the Third District business community is for continued
modest growth.

Manufacturers forecast further expansion with some gains in

employment possible by midyear. Retailers expect sales to rise during the first
half but they are planning cautiously for the period.
similar outlook.

Auto dealers have a

Bankers generally anticipate only slight growth for all types

of lending.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District continued on an upward trend
as the new year began, according to reports from area manufacturers in early
January.

Almost half of those contacted said business was expanding while half

indicated they were operating at a steady pace.

Positive reports outnumbered

negative ones in virtually all major industries in the District. Around half of

III-2

all the firms contacted were posting gains in both shipments and new orders, and
only a small percentage were registering decreases.
steady

order backlogs,

those

indicating

rising

outnumbered those with declines by two-to-one.

While around half noted

levels

of unfilled

orders

Although slightly more companies

were hiring new workers and expanding hours than were cutting back, a majority
was maintaining steady employment.
Third District manufacturers generally forecast continued expansion. Twothirds expect shipments and orders to advance at least through June and one-third
anticipate further increases in order backlogs.

Although most firms indicate

they will hold employment at current levels, one-third plan to step up hiring and
boost hours over the next six months.

RETAIL
Most Third District retailers contacted for this report said sales for the
Christmas shopping period met or slightly exceeded their expectations.

Year-

over-year gains averaged around five percent, in current dollars. Although some
retailers said they were left with inventories somewhat above plan for the
beginning of January, none expressed concern that clearance sales would have a
significant

negative

effect

on

fiscal

fourth

quarter

(November-January)

profitability.
Despite the relatively good holiday sales results, few Third District
retailers have expectations of strong growth in the first half of 1993.

Several

noted that credit card usage was high in December, and they anticipate a period
of slacker sales while consumers pay down balances.
forecast only modest

growth

in

sales

competition among stores to remain keen.

through

the

In general, merchants
spring

and

they

expect

III-3

Auto dealers said sales had risen in recent weeks.

They are cautious in

forecasting for 1993 but believe sales for the year could exceed the 1992 level
by a healthy amount.
FINANCE
Most of the Third District bankers contacted in early January said total
loan volumes at their institutions were rising, albeit slowly.
was most often mentioned as the strongest credit category.

Consumer lending

Several bankers said

demand for auto loans and leases had increased in December and there was some
carryover of the upward trend into early January.
also reported to be on the rise;

Home equity credit lines were

however, several bankers noted that loan

consolidation seemed to be motivating much of the increase as net new lending to
home equity borrowers was slight.

Most of the bankers contacted for this report

said business loan volume outstanding was posting only sluggish growth.

In

general, they said demand for commercial and industrial loans was not strong, and
they described loan pricing as very competitive. Most bankers also said mortgage
refinancings were trending down and that the rate of growth in purchase-mortgage
lending was easing.
In general, Third District bankers forecast slight growth in lending during
the first quarter.

They say there is little evidence that business loan demand

will increase substantially and they do not expect sustained growth in consumer
loan demand until employment and incomes are firmly on an upward trend.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary. Business activity in the Fourth District was generally stronger in recent
months than was widely anticipated, and manufacturers forecast a larger increase in
production this quarter than last. Consumer spending during the holiday season rose
considerably more than retailers had estimated last fall, and housing sales in late 1992
showed sizable year-over-year increases. Most manufacturers of steel, autos, and capital
goods forecast higher production this quarter than last. Still, businesses typically are not
planning increases in employment, at least over the next few months. Lenders report a surge
in credit-card use in December, but a slacker pace in mortgage loan refinancing.
Consumer Spending. District retail sales in December were much stronger than
retailers expected. The surge in sales led many stores to order additional holiday-type
merchandise. Despite the last-minute ordering, inventories generally have been depleted,
and retailers report that heavy post-season discounting to cut excess stocks will not be
necessary this year. However, traditional retailers, facing pressure from "off-price"
competitors, were forced to discount merchandise prior to Christmas.
New car dealers report a mixed sales performance in December and early January.
Sellers of Big Three models generally fared better than Japanese nameplate dealers, and van
and light truck sales continued to grow more strongly than those for cars. Dealers claim
new car inventories, in a 60- to 70-day range, are slightly larger than desired, but stocks of
the new Chrysler products are said to be tight. Dealers also note that consumers are moving
toward more options and high-end models within each class.
Housing and the Mortgage Market. Lenders and realtors in Cleveland, Columbus,
and Cincinnati report that home sales were higher in November and December than is
typical for this season. Total year-over-year sales increases in Columbus were in double
digits in December, with homes priced over $250,000 posting strong year-over-year gains.

IV-2

In Cincinnati, sales and starts rose at double-digit rates in November, and in Cleveland, sales
rebounded after two monthly declines and were up 10% from a year earlier.
Manufacturing . District manufacturers expect last fall's upswing in production to
continue into this quarter. Some steel producers predict that production will rebound this
quarter following a decline last quarter. Several steel customers, especially automotive,
have already placed orders for February and March delivery. Galvanized sheet production
could reach capacity during the first quarter. Steel analysts estimate that steel operations
will average about 85% of capacity this quarter, up from the 82% rate last quarter.
Automotive sources also estimate a higher production rate this quarter than last. Domestic
auto producers recently raised their 1993:IQ production schedules by a few percentage
points from the previous forecast. If achieved, the production rate will be at least 10%
higher than last quarter's pace.
Strong demand for both passenger and truck tires has pushed tire production close
to capacity for some producers. According to industry sources, these producers are
planning to increase capacity to accommodate the better-than-expected sales.
Capital goods producers note an uneven but steadily rising trend in their businesses.
However, uncertainty over a proposed investment tax credit has led to postponements and
cutbacks in some orders. A producer of information processing equipment reports that
computer orders fell unexpectedly in late 1992, after a strong increase during the summer
quarter. A producer of industrial motors claims that some of its customers have delayed
placing new orders until more details of a possible tax credit are known.
The strongly reviving heavy-duty truck market is apparently largely unaffected by
the tax credit discussion. New orders in December continue to climb at an annual rate that
is well above the forecast for this year. Analysts estimate a 20% increase in output this year
from last, which will place 1993 production only slightly below the level of the last peak
year in 1988.

IV-3

Other capital goods producers report below-average sales growth. The market for
industrial controls is gradually recovering, but is still constrained by the slump in the
nonresidential building industry and by weakness in aerospace. Similarly, markets for
valves, fittings, and industrial components continue to strengthen erratically.
Employment. District employment shows little sign of a sizable pickup. Most
manufacturers and retailers report that higher-than-anticipated production and sales can be
accommodated with their existing work force. Although some employees have been
recalled in recent weeks, many manufacturers report that they will take on new workers only
after receiving sustained increases in new orders. Structural layoffs because of mergers and
reorganization in the telecommunications, utilities, and plastic industries in the District are
likely to result in job losses of about 1,200 workers during the year.
Financial Developments. Business loans outstanding rose slowly in the District again
in December, according to some bankers. These sources also noted an unexpected surge in
credit-card use in December. Both banks and thrifts indicate a letup in mortgage loan
refinancing in December. A large thrift reported that its volume of new mortgage loans in
early January had slowed substantially from a year earlier. Several thrifts and banks in the
Cleveland area have been offering 30-year fixed-rate mortgages at 7.8% plus 2.5 to 3 points.

V-1

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
District business conditions were mostly improved during the past six to
eight weeks.

Retailers reported increased activity for the Christmas season.

Both manufacturing and port activity held steady from the previous period.
Commercial and consumer loan demand increased slightly, while mortgage loan
demand declined.

Both residential and commercial real estate activity

increased since early November.

Some District crops were threatened by

unusually wet weather.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that District retail activity improved
in December.

Retailers noted increases in shopper traffic and sales,

including sales of big-ticket items.
wholesale levels also rose.

Wages and prices at the retail and

Survey respondents reported virtually no change

in employment.
Retailers were optimistic about their prospects for the next six months.
They expected shopper traffic, sales, wages, and prices to rise.

They

anticipated profits in the first half of 1993 to exceed profits in the same
period of 1992.

Few retailers expected major changes in employment in their

companies or in their states.
Manufacturing
Manufacturers indicated that District factory activity held steady
during the past month.

Respondents noted little change in most indicators,

although they reported small increases in shipments, capital expenditures, and

exports.

Respondents cited health care costs and government regulations as

their most important problems.
Manufacturers were optimistic about their prospects for the next six
months.

Increases in all indicators were expected, and most anticipated a

moderately lower unemployment rate in their states.

Manufacturers also

believed that profits in the first half of 1993 would be higher than they were
in the first six months of 1992.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that both imports and exports remained about the
same in December as in November and when compared with a year ago.

Exports

were expected to increase at Charleston and Hampton Roads but to remain the
same at Baltimore during the next six months.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions were varied over the last six weeks.

Respondents stated

that commercial and consumer loan demand improved slightly.

Rates on

commercial loans were unchanged, while consumer rates were lower.
Mortgage loan demand was down significantly over the past six weeks.
Weakness was reported primarily in refinancings.

Mortgage loan rates fell

slightly.
Residential Real Estate
Real estate analysts surveyed by telephone reported that the residential
market continued to improve in most of the District during the past six weeks.
Residential sales increased, while home prices were mostly steady.

Several

respondents suggested that higher consumer confidence spurred activity in

V-3
their areas.

Virtually all respondents were optimistic about real estate

prospects in 1993.
The residential market in North Carolina, particularly in the Raleigh
area, continued to be stronger than in other District states.

Building

permits strengthened somewhat in Greensboro, North Carolina, where the market
has been weak for the past few years.

In West Virginia, home sales continued

to improve, particularly in Morgantown and the Charleston/Kanawha Valley area.
Commercial Real Estate
Commercial real estate activity increased in the past two months,
according to our telephone survey of industry analysts.
vacancy rates were said to be dropping quickly.

In some areas,

In other areas, brokers

received more inquiries by businesses interested in obtaining space, and the
financial condition of those making the inquiries was stronger than in prior
months.

The survey respondents attributed the improved conditions to

increased business confidence.

Most respondents said that demand was still

insufficient in their markets to generate significant new construction.
Agriculture
Unseasonably wet weather continued to plague District farmers in
December and early January.

The harvesting of soybeans and cotton was delayed

further, increasing the risk of yield losses.

The wet weather assisted the

emergence of small grains in the fall, but recently threatened to drown these
crops in some areas.

Livestock were also affected by the rains, because wet

fields limited their ability to graze on small grains planted for winter
forage.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: According to Sixth District contacts, the Southeast economy strengthened
in December and early January.

Retailers enjoyed significant increases in holiday sales with

claims of double-digit percentage gains over year-ago levels being common. Realtors and home
builders saw continued improvement in most single-family markets.

Most manufacturers

reported modest increases in production and expect expansion in 1993. Bankers indicated that
consumer and business loan demand is picking up. Except for some construction materials,
wholesale and retail prices have remained stable and wage gains modest. Contacts across the
District suggested that consumer and business confidence is reviving.
Consumer Spending:

Retailers reported significant increases in holiday sales over

year-ago levels and are generally upbeat about prospects in early 1993. Increased spending was
noted across a wide range of consumer goods, from apparel and household textiles to big-ticket
items such as electronics, appliances, and furniture. Since less price discounting was needed to
move goods and seasonal hiring was conservative, retailers' profit gains have most likely
outpaced total revenues.

Higher-than-expected sales have tightened inventories heading into

1993, but retailers are generally comfortable with this position. Auto sales reports were more
varied, but a number of dealers reported slight increases in December from year-ago levels.
They credited year-end incentive programs for the gains.
Tourism remains a bright spot in the regional economy. Contacts reported that holiday
air passenger traffic, particularly international arrivals, was significantly above year-ago levels.
Through year end, convention attendance exceeded 1991 levels and industry contacts indicated
that advance bookings through mid-1993 promise another good year.

VI-2
Manufacturing: Manufacturing activity has increased moderately in the District since
late November. Production, shipments, and new orders continue to increase for textile and
apparel producers. However, industry spokesmen warn that production is likely to slow since
order backlogs are expected to decline by the end of the first quarter. Improving orders were
also noted by contacts in industries producing electronic equipment, chemicals, and packaging.
The nation's home-building recovery and Hurricane Andrew have resulted in gains in
new orders for furniture producers, building supply companies, and lumber yards. The District's
transportation-related production has benefited from increased light truck and van sales. After
struggling through most of 1992, suppliers to the offshore oil industry noted improving
conditions at year end.
Construction: After taking into account normal seasonal patterns, nearly all realtors
reported continued improvement in home sales.

These gains were attributed to attractive

mortgage rates, pent-up demand, and increased consumer confidence. Sales remain strongest in
the low-to-mid price range but contacts noted increased interest in the trade-up market. Ample
inventories of homes for sale kept existing home prices relatively stable, but higher lumber costs
are reportedly pushing new home prices modestly higher. Although unseasonably wet weather
has slowed housing starts in the District, builders are optimistic for 1993.

Multifamily

development remains generally weak, although scattered reports of new development in response
to rising occupancy rates and firming rents are beginning to surface.
Financial Services: Most of the region's bankers encountered improving loan demand
in December and early January. Primarily reflecting increased home sales, mortgage originations
were fairly strong for this time of year. Lending for autos was steady and credit card receivables

VI-3
were up moderately as consumers charged some of their increased holiday purchases. Most
commercial lenders also reported modest increases in loan demand, including a few business
expansion loans during December. Those bankers not experiencing improvement at the end of
1992 were relatively optimistic about the first half of 1993.
Wages and Prices: Few factory contacts reported increases in materials or finished
goods prices. Although some manufacturers intend to post modest price increases in early 1993,
they are uncertain whether the increases will stick in an intensely competitive environment.
There are no reports of increasing wage pressures. In fact, some major employers in the District
have recently imposed moderate across-the-board wage reductions or announced plans to
significantly trim current employment levels.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. The Seventh District economy strengthened further in December and early January,
led by consumer spending on durable goods. District retailers generally reported that holiday season sales
gains exceeded expectations, and several retailers noted that sales gains held up well in the early postholiday period. After losing some momentum in the third quarter, District manufacturing activity
strengthened in November and December, particularly as motor vehicle production rose. Indicators of
District employment remained mixed. The consensus forecast of a group of economists from Midwest
firms called for modest but steady GDP growth in 1993, with key contributions from motor vehicles and
business fixed investment, two areas important for Seventh District manufacturing activity.
Consumer Spending. District retailers generally reported better-than-expected holiday sales
results, and several reports suggested that sales gains held up well in late December and early January.
Responding to somewhat better-than-expected sales, a large department store chain raised its plan for
first-quarter same-store sales gains to a level in line with its experience in the holiday season, and above
the pace planned for the first quarter at this time last year. Another large department store chain reported
that same-store sales gains in the Midwest ran roughly 5 percentage points above the national average
during the holiday season. A toy retailer's sales gains in the Chicago area were significantly above its
national average. An association of small retailers in Illinois reported that members' sales gains ran in the
high single digits, on average, during the holiday season. An association of small retailers in Michigan
stated that "our people are generally euphoric." One retailers' mail order business performed well above
plan during the holiday season. This contact stated that "hopefully, we've turned the corner, but we don't
want to get fooled again."
Several retailers noted that January will be a critical month for this year's plans, and sales gains
appear to have held up well in the early post-holiday period. A report from a large department store chain
indicated that sales growth strengthened in the last two weeks of December. A large retail chain reported
that year-over-year sales gains in early January were in line with those posted in December, despite a
more difficult comparison, and results in the Midwest were running slightly ahead of the national average.

VII-2
Early January sales gains were led by durable goods, notably appliances, furniture, and personal
computers. Another large retail chain stated that durable goods sales gains held up in early January, after
a resurgence in the fourth quarter of 1992. This firm recently accelerated receipt dates for spring
merchandise, which should lead to more aggressive ordering. A large discount chain reported
disappointing results for early January, but was optimistic about overall consumer spending growth
holding up in the first quarter.
Manufacturing. Purchasing managers' surveys and reports from individual manufacturers
suggest that District manufacturing activity turned higher on a seasonally adjusted basis in November and
December. In December, the overall index for the Chicago survey reached its highest level since the
official onset of the national recession. The recent rebound in the overall index was concentrated in the
production and new orders components, although the employment component also contributed. After
slipping slightly in recent months, the price component rose in December, but remained at a level well
below those experienced in the late 1980s. The director of the Detroit purchasing managers' survey
characterized December's results as "no doubt the most encouraging news we've had in several years ...
the economy is maintaining the recovery momentum it developed late last year." The survey's overall
index remained essentially flat in December, but only after a spike in November that lifted it to a threeyear high. In the fourth quarter of 1992, the strengthening in the overall Detroit index was led by
responses from participants in the auto industry. A large auto producer reported that showroom traffic
posted a strong increase on a seasonally adjusted basis in recent months. Citing improvement in orders
from the auto industry, a steel industry analyst expected steel production to rise in the first quarter to a
level 18 percent above a relatively weak year-earlier period. A machine tool producer reported some
slowing in orders in recent months, but this was attributed to temporary uncertainty about prospective tax
legislation. An office furniture producer stated that sales ran flat with weak year-earlier levels during
recent months, but the company also reported new orders' gains and expected improved sales in the new
year. An electronics manufacturer stated that orders for semiconductors from overseas markets have been
holding up well in spite of slowing growth in those economies.

VII-3
Employment. Alternative data sources continued to depict varying degrees of recovery in
District labor markets, but the overall picture is generally one of improvement. Household survey
estimates for Illinois and Michigan and local area unemployment statistics data for the other District
states show a continuing recovery in total District employment in recent months. Since late 1991, when
total employment (as measured by the household survey data) bottomed out, the recovery in these
measures has been closely in line with the pace of the recovery from the 1981-82 recession, and total
District employment now exceeds the levels that prevailed at the onset of the recession. Establishment
survey estimates for Illinois and Michigan hint at a modest upturn in recent months, but the estimates for
these states have been essentially flat since their recessionary lows in 1991. In Indiana, Iowa, and
Wisconsin, where direct household survey estimates are unavailable, establishment survey estimates have
reached and exceeded current measures of pre-recession levels. The underlying trend in the employment
components of the Chicago and Milwaukee purchasing managers' surveys have followed paths similar to
past recoveries. Employers continued to express concern about the impact of rising health care costs as a
factor in restraining hiring and contributing to layoffs.
Economic Outlook. A reserved but optimistic mood prevailed at a recent outlook conference
held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Concerns persisted in some areas, but belief in the
sustainability of the recovery seemed increasingly firmly rooted. The median forecast of 24 economists
called for year-over-year real GDP growth of 2.8 percent in 1993. Key contributions were anticipated for
business fixed investment and consumer spending on motor vehicles, two important sectors for District
production. Car and light truck sales were forecast to rise about 10 percent to 14.0 million units in the
new year, while the median forecast for housing starts called for a 12 percent increase to 1.353 million
units in 1993.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Summary
District economic activity, sparked by a strong holiday sales season, continues to
show signs of improvement. Holiday sales were generally strong throughout the District,
and most retailers are optimistic about 1993. Manufacturers report increases in sales and
employment. Single-family home construction continues to buoy the District's economy.
Nonresidential construction is on the rise in St. Louis. Loans outstanding at large District
banks continue to register small increases. According to District farmers, record or nearrecord harvests were the rule rather than the exception.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales of general merchandise in the District made a strong comeback during
the holiday season. Many contacts report double-digit increases in sales compared with
a year ago. Two extra days between Thanksgiving and Christmas gave retailers more time
to attract early shoppers, although aggressive marketing strategies apparently were
unnecessary as the level of price-cutting and advertising remained relatively low. Holiday
shoppers focused on mainstays such as electronics, jewelry and small appliances, while
holding off on the luxury and big-ticket items. Discounters reportedly fared better than
the specialty and department stores. A number of merchants report that more customers
paid for purchases with cash this year than in previous years. Inventories remain fairly
steady at desired levels. Retail merchants are optimistic about the growth of sales during
the early part of 1993, citing the strong holiday season and a more positive consumer
attitude about the direction of the economy.
District auto sales are reported to be moderately strong, although in Arkansas,
many dealers called the past quarter the worst in years. Sales of mid-sized, moderately
priced cars still outpaced the sales of all others, particularly upscale models.

VIII-2

Manufacturing and Employment
Reports from District manufacturing contacts are more upbeat than they have been
in recent months. Many speak of increases in both sales and employment. A contact in
the burglar alarm industry reports that sales are up 76 percent over last year's level.
Contacts in the heavy equipment industry state that sales increased during the fourth
quarter of 1992 and are expected to remain strong in the short term. Nonetheless, sales
remain below peak levels, and inventories are at their lowest level since 1975-76.

A

beverage and grocery distributor reports that orders and inventories have been stable at
desired levels. A concern of most contacts throughout the District is the lack of qualified
workers available in the market. Small businesses worry about the rising cost of health
care.
Other reports show District poultry producers and auto parts suppliers increasing
employment because of expansions and increased demand. In addition, a major household
appliance manufacturer is not only recalling 650 workers laid off during the holiday
season, but expects to hire an additional 550 during the first quarter to meet demand. A
District shoe manufacturer has secured a contract to begin selling its products in four
major Chinese cities. A St. Louis defense contractor, however, continues to shrink with
320 more layoffs.
A recent survey of firms in the St. Louis area reveals that approximately 20 percent
will hire new employees during the first quarter, while only 8 percent plan layoffs.
Nationally, 17 percent of employers plan to hire, while 13 percent plan to cut employees.
Construction and Real Estate
Most areas of the District finished 1992 with single-family housing permits
substantially above their year-ago levels. Homebuilders cite low interest rates, increases
in consumer confidence and a surge of starter-priced housing as reasons for the continuing
improvement. New and existing home sales are also up in most parts of the District;
though home prices are generally flat, some increases have been reported. Contacts in St.

VIII-3

Louis note that nonresidential construction is showing signs of expansion, with public
works projects and new factories accounting for the growth spurt. These same contacts
report that the level of nonresidential construction is still running about 20 percent below
the boom years of the mid-1980s.
Banking and Finance
Consumer and business loan demand appears to be strengthening.

Loans

outstanding at 12 large District banks increased 0.7 percent in November and December,
after declining 0.5 percent during the prior two-month period.

Business loans and

consumer loans increased in November and December, while real estate loans, the largest
portion of these banks' combined loan portfolio, declined 2 percent during the period after
a 0.8 percent decline in September and October.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Farmers reported record or near-record harvests in many areas, although some corn
has yet to be harvested in the northern region of the District. While prices received by
District farmers have risen somewhat recently, they remain below last year's levels.
Substantial amounts of precipitation were reported in many areas of the District in late
December and early January. The demand for natural gas in some parts of the District
has reportedly increased markedly, owing to increased drying of the recently harvested
corn crop. Cotton producers in the southern portion of the District report that the quality
of 1992's cotton crop was excellent. Southern pine lumber mills report that orders have
declined slightly, but that production remains substantially above that of last year.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS
The Ninth District economy continues to strengthen slowly, led by consumer
spending and construction. Retail sales for the holiday season were excellent
Residential construction is much stronger than a year ago as is heavy construction.
Reports on winter recreation are generally good, in spite of unfavorable weather.
Labor markets show tentative improvement. Some forest products manufacturing is
strong, but mining and energy production remain slow. In agriculture an extremely
late harvest is now largely complete. Some farm prices have declined slightly.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending in December was very strong. News media from across the
district generally report strong retail sales for the holidays; several retailers described
the season as the best in several years. Two Minnesota-based retailers reported samestore sales for December 9 percent and 13 percent above a year earlier.
At both ends of the district, recreation sector officials report that winter recreation
such as skiing and snowmobiling is now good after late arrival of snow cover. Reports
from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan describe resort and motel business above that of
1991. A Minneapolis Fed Advisory Council member reports that winter recreation
businesses across Montana are having a good season in comparison to last year.
Construction and Home Sales
Construction, especially of homes, is strong across the Ninth District Residential
construction is reported very active in western South Dakota and Wisconsin's
Chippewa Valley. The Minneapolis-St Paul metropolitan area experienced the best
growth; the number of residential building permits issued in November was nearly 52
percent above the level a year earlier. News reports from across the district note that
home builders anticipate the busiest winter construction season since 1986-1987.

IX-2
As in residential construction, contract awards for new roads, bridges, sewer and
water projects jumped sharply in November. For Minnesota and the Dakotas such
awards were nearly double those of November 1991, and the total for the first 11
months of 1992 were 17 percent above 1991. Actual construction resulting from many
of these contracts will not begin until late winter or early spring.
Specific new private-sector building projects include a shopping center in Billings,
Mont, an addition to a computer disk drive factory in Sioux Falls, S. Dak, and a large
retail facility in Mankato, Minn. Also announced was a 100,000 square foot addition to
a shopping mall in Sault Ste. Marie, Mich. Strong shopping by Canadians in this
border town was reportedly a major motivating factor for this investment.
Forestry, Mining and Energy
Minnesota forestry industry officials report strong demand for lumber and for
plywood substitutes, and production levels at most plants are high. A $500 million
rebuilding of a plant at Cloquet, Minn., which produces a plywood substitute, is
underway and will substantially increase its capacity. In contrast, the paper industry
faces low prices and has slack capacity.
Metal mining continues weak. An iron mine in northeastern Minnesota sent home
600 workers for six weeks, and a Michigan mine with 700 employees shut down for two
weeks. Both shutdowns were reportedly due to slack orders. One positive note was
the start of work at a new open pit mine near Ladysmith, Wis. The mine, which will
produce copper, gold and silver, is the first new metallic mine opened in Wisconsin in
25 years.
Oil production in North Dakota and Montana in December and for 1992 was
generally unchanged from 1991. But exploration activities continue to decline;
December rig counts for North Dakota and Montana were down 20 percent and 40
percent respectively from a year earlier and both are down about 60 percent from

IX-3

December 1990. One exception was the announcement that a new well will be drilled
in south-central South Dakota in a previously untried area.
Labor Market Conditions
Labor markets show tentative strengthening. Employment numbers and
unemployment rates are essentially stable but initial claims for unemployment
insurance fell sharply in Minnesota and Wisconsin in December.
Few large layoffs were reported in the district. A prominent Minnesotabased airline announced a nationwide layoff of over 1,000 employees, but less
than 200 of these were based in the district. Layoffs of 80 and 100 workers took
place at two Minnesota computer equipment firms, in addition to seasonal layoffs
of casino workers. Also laid off were 30 Billings, Mont, telephone workers. But
substantial hiring was reported at new businesses in Sioux Falls, S.D., as well as Eau
Claire and Menominee, Wis.
Agriculture
The 1992 harvest is complete with the exception of about 5 percent of the corn
in Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Dakotas and sunflowers in North Dakota still
unharvested at year end due to unfavorable weather conditions. Overall, the crop
was a record or near-record one for most grain crops in the district.
Prices received by farmers were generally steady or lower than earlier in 1992 for
most major commodities except wheat. Milk prices in dairy areas are down about three
percent from the previous year.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy is still growing moderately.

Retail sales are continuing to improve, bank loan demand is strengthening
further, and farm income is rising slightly.

However, while activity in the

energy sector improved through yearend, some slowing is expected in the near
term.
Most retailers report increased sales last month, with

Retail Sales.

Christmas sales strong in most merchandise categories.
anticipate further improvement in sales in 1993.

District retailers

Overall prices increased

only slightly from a month earlier and are expected to remain nearly stable.
Most respondents are satisfied with inventory levels and expect no change for
the next few months.
Auto sales increased slightly in the district last month, and most
dealers expect this growth to continue in 1993.

Some dealers report

difficulty in financing inventories due to the new GMAC policy of no longer
financing floor planning for autos which are not produced by General Motors.
Dealers are generally satisfied with current inventory levels and expect to
hold them steady.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report input prices were steady

to slightly higher through 1992.
modestly in 1993.

Prices are expected to increase only

Materials are readily available although lead times are

shortening in a few instances.

Most firms are trimming inventories due to

seasonal factors and a move to just-in-time inventory management.
generally still operating below capacity.

Firms are

Exporting firms expect foreign

sales to increase in 1993.
Energy.

Drilling activity in the district continued to improve through

X-2
the end of the year.

The average number of active drilling rigs climbed from

307 in November to 327 in December.

The rise brought the region's rig count

to a level 43.percent higher than a year earlier.

Drilling activity is

expected to drop sharply in coming weeks due to the yearend expiration of tax
incentives for coal-seam methane gas drilling.
Housing.

Housing starts slowed last month, due mainly to seasonal

factors, but remain significantly higher than last year.

Sales of new homes

also slowed and the demand for mortgage funds declined as mortgage rates edged
upward.

Despite these developments, inventories of new homes declined last

month and house prices rose.

The price of lumber remains high, but prices of

other building materials are about normal.

Builders apparently are accepting

the price increases for lumber as a permanent reality rather than an
aberration to be waited out.

Despite the recent rise in mortgage rates, most

respondents expect rates over the next three months to stay within a narrow
range.
Banking.
last month.
all banks.

Loan demand at district banks continued to strengthen somewhat

Demand for commercial and industrial loans was stronger at almost
Demand for consumer loans and home mortgages was flat to stronger,

while demand for commercial real estate loans was generally unchanged.

Loan-

deposit ratios were unchanged or higher compared with the previous month, but
about half of the respondents reported that loan-deposit ratios were still
below year-ago levels.

Investments were unchanged to higher at most banks.

No banks changed their prime rates last month, and none expect to change
them in the near future.

While consumer lending rates were unchanged at most

banks, a few respondents reported they had reduced rates.

Most banks expect

their consumer lending rates to remain constant over the near term.
standards were unchanged.

Lending

X-3
Total deposits were flat at half of the responding banks and higher at
the other half.

Demand deposits increased at almost all banks.

NOW accounts,

MMDAs, and small time and savings deposits were generally constant to up,
while large CDs were generally constant to down.
Agriculture.

Most farm operators entered 1993 in solid financial

condition, and the outlook for farm income in the year ahead is relatively
bright.

Large supplies of corn and soybeans have pushed down crop prices,

limiting prospective income gains for crop producers.

But low crop prices

will hold down feed costs and boost incomes for livestock producers.

Overall,

the outlook points to a slight gain in farm income in 1993.
District bankers expect the uptick in farm income to increase economic
activity in rural communities, bolstering demand for both farm and commercial
loans.

While business conditions continue to improve in rural areas, many

Main Street businesses are struggling to maintain sales against growing
competition from national retail chains.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

While District economic activity continues to grow moderately overall, signs of a slight
acceleration have begun to appear in some sectors.

Most prices are reported to be stable,

although those of some construction-related manufacturing products have increased.
Optimism is pervasive across industries. Orders to manufacturing and service firms have
increased. District retail and auto sales continue to expand at a moderately strong rate in
general, although retail sales along the Mexican border appear to have fallen from a year
ago. Construction and real estate activity continue to pick up. End-of-year oil field activity
was particularly strong but overall the energy industry remains weak. The financial industry
reports rising deposits but little change in loan demand. Agricultural yields were reported as
good in most areas, but prices have declined slightly.
Manufacturing activity is picking up. Production increases are greatest for
construction-related products, largely because of continued expansion in homebuilding.
Demand remains strong for brick, cement, lumber and construction-related fabricated metals.
Prices have been increasing for these products. Demand for oil and gas-related fabricated
metals remains slow overall, but foreign demand recently picked up somewhat. Production
of primary metals increased slightly last month. Part of the expansion was said to reflect an
anticipated January 1 increase in the price of steel. Sales of glass to automakers have
increased because of an expected uptick in nationwide auto sales; prices remain stable.
Demand continues to be strong for personal computers and telecommunication equipment.
Orders to chemical producers are mixed. A worldwide oversupply of industrial chemicals has
slowed production and held prices stable but sales of pharmaceutical chemicals are strong
and prices have increased. An end-of-year surge in domestic drilling boosted demand for oil
field equipment. Sales of paper products remain above last year's level. Demand for food

XI-2

and kindred products has picked up slightly. Production of denim products continues to
grow at a moderate rate while producers of high-end apparel report weak sales.
The growth rate of the service activity has increased slightly but optimism has
increased more. Demand has picked up slightly and some firms have increased hiring.
Respondents note that they are expanding cautiously, however, and only in response to
stronger sales. Prices are generally stable. District state governments face budget
problems although no hiring freezes have been implemented. New Mexico is the only District
state expecting a budget surplus this year. Louisiana is expecting a $900 million budget
deficit and has proposed a 40 percent cut in state funding to higher education this year. The
state is implementing riverboat gambling to raise revenue and produce jobs.
District retail and auto sales continue to grow at a moderately strong rate. Retailers
report that prices are still competitive but inventories have been reduced without significant
discounting. Wage costs are the same or lower than last year. Consumers have greatly
increased credit card purchases, and one retailer speculated that this may be an indication of
increased consumer confidence. District metropolitan areas, which had experienced sluggish
retail sales growth throughout most of 1992, have now improved. Typically robust sales
along the Mexican border, however, fell absolutely because of what respondents said was
increased enforcement of import restrictions by the Mexican government.
Construction and real estate activity continue to increase slowly. Occupancy rates
and rents have increased for multi-family real estate in Dallas and Austin, although rents in
Fort Worth remain unchanged. New home demand is strong in Dallas, Austin and Houston.
The office real estate market remains weak with the exception of Austin where rents are rising
and office vacancy rates are falling. Austin is the District's first major metropolitan area in a

XI-3

decade to have office vacancy rates below the national average. While office vacancy rates
are still high in Dallas, one respondent noted that prices have dropped to a point where
property sales have begun to pick up. Industrial vacancy rates have fallen recently and rents
seem to have stabilized after falling for the past several years.
Expiring tax credits stimulated end-of-year oil field activity but low prices and weak
demand have generally slowed the energy industry. Growing world inventories have kept
crude oil prices hovering around $20 per barrel. Although natural gas prices are above last
year's level, prices have weakened since October because of adequate supplies and
competition from low oil prices. Some respondents expects natural gas prices to continue to
decline. Refining margins remain low and profits have been estimated to be at their lowest
levels since 1987. Many refineries have reduced capacity. After peaking at 935 in midDecember, the rig count ended the year just above 700 rigs, well below the 860 of 1991. A
larger than normal spurt of natural gas drilling was prompted by expiring tax credits which
reduced costs for wells started by December 31. A slump in drilling is certain in January,
although changes in the Alternative Minimum Tax will mitigate the loss of expired tax credits.
The financial industry reports rising deposits but little change in loan demand.
Refinancing on residential and commercial properties continues to boost real estate lending
activity and fee income.
Agricultural respondents in most areas of the District report higher yields but lower
prices. Production in 1992 will be less than in 1991 because producers planted fewer acres.
Prices for most commodities are below year-earlier levels. The December Texas All Farm
Products Index of Prices Received was 2.5 percent below December 1991. Prices are
slightly higher for livestock commodities but lower for most crops.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Weakness in California continues to offset moderate growth in most other District states. In
California, employment cutbacks continue in aerospace and defense-related manufacturing,
construction, and trade. Holiday sales in California were characterized as flat to slightly improved,
and the state's fiscal outlook remains troubled. Outside of California, moderate improvement is
reported in several sectors, with the strongest conditions reported in eastern Washington, Utah, and
Idaho. Holiday sales were characterized as moderate to strong in most of these areas. However, the
Puget Sound area faces continued uncertainty in aerospace. Overall business sentiment has improved
and recent rains have improved District agricultural prospects. Little upward pressure on prices is
reported and wage increases are reported to be modest.
Business Sentiment
Sentiment among Twelfth District business leaders has improved since our last report. Over
half of our respondents now expect the real economy to expand during the next four quarters at a rate
of at least 2.5 percent. This proportion is up from one-third in November. An additional forty
percent of our respondents expect real output to expand, but at a rate below 2.5 percent.
Wages and Prices
Little upward pressure on prices is reported by contacts in most District markets. Contacts
report flat prices or downward pressure on prices for new cars, air fares, furniture, paper, and
computers. Aluminum prices are reported as very soft. In Oregon, a contact reports that cold
weather and the closure of a nuclear power plant is causing utilities to purchase replacement power
and will result in a 10 to 14 percent rise in energy prices in 1993. Another contact, however, reports
that the decline in manufacturing activity in southern California has resulted in a surplus of electric

XI -2
power, easing the short-term constraint in Oregon. Projections for wages in 1993 range from flat
conditions to 3 percent increases, with increases in the health care industry running higher than in
other industries.

Retail Trade and Services
Contacts from markets outside of California report good holiday sales, but less robust
conditions were reported within California. Strong sales were reported by contacts in Oregon,
Washington, Utah, Idaho, and Arizona. A national retailer reported a 7 to 8 percent increase in sales
in the Northwest. The same retailer, however, had only a 3 to 5 percent increase in California.
Another contact in California termed retail sales as "disappointing" during the holidays, with little
improvement seen over 1991. A contact in small business financing reports that sales were below
expectations, and that many retailers are hurting in the San Francisco Bay area.
Activity in the legal industry in California is termed weak, with several firms likely to
contract employment in 1993. In addition, a telecommunications firm in California reported further
deterioration in demand during November. The California governor has proposed significant cuts in
aid to local governments in response to a continued state budget shortfall. The fiscal situation in
Oregon is also uncertain, due to a property tax limitation and required increased spending for
education. In Washington, the state has announced a budget deficit of $1.2 to $1.7 billion for the
next budget cycle.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity continues to contract as layoffs in aerospace and defenserelated industries continue in southern California and Washington. A manufacturer in southern
California describes conditions as very bad, with no improvement in sight and further layoffs
anticipated by major employers. A contact in northern California reports that layoffs are still a great
concern, and that many small manufacturers are taking a wait-and-see approach to buying. In the

XII - 3

Puget Sound area, concern remains for additional layoffs in aerospace.
Other District manufacturing activity is showing some improvement. A contact in Oregon
reports that electronics manufacturing is on the rebound. Orders for computer equipment also are
reported strong for several categories, with foreign demand remaining brisk despite weakness in
Japan.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Recent rains have improved the outlook for water supplies in many western states. The
livestock industry is characterized as in fair to good shape, although the rain has hampered feed lots.
Strong demand is reported in apple markets and rye grass seed. Wood product orders are firm, and
inventory levels are low. In addition, western timber supplies are tight due to the lack of timber sales
from public lands.
Construction and Real Estate
Nonresidential real estate and construction markets are reported to be weak in several District
markets. One contact reports that in southern California hotel rates are declining due to increased
room supply. Another contact in southern California reports that commercial rents and property
values are depressed by high vacancy rates and continued employment losses. A contact from
northern California reports that values of commercial buildings are falling-some below replacement
cost-and that rents of some buildings are just covering operating costs.
Mixed conditions are reported in the residential sector. Housing prices in southern California
continue to weaken and house prices also are reported softening in the Puget Sound area, particularly
for more expensive houses. New house prices in Oregon are reported up 3 to 6 percent in smaller
cities, with some lack of building lots reported due to financing constraints on developers. In Utah,
housing prices are rising and land adjacent to metropolitan areas is also increasing in value.

XII - 4
Financial Institutions
Conditions at District financial institutions are reported as mixed. Outside of California,
contacts report some growth in loan demand and deposits in Arizona, Utah, and Washington.
In California, contacts report that loan demand remains weak and that the volume of outstanding loans
continues to decline. Asset quality is reported weak as well, although one contact reports that the
pace of deterioration has slowed recently. One contact reports that the overall delinquency rate
decreased for November. Some increased demand is reported for residential mortgages and home
equity lines of credit.

