SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON
CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

AUGUST 1993

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUM M ARY .....

......
..............................

.. i

First District - Boston ....................... ISecond District - New York ............... I-1
Third District - Philadelphia .............

-1

Fourth District - Cleveland ............. IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond ................. V-1
Sixth District-

Atlanta.......................

Seventh District - Chicago .................
Eighth District - St. Louis .................

VI-1
VII-1
VII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis............... IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City................X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas .................... XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco ........ XII-1

SUMMARY *

Slow to moderate growth characterized economic conditions in most Federal
Reserve districts in late July and in August. Geographically, economic growth appears
weaker on the East and West coasts while central areas such as Cleveland, Dallas,
Kansas City and Minneapolis report stronger than average growth. Employment
continues to grow slowly in spite of large companies' continued efforts to restructure
and cut labor costs. Manufacturing reportedly is improving in several districts. Home
construction is strong in many districts compared to a year ago, and a few see some
improvement in commercial real estate markets. In agriculture, several districts
describe weather-related damage to crops but note generally favorable conditions for
livestock producers. Mining shows little overall change, but there is some increase in
oil and gas exploration. Small increases in loans are noted in some districts, and some
business lending rates reportedly have fallen. General retail sales show a mixed
pattern, with strength in several districts but weakness in the remainder. Auto sales
are strong in most districts. Tourism is a bright spot for some districts. With the
exception of lumber, prices are generally stable and there is little evidence of
inflationary cost pressures.
Labor markets
Continued corporate restructuring is taking the bloom off employment growth.
Cleveland indicates that several manufacturers emphasize near-term revival in
employment growth is unlikely, since curbing labor costs appears to be the favored
option for improving profits in view of uncertainty over sales. Several large firms in
the Minneapolis and New York districts recently have announced sizable layoffs.
Boston and Philadelphia look for no change in manufacturing employment, and

* Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and based on information collected before
August 31, 1993. This document summarizes comments received from businesses and other contacts
outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

Richmond foresees a decline. In the St. Louis district flooding is still keeping some
people from working.
But some districts also state that labor markets may be reviving. Several
manufacturers, according to Dallas, have boosted employment, and in the Cleveland
district retailers report cautious hiring. Some Minneapolis district firms have recently
added workers. Moreover, even though employment has continued to decline in the
New York district, the recent pace of decline has been modest.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing production and sales are increasing in many districts. Several
districts report strong sales for firms making building materials or construction-related
items. Boston notes double-digit sales increases for automotive and electronics
products compared to year-earlier levels. Cleveland reports a surge in appliance
production and indicates that sheet steel and heavy truck manufacturers are operating
at capacity. Chicago also notes very strong heavy truck sales along with strong light
vehicle assembly. St. Louis lists improved business for petroleum equipment and
apparel. Dallas also notes improvements in oil field equipment, in addition to strong
orders for semiconductors and telecommunication devices. San Francisco describes
improvements in semiconductors and electronics. Respondents to a Richmond survey
of manufacturers are optimistic about prospects for the next six months.
The situation for some products varies by location. Dallas, Minneapolis and San
Francisco have positive comments about food processors, but Boston reports food
manufacturing output as flat. Similarly, Atlanta, St. Louis and San Francisco see
strength in the furniture industry, which is described as flat for Boston. Textile sales
are reportedly declining for Atlanta and Boston, but higher in California.
In the Atlanta, Boston and San Francisco districts the aerospace and defense
industries are still weak, as are chemicals and petroleum for Dallas.
Construction and real estate
Home construction is improving in many regions. For Dallas and Minneapolis,
residential construction is strong. Home building reportedly is picking up momentum
for St. Louis, and sales and permits rose for Richmond, particularly in the Carolinas.

While housing starts for Kansas City were slightly below year-ago levels, they are
rising and expected to continue to increase. San Francisco describes regionally mixed
conditions, with strong construction in Arizona, Idaho, Oregon and Utah, but relative
weakness in California, Hawaii and Washington. New York notes no change in homebuilding activity, and Philadelphia describes the pace of construction and sales as about
even with last year. In non-residential construction, Minneapolis reports strong
commercial and public building across its district.
Boston and New York see some improvement in commercial real estate markets.
New York describes the sale of a new, large office building as eliciting greater than
expected interest and selling for a higher price than expected. According to Richmond,
commercial real estate markets have improved in Virginia and the Carolinas but are
slow elsewhere. For Philadelphia, commercial real estate is stagnant.
Agriculture, mining and energy
It is either too wet or too dry for normal crop development, according to reports
from several districts. Continued drought has damaged corn, sorghum, tobacco and
other crops as well as pastures in the Dallas and Richmond districts and in southern
portions of the St. Louis district. On the other hand, flooding and excess moisture are
the principal problems for Chicago, Kansas City and Minneapolis. These districts
report substantial damage to corn, soybean and spring wheat crops. Slow crop
development caused by unseasonably cool, wet weather has left many crops in the
Midwest vulnerable to damage from early frosts.
But some positive crop developments are also noted. Scattered rains brought relief
for some crops in Richmond's area, while Dallas reports good cotton crops in west and
northwest Texas and estimates that overall crop output will be up from last year, in
spite of dry conditions. Winter wheat production is good for Kansas City and excellent
for the Minneapolis district. Cotton and peanuts in Oklahoma are reportedly in good
condition. And San Francisco reports generally favorable agricultural output. The
livestock sector is generally better than crops, with favorable range conditions in most
areas and strong prices. Kansas City notes that cattle feeders reduced inventories
somewhat in response to higher feed costs.

According to San Francisco, new mines are opening in Nevada in response to
higher gold prices. An existing gold operation in South Dakota is contemplating
expansion. Mining is stable for Minneapolis, though a strike at four iron mines in
August cast a cloud over increased production in that sector. Dallas reports rising oil
and gas drilling rig counts compared to earlier in the year and describes activity in the
Gulf of Mexico as very strong. Kansas City also notes that drilling rig numbers
continue to rise and are substantially above 1992 levels. St. Louis reports that lumber
producers are rebuilding inventories.
Financial institutions and credit
Most districts report slight increases in loan volumes. Consumer borrowing and
mortgage financing are up modestly in Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas
City, Philadelphia, Richmond and parts of the San Francisco district. Mortgage
refinancing is especially strong in Atlanta, Philadelphia and Richmond.
Commercial and industrial loans, however, are generally flat across the country,
though there are signs of improvement. Philadelphia reports that business loans may
increase as previously postponed projects are reviewed. Loan volumes in California
continue to decrease, though at a slower pace than in recent months. Chicago and
Dallas observe that increased competition among banks in their districts is bringing
down rates for prospective borrowers, and New York notes that about half of surveyed
loan officers report moderately lower rates.
Consumer spending and tourism
General retail sales are strong in several districts, but weak in the remainder. For
Cleveland, durable goods are moving well. Several retailers in the Kansas City and St.
Louis districts report moderate increases in sales over last year. In California and New
York sales are flat and mixed respectively. However, sales are unseasonably slow for
Atlanta and Boston, and Minneapolis indicates that strength earlier in the year has
ebbed somewhat. Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas and Richmond report that retail
inventories have returned to satisfactory levels.
Auto sales are strong in most districts. Cleveland notes that dealers of domestic
new cars and light trucks enjoyed the best summer sales in more than five years. St.

Louis car dealers report that sales of new and used domestic cars are up, in many cases
by 10 percent In the Philadelphia district, auto sales are running above year-earlier
levels, while Minneapolis characterizes them as stable. While domestic auto sales have
climbed, import sales, especially of Japanese cars, have dropped according to
Cleveland and St. Louis.
Tourism is cited as a bright spot for several districts. Chicago, Minneapolis and
Richmond report strong summer seasons. According to San Francisco, Idaho and Utah
are enjoying record years, but Hawaii's visitor industry has slumped.
Prices
Atlanta, Boston, Dallas and Kansas City report little or no change in prices. Food
prices, according to Minneapolis, are stable, and gasoline prices continue below yearearlier levels. Boston and Kansas City say retail prices are holding steady, and Dallas
states strong competition has been restraining retail price increases. While Kansas City
area manufacturers indicate input prices are modestly higher than a year ago, Atlanta's
factory contacts report stable prices for both raw materials and finished goods. Prices
are even flat for manufacturers in strong markets, Boston observes.
Lumber is an exception to this pattern of stable prices. In the Atlanta district, home
builders note lumber prices are beginning to rise again in anticipation of increased
demand from rebuilding in Midwestern flood areas. Lumber prices, San Francisco
says, are up about 30 percent from a year ago.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

On balance, the First District economy appears to be expanding
only marginally.
in late August.

Retail sales are flat to down among contacts reached
Manufacturing growth is uneven, and respondents report

competitive price pressures even in relatively strong areas like
automobiles and electronics.
improvement.

Commercial construction shows scattered

Asset managers are experiencing higher sales.

Retail
First District retail contacts report sales results ranging from
unchanged to more than 5 percent below year-ago levels.

Respondents

observe that sluggish employment growth continues to inhibit spending.
Also, retailers in northern New England believe the strength of the U.S.
dollar has adversely affected trade with Canadian tourists.
Both costs and selling prices are largely unchanged.

Retailers

report that inventory levels generally are satisfactory, but, in the
absence of sales advances, they are monitoring their stocks closely.
Most retail contacts intend to renovate some stores or upgrade
equipment, and a minority plan to expand their locations.
increasing only to staff new locations.

Employment is

Looking forward, contacts

express concern that economic progress may have stalled.
Manufacturing
Manufacturers of automotive and certain electronics products are
experiencing double-digit sales increases over year-ago levels.
Construction-related sales are improving moderately, with some boost
from rebuilding in hurricane- and flood-damaged areas.

By contrast,

contacts indicate zero to very modest sales increases for food,
furniture, miscellaneous machinery, and products used by the

I-2
pharmaceutical industry.

Sales of textiles for apparel, heavy

machinery, and medical equipment are declining significantly.

Demand

for aircraft engines and parts also is reported to be sluggish, except
by one manufacturer with increased foreign orders.
Almost all contacts cite downward pressure on prices.

The

majority, including those in strong markets, indicate that their selling
prices are flat.

Medical equipment suppliers have reduced their prices,

by as much as 15 percent.

Materials costs are flat or up just slightly.

A growing number of contacts indicate that they are pressing suppliers
to reduce prices--with some success where markets are competitive.

By

exception, lumber prices have reportedly risen by about 20 percent over
the past year, and one contact anticipates a double-digit increase in
the price of steel after a three-year freeze.
Employment has risen substantially at two contacts over the past
year, but most report declines in the range of 1 to 10 percent.

The

majority expect the size of their work forces to remain steady in coming
months, although some are continuing to reduce their numbers through
attrition or layoffs.

One manufacturer of auto parts intends to hire

additional workers, and two other contacts mentioned the
possibility of increasing overtime if demand continues to improve.
Capital spending remains concentrated on modernization and automation,
but about one-third of this month's contacts intend to expand capacity.
Most manufacturers feel that the economy at large will provide
very little help to their business over the coming year.

Over half

mentioned higher federal taxes as a negative factor, and some voice
concern about uncertainties resulting from pending health care reform.

Commercial Real Estate
The commercial real estate market has shown signs of improvement
over the last three months.

The apartment and retail markets reportedly

are attracting some new investment.
more mixed.

Results in the office market are

Sales of existing office buildings have picked up in some

suburban Boston locations as buyers appear to have gained confidence
that the market has bottomed.

One contact notes that prices may be up

10 to 15 percent, while another indicates that prices have increased
only for the most desirable, well-leased buildings.

Vacancy rates in

the greater Boston office market increased slightly in the first half of
the year, mostly because of a drop-off in large lease signings.

Office

leasing in the Hartford area is reported to be slow, with vacancy rates
continuing to rise.

According to one contact, recovery in Connecticut

real estate is at least six to twelve months behind the rest of New
England.
Nonbank Financial Services
Investment management companies report strong sales.

Increases in

assets under management ranged from 4 to 10 percent between the first
and second quarters of 1993.
funds and equity funds.

Sales were strongest in tax-free bond

Venture capital contacts report that firms in

communications software and health care cost containment experienced
strong growth in the second quarter, while retailers are said to have
had mixed results.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

On balance, economic developments seemed slightly more positive in recent weeks,
although some negative reports continued to be received. Sales results varied widely at District
retail stores during July and early August. Respondents reported no noteworthy change in
homebuilding activity in recent weeks, and now expect housing starts to top last year's relatively
low levels, though not by much. In the commercial real estate market the sale of a nearly vacant
new office building in mid-Manhattan reportedly elicited more interest and sold for a higher price
than many had expected. New York's unemployment rate decreased to 7.5 percent in July from
7.8 percent while New Jersey's rate held steady at 6.9 percent.

Most senior loan officers

surveyed at small and midsized banks indicated no recent change in their willingness to lend.
Consumer Spending
Sales results varied widely at District retail stores during July, and early August data
indicated a continuation of this pattern. Fans and air conditioners were strong sellers in July as
most of the District experienced record-high temperatures, and other items for the home also
fared well. Sales of women's apparel and cosmetics were strong at some stores but quite weak
at others. Some retailers attributed their lower apparel sales to the fact that they had smallerthan-usual stocks on hand for this year's July summer clearance.
Over-the-year sales changes ranged from -14 percent to +18 percent but despite several
negative results, only one chain stated that inventories were somewhat worrisome. Stores were
fairly evenly divided between those falling below and those exceeding plan. One chain with
lower-than-expected results had moved a large promotional event from July to August and
apparently underestimated the impact this would have on July sales. Several respondents were
cautiously optimistic about the outlook, citing a continued lack of consumer confidence as the
reason for their caution.

II-2
Residential Construction and Real Estate
Respondents report essentially no change in homebuilding activity in recent weeks. Some
noted a slight slowing of traffic and sales but stressed the fact that traffic has exhibited an up and
down pattern over a period of time. The IBM layoffs have begun to have a negative impact in
the Hudson Valley area, however, with an increasing number of homes being added to the resale
market. Uncertainty about the economic outlook and concern about job security were factors
mentioned as continuing to dampen demand for new homes in several other parts of the District
as well. Low interest rates and stable home prices are sustaining some demand, however, and
credit seems somewhat more available than had been the case, particularly for large builders.
Housing starts are expected to top last year's relatively low levels throughout the District though
not by large amounts.
In the commercial real estate market the recent sale of a 42-story, nearly vacant new
office building in mid-Manhattan reportedly elicited more interest and sold for a higher price than
many had expected. The buyer, Morgan Stanley, noted that a number of its businesses have been
growing and that the new building will fit in with its expansion plans. Some other financial
services firms in Manhattan also have already increased or plan to increase their space when
negotiating new leases.
Other Business Activity
New York's unemployment rate decreased to 7.5 percent in July from 7.8 percent in June
while New Jersey's rate held steady at 6.9 percent, just above the national average.

While

employment has continued declining in the District, the recent pace has been modest. Moreover,
a recent BLS report noted that, despite its employment doldrums, New York City wages and
salaries grew by a sizable amount in 1992 even when the highly-paid Wall Street firms are
excluded. New York State payrolls also rose in 1992, though by a smaller amount.
The July surveys of purchasing managers in Buffalo and Rochester indicated some
improvement among manufacturers in those areas. Rochester had a sizable increase in the per-

II-3
centage of firms stating that general business conditions were better: 38 percent in July from
20 percent in June. A higher percentage of Buffalo firms reported a rise in output in July and,
though the percentage with a gain in new orders fell, the percentage with the same or increased
new orders rose.
The District's employment outlook was dimmed by several announcements of future job
reductions. The largest of these were IBM's planned cutback of another 35,000 and Kodak's
additional downsizing of 10,000. Smaller cutbacks of 3000 and up to 1500 are in the offing for
Johnson and Johnson and New York's Empire Blue Cross. Most of these numbers pertain to
worldwide operations and no information is currently available as to the local impact. On a
smaller scale, Martin Marietta will cut almost 500 Albany-area jobs and will decide by October
whether to close any of several other plants in New York which it acquired in its recent purchase
of GE's aerospace division.
Financial Developments
Most senior loan officers surveyed at small and midsized banks in the District indicated
that they are as willing to lend as they were two months ago. Loan rates decreased slightly in
the last two months as roughly half of the surveyed loan officers reported moderately lower rates
while the rest reported theirs unchanged. Overall loan demand was reported to be generally
stable.

Approximately three-fifths of the respondents reported steady demand while the

remainder was evenly divided between those with higher and lower demand. With regard to
specific categories, most surveyed loan officers reported that demand for consumer loans was
unchanged and that mortgage demand and refinancing activity remained stable over the last two
months. Business loan demand showed continued signs of sluggishness as two-thirds of the
respondents indicated stagnant demand while others noted only slight increases or decreases. In
addition, approximately 90 percent of respondents reported either no change or a moderate
decline in loan delinquency rates during the last two months.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from various sectors of the Third District economy were mixed in

August,

although

Manufacturers

indications

reported steady

were
orders

that
but

overall
a drop

activity

in shipments.

was

steady.
Retailers

indicated sales were seasonally slow but slightly above the level in August of
last year.
month.

Auto dealers said an upward trend in sales persisted through the

Bankers generally indicated that overall loan volumes were edging up,

with weakness in commercial
lending.

loan demand being offset by increased consumer

Mortgage refinancing volume was growing.

Realtors and builders said

sales were up compared with last year for new and existing homes in lower price
ranges, but were off for higher priced homes.

Commercial real estate activity

remained weak, especially in the Philadelphia central business district, but
there were some reports that demand for office space in suburban areas was a bit
firmer.
Looking ahead, manufacturers expect conditions to improve, but they do not
plan to step up hiring.

Retailers express cautious optimism for the fall, and

auto dealers expect the upward trend in sales to continue through the rest of the
year.

Bankers generally expect consumer lending to continue moving up modestly,

but most do not expect commercial loan demand to strengthen in the immediate
future.
activity.

Realtors anticipate

continued weakness

in commercial

real

estate

III-2
MANUFACTURING
Third District manufacturers

continued to

report

slack conditions

in

August. Around half said new orders and shipments were running at a steady pace.
While as many firms reported increases in orders as reported decreases, the
number of firms that indicated shipments had dropped was slightly greater than
the number that posted increases.

Around three-fourths of the firms contacted

in August said they were holding payrolls steady, but nearly one-fourth were
making cuts.

Inventories were generally described as steady.

Looking ahead, nearly half of the manufacturers surveyed in August expect
conditions to improve over the next six months, while only one in ten anticipates
further weakening.

On balance, industrial firms in the region expect rising

orders and shipments.
for some slight

Overall, area firms' plans for the next six months call

increases

in capital

spending but

no

change

from current

employment levels.
RETAIL
Most of the Third District retailers contacted in late August said sales
were seasonally slow as the back-to-school shopping period was just getting under
way.

Many noted that sales were running a bit above the pace set last August,

and they expect slight year-over-year gains to persist through the fall months.
Auto dealers generally indicated that sales in August were above the level of
August 1992.

They expect the growth trend that began this spring to carry

through the rest of the year.
FINANCE
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks was edging up
in August, according to reports from bankers.

Most said that consumer lending

was rising while commercial and industrial loan volumes were steady or easing.

III-3
Bankers also

said that home mortgage refinancing activity was

strong, with

borrowers preferring fixed-rate loans.
While most bankers said they did not expect commercial loan demand to
increase in the immediate future, some said discussions with potential business
borrowers

indicated that commercial

loan demand could begin to

previously postponed capital spending projects are reviewed.

improve as

Bankers generally

expect consumer loan demand to remain on a modest upward trend. While some noted
signs of increasing home sales and purchase-mortgage originations, the gains are
not expected to be strong.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Third District

contacts

in

residential

real

estate

and construction

indicated that the pace of new home construction and sales this summer has been
about even with last year's rate.

For both new and existing homes, realtors said

there was strong demand for those in the price range associated with first-time
home-buying.

They said these homes were selling at a better rate than last year

because of lower mortgage rates and some easing in price from prior years.
Several realtors noted slower sales and growing inventories of existing homes for
sale in higher price ranges.
Commercial real estate activity remained slow, according to realtors and
property managers contacted for this report.
Philadelphia was

weak, according to

The demand for office space in

real estate

suburban areas appeared to be somewhat firmer.

contacts, while demand

in

Real estate contacts expect

demand for office space to remain soft as a result of the slow job growth they
anticipate.

IV-1

Fourth District - Cleveland
Summary. Growth in District business activity has been driven by brisk retail sales
and steady gains in production. Strong demand for furniture and appliances and
exceptional new-car sales have helped to sustain significant overall retail sales growth
during the last two months. Manufacturers generally report strong orders. Steel
producers (except for plate steel) continue to operate near capacity, and automakers
expect higher production this quarter compared with 1992:Q3. Mortgage refinancing
accounts for much of the moderate rise in loan demand, and some banks have noted a
decline in deposits.
Consumer Spending. While total retail sales have continued to make significant
gains in July and August, product demand has varied by type of retailer and product. The
larger department stores appear to be the major beneficiaries of higher sales, although
certain discount chains continue to do well. Despite heavy sales promotion by some
specialty stores, this segment of the market continues to lag.
Retailers report that durable goods, including furniture, hardware, and appliances
and electronics, have been moving well. Respondents attribute the strong demand to
factors such as improving home sales, weather, and some pent-up demand for durables.
Sales of apparel and of other nondurable items have been sluggish. Yet, aggressive
clearance promotion has prompted some movement of these items, pushing inventories
below the excesses reported earlier this year, particularly by department stores.
Although back-to-school sales have started slowly, retailers are cautiously
optimistic about the fall season. This positive attitude is buttressed by the region's betterthan-average sales performance and by the anticipation of only moderate price increases
on fall items.
Dealers of domestic new cars and light trucks report the best summer sales season
in more than five years. While the most dramatic increases occurred earlier in the summer,

IV-2

demand has continued to improve in August, with sales running 5 to 10 percent above the
same period a year ago. Some sources insist that sales could have been even better were it
not for shortages of many popular models and options. In contrast, unit sales of Japanese
nameplate vehicles are lower than last year.
Manufacturing. The durable sector continues to spearhead gains in manufacturing
output. Orders and production of appliances surged in July, spurred by the heat-related
demand for air conditioning and refrigeration units. Heavy-duty truck makers report that
operations continue to be at capacity, and they expect that output this year will be the
highest since 1977. Producers also note a steady pickup in orders for medium-sized
trucks.
Steel producers anticipate that output for the remainder of the year will exceed
levels attained during the first half. Sheet steel facilities continue to operate at virtual
capacity, and order books are full well into the fourth quarter. Plate steel producers,
however, report a softening in orders for the second half of the year. They attribute the
slowdown to the deferment of investment in barges and freight cars until facilities
destroyed by the Midwest floods are rebuilt.
A producer of power-generating equipment reports that domestic demand has
slowed considerably in recent months. The respondent speculates that customers have
delayed projects because of uncertainty about the economy and about pending legislation
affecting energy and waste disposal.
District manufacturers anticipate that exports to Europe may be dampened by the
latest run-up of the dollar vis-à-vis European currencies. Some also note scattered signs
that the yen's appreciation may have slowed the growth of Japanese imports, although the
impact to date is thought to have been moderate. A large steel producer reports some
resistance from auto transplants to switch existing relationships with Japanese steel
producers even though the strong yen may have temporarily left Japanese steel at a

IV-3

competitive disadvantage. However, some respondents anticipate that the yen's rise will
allow domestic automakers to gain greater market share at home.
Employment. Several manufacturers emphasize that near-term revival in
employment growth is unlikely, because curbing labor costs appears to be the most
appropriate option for improving profits in view of uncertainty over sales. For instance,
although auto producers expect higher output this quarter, they plan to add on only a
minimal number of workers. Retailers also report cautious hiring for the balance of this
quarter.
Financial Institutions. Depository institutions continue to report that home
mortgage financing is the main source of new loans, as interest rates in the District have
receded to as low as 7.0 percent for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. However, several
lenders note that the low rates have not spurred as many new mortgage applications as
expected, particularly in Cleveland, where home sales and starts trail last year's pace.
Respondents describe business loan volume in July as slow or shrinking, but they
indicate that consumer installment loans continue to grow moderately. Bank officials also
report further declines in deposits, resulting largely from losses of maturing certificates of
deposit.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview
The District economy continued to grow sluggishly during late July and
the first three weeks of August.

Hot, dry weather boosted tourism but

dampened shopper traffic at retail outlets, pushed up manufacturers' costs,
and devastated crops.

Credit demand strengthened slightly as did residential

and commercial real estate activity.

At District ports, exports fell but

imports rose.
Consumer Spending
Our regular mail survey indicated that retail activity was mixed in late
July and early August.

Respondents reported that sales rose slightly, even

though big-ticket items decreased somewhat.

Wages increased, as did wholesale

and retail prices, while employment and inventories were lower.

Capital

expenditures were reported to be flat.
Survey respondents were optimistic about their prospects for the next
six months.

They expected increases in all indicators except sales of big-

ticket items, which they believed would be unchanged.
Manufacturing
Our survey of manufacturers indicated that District activity continued
to hold steady in late July and early August.

Respondents indicated little

change in most indicators, although raw materials prices rose and new orders
fell slightly.

Manufacturers cited government regulations and weak product

demand as their most important problems, and they noted that the summer's hot
weather had pushed up their production costs somewhat.
Respondents were optimistic about their prospects for the next six
months.

They anticipated increases in most indicators, but expected

V-2
inventories and the number of employees to decline.

They anticipated no

change in backlogs and employee hours.
Tourism
Hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District indicated that
tourist activity for July and the first three weeks of August was higher than
in June and a year ago.
good weather.

Respondents attributed the increases to unseasonably

All respondents noted that their summer bookings increased when

compared to a year ago, and most expected tourist activity to continue to
improve during the next six months.
Ports
Representatives at District ports--Baltimore, Charleston, and Hampton
Roads (Norfolk)--indicated that exports were lower and imports were higher in
July than in June and a year ago.

Hampton Roads expected exports to increase

during the next six months, while Baltimore and Charleston expected export
volume to be unchanged.
Finance
District financial institutions contacted by telephone indicated that
credit conditions improved slightly over the last five weeks.

Respondents

stated that commercial loan demand was flat while consumer loan demand
strengthened somewhat.

Interest rates were steady on commercial loans and

somewhat higher on consumer loans.
Residential mortgage demand increased during the past five weeks.
Refinancing activity increased significantly, while mortgage originations were
flat.

Residential mortgage lending rates were moderately lower.

Residential Real Estate
Real estate analysts and homebuilders surveyed by telephone reported
that residential activity increased throughout the District during the past
six weeks.

Residential sales and building permits rose on a seasonally

adjusted basis, as did home prices, particularly in the Carolinas.

Most

respondents indicated that higher prices reflected both higher building
materials costs and stronger demand.

Some also attributed increased prices to

a lessened availability of residential lots and to increased regulatory and
labor costs.
Commercial Real Estate
Commercial real estate activity was mixed during the past six weeks; it
improved in Virginia and the Carolinas, but remained sluggish elsewhere.
Office building and retail vacancy rates continued to edge down, and no
speculative construction was reported to be underway.

However, some analysts

anticipated speculative office building activity in some areas as early as
next year.

Commercial rental rates remained steady throughout the District

except in Raleigh, where they were higher.
State Tax Revenues
State tax analysts reported that revenue growth implied real economic
growth of 2 to 3 percent in most District states.

South Carolina's economy

appeared to be growing at a slower rate, partly because of military cutbacks.
In the District of Columbia, real revenues continued to shrink.
Agriculture
Agricultural analysts reported that scattered rain across much of the
District in August brought relief to some crops but arrived too late for
others.

Drought damage to corn, sorghum, and tobacco reduced their expected

yields substantially.

The soybean and hay crops benefited from the August

precipitation but remained in poor condition.

As of late August, estimates of

drought-related damage in the District approached $600 million.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: Reports from Sixth District contacts indicate that economic activity in the
Southeast grew somewhat more slowly in July and August than during the first half of the year.
After recording relatively strong growth in the first two quarters, retail sales gains tapered off
early in the third quarter and have maintained this slower pace of growth since. Reports from
manufacturers also varied over the same period. Firms in the apparel, packaging, and aerospace
industries reported decelerations in new orders and current production, while manufacturers of
home furnishings, appliances, and building materials reported steady to slight improvements in
overall activity. Demand for housing-related items continues to be supported by single-family
home sales and construction, which have remained healthy in most of the Southeast. Multifamily
and commercial construction activity, however, has continued to be sluggish. According to
bankers, consumer loan demand increased slightly during the last two months, while commercial
lending was generally flat over the same period. Prices generally were said to be stable; some
firms reported modest wage increases.
Consumer Spending:

Retailers reported that consumer spending growth slowed

unseasonably in July and August. Sales of apparel and other consumer nondurables were said
to be particularly sluggish.

Although sales of furniture, appliances, and automobiles have

continued to improve on a year-over-year basis, recent gains have been more muted than earlier
in the year. While most retailers reported that they continue to expect sales during the upcoming
holiday shopping season to equal or surpass year-ago levels, they said that the recent softening
in consumer demand has made them more cautious in placing orders. Tourism remains strong

VI-2
in the Southeast. Hotel occupancy rates and convention attendance are above last year's levels,
and most industry contacts expect further improvement through the end of the year.
Manufacturing: Reports on factory activity in the Southeast were mixed in July and
August.

Textile and apparel industry contacts reported that sluggish retail sales had led to

reduced orders overall, with the exception of denim. Producers of packaging materials reported
a fall in new orders that they attributed to the recent weakness in consumer spending. Chemical
producers expressed concern that the floods in the Midwest could later contribute to reduced
demand for agricultural chemicals, while cutbacks in the space station program are expected to
add to the job losses already experienced in the aerospace industry. On the other hand, industries
that are closely linked to regional and national housing markets have continued to report increases
in overall business activity. Producers of lumber, carpets, appliances, and furniture continued
to experience gains in production and shipments.

However, even in these industries the

expansion in the volume of new orders has declined from the more rapid pace recorded earlier
in the year.
Construction: Realtors again reported strong single-family home sales through the end
of August. Contacts noted that after slowing briefly at the beginning of the summer, home sales
have picked up again. Year-to-date sales continue to outpace last year's relatively strong levels.
New mid-priced homes were said to be selling particularly well, and agents noted that inventories
of both new and existing homes for sale were tight in many market areas.

Home builders

reported that increases in demand had kept them extremely busy through August, and that they
saw signs of a shortage of subcontractors available to work on new projects.

VI-3
Multifamily and commercial construction activity remained sluggish across the District,
though several contacts noted improvement in vacancy and rental rates in their market areas. In
particular, large blocks of space are becoming scarce in some of the more desirable locations.
However, no new speculative building projects were announced.
Financial Services: Bankers from across the Southeast reported that loan demand was
flat or up modestly in August. Loans for automobile purchases have been the source of most of
the growth in new consumer loans. Residential mortgage lending also has continued to increase,
but bankers said that about three-quarters of this activity was due to refinancings. Business
lending has been flat and dominated by debt refinancing.
Wages and Prices: Factory contacts reported that prices for both raw materials and
finished goods have been stable in the last two months. However, home builders noted that
lumber prices were beginning to rise again in anticipation of increased demand from the
rebuilding in the Midwestern flood areas. In regard to wages, several firms said that they were
giving their employees only cost-of-living wage increases.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Seventh District economic expansion proceeded slowly in July and early August,
while efforts to clean up after the flooding got underway. Reports from a variety of retailing contacts
indicated modest improvement in consumer spending. Housing markets remained relatively active,
although bad weather restricted construction and the delivery of building materials. Manufacturing
activity flattened out during a seasonally slow period, but is generally expected to build momentum over
the rest of the year. Reports from banks indicated that commercial, industrial, and consumer lending
progressed at a somewhat stronger pace. Flood damage and related slow crop development reduced
anticipated agricultural production and left a sizable portion of the remaining corn and soybean crop
vulnerable to an early frost.
Retail Sales. Discussions with retailers, state tourism officials, auto dealers and other contacts
were largely consistent with a modest pickup in consumer spending in July and August. A large discount
store chain reported that same-store sales gains improved in August, with hard lines leading sales, and
results in the District slightly stronger than the national average. While a major department store chain
reported solid gains in back-to-school sales during August, some other retailers stated that back-to-school
sales have proceeded somewhat more slowly than anticipated. One retailer speculated that a burst of
later-than-usual vacations after an extended period of bad weather may have been partly responsible.
According to another retailer, there has also been a trend toward later back-to-school sales, and this
contact stated that continuing sales gains in home furnishings and nonseasonal merchandise were more
indicative of the true underlying momentum in retailing activity. Bad weather limited tourism spending
in Wisconsin in July, but a state official stated that with improvement in weather during August, a
substantial increase in business has occurred in many parts of the state, with record-breaking weeks
reported for one popular tourist area. An auto dealers' exchange stated that volume ran substantially
above year-earlier levels in recent months, and used car prices continued to rise. One of the largest auto
dealers in the District noted that profitability has been improving to a somewhat greater extent than
volume. Inventories are leaner and consumers "aren't beating us up on price so much." A manager of
shopping center properties reported that sales growth for the stores in its centers in the District seemed
little changed thus far in the third quarter. This contact noted relative strength in department store sales
results, and was encouraged that consumers seem increasingly focused on value as opposed to price
alone.

VII-2
Housing and Construction. Bad weather and hesitancy among producers has impeded
residential construction activity through much of the year, but discussions with housing industry contacts
suggested that the underlying tone of the home sales market remained firm. An association of realtors
stated that local boards have been reporting further improvement in sales activity and buyer interest
during the third quarter in Illinois. A realtors' association reported a significant increase in home resales
in Wisconsin during July, and year-to-date sales are now ahead of a record breaking year-earlier period in
spite of relatively weak results in early 1993. One of the largest residential realtors in the District
reported a return to a record selling pace in July, after some softening in its markets during the second
quarter, and early August results remained encouraging. A survey of residential mortgage lenders in
Western Michigan showed a pickup in origination growth in recent months. Two mortgage lenders
reported significant improvement in the housing market in the Detroit area.
Bad weather and the effects of flooding restricted shipments of construction materials through
July and early August. A gypsum wallboard producer expected industry shipments to rise somewhat less
than earlier expected this year, but shipments to the Seventh District were still expected to post a
modestly higher gain than in the nation as a whole. A large cement producer reported relative strength in
shipments for light industrial construction, which combined with extensive public works activity to boost
overall shipments in the absence of improvement in the weak commercial market. This contact stated that
"we definitely see some better times ahead." A cement industry association stated that bad weather did
not affect production, but shipments were delayed in some parts of the region.
Manufacturing. Purchasing managers' survey results and reports from manufacturers indicate
that industrial output in the District flattened out (on a seasonally adjusted basis) during the seasonally
slow months of July and August. Light vehicle assemblies had been scheduled to surge in the third
quarter, but underbuilds during August have pared those expectations. One large automaker expected
output to continue to increase on a seasonally adjusted basis in the third quarter, and this contact
expressed confidence that assemblies would continue to climb into the fourth quarter. Light vehicle
assembly gains in the District have significantly exceeded the national average thus far in 1993, and
District production should benefit when one large facility reopens later in the year. A steel producer
selling into niche markets reported that their order books were full through October and November.
Improvement in demand remains widespread by customer grouping, according to this contact A steel
industry analyst stated that continued relative strength among steel service centers is another sign that

VII-3
improvement in demand has been generalized, and not confined to auto and appliance manufacturers. A
large electronics and communications company stated that strong bookings growth continued, particularly
in orders from Asia. A heavy-duty truck industry analyst reported that net orders in July climbed to their
highest level for that month since 1978. The increase was partly driven by promotions, but there was
little sign of an orders slowdown in preliminary results for August Some small manufacturers that were
closed due to flooding in July have begun the clean-up process.
Banking. Commercial, industrial and consumer lending activity generally continued to improve
in recent months. Several large bank holding companies reported increased liquidity in the large
corporate loan market, with a perceived strengthening in asset quality prompting greater willingness
among banks to extend credit. Heightened competition has reduced the cost of credit lines and the spread
of loan rates over base rates. A regional bank holding company stated that middle-market commercial
loan demand is still "pretty good," with demand for working capital financing more robust than demand
for fixed investment financing. Another middle-market lender stated that commercial borrowers seem to
have increased their tendency to shop around for better loan terms, and competition on rates has
intensified in most borrower classes, with little overall net lending growth. "We are continuing to go
forward at rates we consider acceptable, but the overall market is best characterized as sluggish or weak."
Auto loans still form an important source of strength in consumer lending, according to one regional bank
holding company. A large retailing firm reported continued expansion in outstanding consumer credit,
while a large bank holding company reported that credit card write-offs have been running at their lowest
pace in almost a decade.
Agriculture. Recent flooding is estimated to have led to an expected total production loss of
roughly 4 to 7 percent of this year's intended crop acreage in the hardest-hit District states (Iowa, Illinois
and Wisconsin). Ponding and slow crop development have considerably reduced the yield prospects on
the remaining acreage in Iowa and Wisconsin. Production uncertainties continued into late August, with
ongoing rainfall in much of the District. A sizable portion of the corn and soybeans in the northern half
of the District remain vulnerable to a frost prior to maturity, and even a normal first frost would cause
some damage to this year's late crop.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Summary
The District economy continues to grow slowly. Floodwater has receded in many
areas, allowing the cleanup to begin.

Our flood damage estimate for the District now

stands at $2 billion to $3 billion, up from the $1.5 billion to $2 billion stated in the last
report. The Coast Guard has reopened the Missouri River and is allowing restricted traffic
on the Mississippi River between St. Louis and Cairo, Illinois. Residential construction
has picked up in areas where it was lagging and continues to be strong elsewhere. Total
loans outstanding at a sample of District banks rose less from mid-June to mid-August than
they had in the prior two-month period. Hot, dry weather has hurt crop prospects in the
southern parts of the District.
Consumer Spending
Most retailers throughout the District, except in St. Louis, report that sales are up
between 1 percent and 7 percent over last year. Retailers in St. Louis have not fared as
well, reporting that sales have been flat.
Louisville report double-digit increases.

Some department stores in Little Rock and
Stores in Little Rock, Louisville and Memphis

also report that back-to-school sales are above expectations, although some say that it is
still too early to report. Contacts in Little Rock and Memphis expect sales this holiday
season to be as good as, if not slightly better than, last year. Some contacts in Louisville
and St. Louis were less optimistic though, expecting sales this holiday season to just match
last year's.
Car dealers report that sales of both new and used domestic cars are up, in many
cases by more than 10 percent, over the same period last year. Import sales, especially
of Japanese cars, however, continue to decline. Most dealers expect that as the model
year changes and the usual year-end incentives are offered, sales over the next few months
will continue their increase from one year ago. Dealers in Louisville, on the other hand,

VIII-2

expect this year's total sales to be slightly lower than last year's because of the decline in
import sales.
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity
Most District firms contacted continue to report slow, steady growth. Many firms
that had suspended operations because of flooding are returning to normal operations. At
the height of the flooding, about 31,500 workers in Missouri were displaced, including
about 10,700 workers in the St. Louis area.

As of August 23, approximately 11,000

people statewide, including about 5,000 people in St. Louis, were still believed to be out
of work because of flooding. Most of the displaced workers in St. Louis are from the
Chesterfield area, where the Monarch Levee broke on July 30, flooding about 300
businesses, the second-busiest airport in Missouri and a county jail. Preliminary damage
estimates for this area are between $150 million and $200 million. In Illinois, about 200
of the 500 displaced nonagricultural workers were still believed to be out of work.
While a few reports from District firms not affected by the flooding are negative,
most are upbeat.

A mine in southeastern Illinois will close permanently by late

September, eliminating 365 jobs.

At the same time, another mine in southern Illinois

reopened, calling back almost 350 workers from a layoff in March.

A domestic airline

announced that its corporate headquarters will move to St. Louis from New York. This
relocation, along with one by a medical supply company from Chicago, will bring about
500 jobs into the area.
A contact in the oil-extraction equipment industry reports that, for the first time in
about a year, orders from domestic firms have picked up.

In Tennessee, a shirt

manufacturer that closed in early July has reopened, calling back 350 employees, and a
furniture manufacturer will open two new plants, creating 400 new jobs.
telecommunications

A major

firm, which recently announced widespread reductions in its

workforce, will close its Louisville office, affecting about 120 employees. Many of these
employees will receive other positions within the company, although not necessarily in the

VIII-3

District. In a July survey of District firms by the National Federation of Independent
Businesses, only 13 percent believed that now is a good time to expand.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction has picked up some of the momentum it had lost in areas
of the District this spring because of adverse weather conditions.

In St. Louis, for

example, single-family home permits rose 8.4 percent in June and 10.1 percent in July
from their year-ago levels, compared with small declines or no increases in prior months.
Elsewhere, single-family home construction continues to buoy area economies:

In

Memphis and Little Rock, year-to-date, single-family home permits are up more than 25
percent from 1992.
Banking and Finance
Total loans outstanding at a sample of 104 large, mid-size and small District banks
increased 0.6 percent between mid-June and mid-August, after increasing 1.9 percent
between mid-April and mid-June. Commercial and industrial loans fell 0.8 percent from
June to August, after posting a 1.8 percent drop from April to June. Real estate loans rose
2.2 percent compared with a 3.5 percent increase in the prior period, and consumer loans
declined 1.4 percent compared with a 2.2 percent increase in the prior period.
Agriculture, Natural Resources and Transportation
Weather conditions remain mostly hot and dry in the southern portions of the
District, adversely affecting the region's crops.

Cotton producers in certain areas of

Mississippi and Tennessee continue to apply pesticides actively; many believe that
production costs for this year's cotton crop will be much higher than normal.

Barge

movement on the Mississippi River is slowly returning to its normal pace, although certain
restrictions remain in effect. One concern is that a logistical problem may develop in the
fall with so many boats and barges moving to New Orleans at the same time. Southern
pine lumber producers are reported to be rebuilding their inventories; however, they
expect only a modest increase in demand associated with the rebuilding efforts from the
flood.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

The economy of the Ninth Federal Reserve District continues to grow moderately
and economic conditions are, on balance, positive. Employment is growing in all
district states, and two recently announced large layoffs appear to be the result of
corporate restructuring rather than slack demand. On a sector-by-sector basis,
construction is clearly quite strong and leads the economy. Manufacturing is
improving, especially in small and mid-size firms. Mining output is generally stable,
though a recent strike by iron miners has idled production in Minnesota and the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Agriculture is the one sector with declining output;
crop production, especially in Minnesota and the Dakotas, will be down sharply from
1992 levels. Retail sales have apparently slowed somewhat in some parts of the
district, but tourism appears stronger after an initially slow start. Price levels are
stable, with no indication of inflationary pressures.
Employment
Non-farm employment continues at above year-earlier levels in all Ninth District
states. Unemployment rates declined in Minnesota, Montana, South Dakota and
North Dakota. Corporate restructuring caused layoffs of 900 insurance workers in
Minnesota and 1,200 lumber company employees in Montana that were announced
recently. One firm in Rapid City, S.D., announced that it would add over 200 new employees
as did another in Hayward, Wis. Another South Dakota firm added a total of 70 workers to
its plants in Sioux Falls and Huron.
Construction and housing
Construction leads the economy. Publicly awarded construction contracts in Minnesota
and the Dakotas for July were about 30 percent above July 1992, while year-to-date awards
are up nearly 20 percent over year-earlier levels. South Dakota is an especially strong area for
all types of construction, and employment in this sector is at near-record levels. Residential
construction is reportedly the largest element in South Dakota, but commercial construction

IX-2

and public building are also strong. Moreover, a Minneapolis-St. Paul building association
official said that 1993 would surpass 1992 in terms of units built and dollars spent. Houghton
and Hancock, Mich., also report a good construction season as do other regional centers in
Montana and Wisconsin.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing apparently is strengthening. Small manufacturing firms in Minnesota
report good orders as do media reports from other district states. A utility serving large areas
of Wisconsin, Minnesota and South Dakota reports industrial electrical use growing at a rate
substantially above the five-year average. Publicly traded manufacturing firms generally
report improved business; one evaluation of Minnesota-based corporations notes second
quarter 1993 net earnings up 18 percent to 25 percent over 1992 for firms making food
products, industrial machinery, biomedical equipment and consumer products.
Mining
Metal mining output is stable. Gold output in Montana and South Dakota metal mines
has risen somewhat in response to higher prices. A South Dakota gold operation requested
permits for new exploratory drilling, and production has increased at a Montana platinumpalladium operation. However, Montana copper production fell slightly as one mine closed.
Iron ore output around Lake Superior was above year-earlier levels until a strike idled two
mines in Minnesota and two in Michigan on Aug. 1. No settlement has been reached to date.
Agriculture
Crops in Wisconsin, Minnesota, South Dakota and North Dakota have all suffered
extensive damage from excessive rain and flooding. Aug. 1, 1993, Agricultural Statistics
Service reports estimate that corn production will be down 13 percent in Wisconsin and 30
percent or more in the other affected states, compared to 1992 levels. Soybean production will
be down 8 percent in Wisconsin and 22 percent in Minnesota and South Dakota. All wheat
production is estimated to be down slightly in the Dakotas, down about 20 percent in
Minnesota, but up over 30 percent in Montana. Spring wheat in Minnesota and the Dakotas
is reportedly heavily infested with plant diseases, including one that can render the grain

IX-3

unfit for food use. The full extent of damage is not yet clear, but spring wheat prices have
risen by one-third since mid-June.
However, reflecting good crop conditions in areas not affected by flooding, soybean and
corn prices have subsided from mid-July increases and are now respectively only 12 percent
and 5 percent above pre-flooding levels and about even with year-ago levels.
In the livestock sector, cattle slaughter numbers and prices remain slightly above yearearlier levels. Hog prices are about 8 percent above year-ago levels and output is essentially
the same. Milk production is down slightly in Wisconsin, but unchanged in Minnesota and
other district states.
Consumer spending and tourism
Consumer spending is mixed. Retail sales vary across the district. In Minnesota, sales
tax collections have fallen behind projections, and retail businesses were the poorest
performing category in a recent report on publicly traded companies based in that state. But
news media and mall managers in regional centers in the Dakotas and Montana report
generally good business, and retail employment in Michigan's Upper Peninsula had the
strongest growth of any sector. Vehicle sales are reported as steady, except in areas affected
by flooding where sales continue to be slack.
The tourism industry is having a good summer season. Montana and western South
Dakota, which have been least affected by adverse weather, continue to have the most
positive reports, while industry sources in Minnesota and Wisconsin report generally
improved traffic after a slow start earlier in the summer.
Prices and wages
There is little evidence of inflationary pressures. Food prices in general are stable.
Gasoline prices continue below year-earlier levels. Housing prices are stable across most of
the district, though up somewhat in the larger urban areas. New wage settlements are
reported to include small increases in direct wages, although health care costs continue to
drive up total labor costs to firms.

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy is still growing moderately.

Retail sales are up, housing activity is increasing, and demand is up for
consumer loans and home mortgages.

The energy sector continues to improve,

and farm income prospects remain healthy despite the wet weather and flooding.
Retail prices generally remain steady, while manufacturers' input prices are
rising modestly.
Retail Sales.

District retailers report that sales are up both from a

year ago and a month ago.

Retailers generally expect sales to increase

further in the next few months, and most plan to increase inventories over
that period.

Retail prices are generally holding steady and are expected to

change little in the months just ahead.
Most auto dealers report continuing strong sales over the past month.
Financing is readily available for dealers and for creditworthy buyers.

Most

dealers are trimming their inventories of 1993 models and expect sales to
remain strong for the remainder of the year.
Manufacturing.

Most purchasing agents report that input prices are

modestly higher than a year ago.

Input prices are expected to remain at

current levels in the near term.

A few purchasing agents report problems

getting materials because of the flooding, but they do not expect the problems
to be long term.

Some respondents are trimming inventories, while others are

increasing inventories.
bottlenecks.

Many plants are operating near capacity but with few

Exporting firms expect foreign sales to remain steady or

increase slightly.
Energy.

Improvement in drilling activity in the district continues

despite generally low oil prices.

The average number of operating drilling

X-2
rigs in district states rose from 240 in June to 249 in July.

During the

first three weeks of August, the district rig count climbed to 259.

As a

result, the average rig count stands about 17 percent higher than during the
same period a year ago.
Housing.

Builders report that housing starts are down slightly from a

year ago due to the weather.

Still, starts are up from last month and are

expected to increase for the rest of the year.

Strong demand for new homes

has reduced the stock of unsold homes and increased prices of new homes.
Materials prices are also up and are expected to rise slowly in the near
future.
Mortgage demand is strong but is expected to wane slightly as winter
approaches.

Mortgage rates have fallen further in recent weeks but

respondents do not expect them to fall much more over the rest of the year.
Banking.

Growth in loan demand last month was mixed, with half the

survey respondents reporting increases in loan demand and half reporting no
change.

Commercial and industrial loan demand was mostly unchanged.

was up at most banks for consumer loans and home mortgages.

Demand

Home equity, home

construction, and commercial real estate loans were constant to up.

Loan-

deposit rations were constant to up, compared with both the previous month and
a year ago.
None of the respondents changed their prime rate last month, and none
expect to change it in the near term.

A few banks lowered consumer lending

rates, but most banks reported no change.

Lending standards were unchanged.

Deposit flows of responding banks were also mixed last month.

Half

reported decreases in deposits, while half reported either no change or
increases.

Demand deposits and NOW accounts were constant to up at most

X-3
responding banks.

IRA and Keogh accounts, large CDs, and small time and

savings deposits were constant to down at most responding banks.
Agriculture.

Heavy rains and flooding have reduced the expected size of

the district's crop of corn and soybeans.

Much of the crop in low-lying areas

along the Missouri River and its tributaries in Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska
will be a total loss.

Moreover, wet weather has delayed the maturity of the

remainder of the crop, leaving it vulnerable to an early cold snap.

The

district's winter wheat harvest is now complete and crop yields were generally
very good, although in some areas yields and quality were reduced by heavy
rains, hail, and disease.

In Oklahoma, the cotton and peanut crops remain in

good condition.
The smaller-than-expected corn and soybean crops--key ingredients in
livestock feed--have pushed up feed costs and trimmed profits somewhat for
district cattle and hog producers.
reduced cattle inventories.

In response, some cattle feeders have

The district's large-scale pork producers,

however, maintain rigid production schedules that are unfazed by modest
changes in feed costs.
Overall, despite the recent weather problems, prospects for farm income
in the district remain healthy.

While crop losses caused by wet weather and

flooding will create financial hardship for many district farmers, higher crop
prices will boost incomes for the majority who escaped the flooding and expect
to harvest normal or near normal crops.

Meanwhile, despite somewhat higher

feed costs, strong cattle and hog prices continue to support solid earnings
for most district livestock producers.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy expanded at a moderate pace in July and August.
Many respondents reported a pickup in sales and employment. Orders were strong
in several manufacturing industries. Respondents in business service
industries reported an increase in business activity. Retail sales continued
to increase slowly. Homebuilding remained strong. Banking respondents said
that loan demand picked up. The energy extraction industry showed continued
improvement in response to strength in natural gas prices. Overall, crops in
the District are expected to fare better than last year.
Most manufacturers reported a pickup in orders and an improved outlook.
Several respondents noted an increase in employment. Producers of stone, clay,
glass, lumber and fabricated metals reported strong gains in orders
originating from the residential construction sector. Employment was reported
to have increased in many of these construction-related industries. Orders for
semiconductors and telecommunications devices were reported to be strong and
employment levels have increased. Producers of food and kindred products said
that sales and employment had increased. A steel industry respondent noted
that orders continued to increase even though they recently implemented a
price increase. Oil field equipment producers said that domestic orders have
improved but that international drilling remains weak. Paper producers noted
an increase in orders and employment. The petrochemical producers continue to
report global overcapacity problems and weak exports. Refinery respondents
reported that their margins improved slightly in August.
Most business service firms reported a pickup in activity and a positive

XI-2

outlook. Temporary employment agencies report an increase in demand, partly
because their clients are resisting hiring full-time workers, but also because
business activity is increasing. The demand for part-time workers was broad
based, although particular strength was reported for the professional fields
such as accounting and engineering. Several law firms reported increases in
employment. Accounting contacts said that business activity has picked up over
the past three months. The main source of growth for accounting firms was
reported as consulting on methods to increase productivity. Advertising
respondents said that activity has risen because of increased demand from the
auto, retail and nondurable goods industries. Hotels in the Dallas, San
Antonio and Austin areas reported high occupancy.
Retail sales continued to grow slowly. Retailers generally were
optimistic that sales growth will pick up. Respondents report that strong
competition within the industry has been restraining prices increases.
Inventories are reported to be back at desired levels.

Some retailers had

experienced an unintended buildup during the early summer. Sales along the
Mexican border are still below last year's levels although there are scattered
reports of improvement. District auto sales slowed in July but year-to-date
sales remain above last year's level.
Residential construction remains strong in many areas of the District.
Respondents report that new home sales slowed somewhat in July but picked up
again in early August. Construction is particularly strong in San Antonio and
Austin, and weak in Houston. Respondents report that home sales are likely to
remain strong as long as mortgage rates remain low.
The District oil and gas drilling rig count continues to rise. Activity

XI-3

in the Gulf of Mexico remains very strong. Oil prices rose to about $18 per
barrel in August after falling to $17 per barrel in July because of
speculation that Iraq would reenter world oil markets, and discord within
OPEC. Hot weather throughout the Southern tier of the United States pushed up
natural gas prices in the last few weeks of August.
Most banking respondents reported that loan demand has picked up and is
up over 1992. Mortgage originations and refinancings remain a bright spot.
Respondents generally were optimistic about future loan demand. Respondents
said that competition among banks for the best borrowers was beginning to
intensify because the larger banks were becoming more aggressive.
Continued dry conditions in the District have had a negative impact on
agricultural conditions in many areas. Overall crop production, however, is
expected to fare better than last year. West Texas and areas north of Lubbock
are expecting good cotton crops. Dry weather is having a negative impact on
crop production in parts of central Texas. Many pastures have dried out
forcing producers to move cattle to market. In general, however, cattle
ranchers report favorable conditions. Higher prices for most livestock and
livestock products pushed the Texas All Farm Products index slightly higher in
July. Prices for most crops declined and the Texas All Crops Index was 10.7
percent below a year ago.

Producers were receiving higher prices for hay,

sorghum and soybeans but lower prices for other crops.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic activity is mixed across the Twelfth District. Economic recovery continues to
elude California, while intermountain areas expand. In California, weakness continues to be reported
in a broad range of sectors-including aerospace and defense-related manufacturing, trade,
construction, finance, and government. Some strength is reported, however, in California's motion
picture and nondurable manufacturing sectors. Sluggish conditions also are reported in western
Washington, affected by retrenchment in aerospace, and Hawaii, undergoing a slump in the visitor
industry. In contrast, conditions are stronger in eastern Washington, Utah, Idaho, and Nevada.
Business Sentiment
Sentiment among Twelfth District business leaders is little changed from our July report.
About half of the respondents expect the real economy to expand during the next four quarters at a
rate at or above trend growth. This proportion is about the same as in July and June, but is down
from two-thirds in April and three-quarters in March. Most other respondents expect the economy to
expand, but at a rate below trend.
Many respondents expect the recent federal budget agreement to have short-run negative
effects on their regions and industries. Defense cuts reportedly will hurt manufacturing in California;
higher tax rates are expected to affect small business owners, farmers, and individuals in high-income
states such as California and Hawaii; and residents in areas with long driving distances are concerned
about the effects of higher fuel taxes. Businesses and consumers are reportedly cautious due to the
tax changes, and some hiring decisions also are being delayed due to uncertainty about health reform.
Retail Trade and Services
Retail activity varies widely across the District, and reflects the underlying regional economic

XII - 2

strength. Low interest rates are reported to have had only a limited effect on purchasing decisions.
In both northern and southern California, retail sales are flat and consumer confidence is reported
down due to continued job losses. Retail sales in western Washington also are reported slow due to
concern over the regional economy. In contrast, sales in eastern Washington have continued strong
for more than a year and consumer confidence has remained high. Consumer confidence remains
very strong in Utah and Idaho, with retail sales reported up nearly 10 percent during the first half of
1993 from a year earlier, and auto sales reported strong.
Conditions in service-related industries are mixed. Idaho and Utah are having record years in
tourism. In contrast, the Hawaii visitor industry has slumped--affected by recessions in both
California and Japan. During the first half of 1993, visitor totals in Hawaii hit a five-year low. In
California, business services have strengthened recently, particularly in Orange County.
Furthermore, the motion picture industry in Los Angeles is growing at a double-digit pace, and
summer box-office revenues are at record levels. Local governments in California are suffering
budget shortfalls and in parts of southern California they are asking for major wage concessions from
public employees.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity is mixed in the District, with weakness centered in aerospace and
defense-related industries. In Washington, Boeing currently is cutting production of several aircraft
models. Furthermore, concern is reported for future production levels at the company due to
uncertainty about foreign orders. One contact with a smaller aerospace components firm expects that
its current backlog of orders will fall 50 percent by 1994. California defense firms continue to shrink
due to cutbacks and restructuring in defense and aerospace. Southern Arizona, however, is
benefitting from a shift of aerospace production activity from California.
A few manufacturing industries show signs of improvement. In California, orders and sales

XII-3
have risen in the semiconductor industry, but the increased demand has yet to translate into higher
employment. Contacts also report strength in California textiles, apparel, and fruit and vegetable
production. Strength outside of California includes electronics in Oregon and Idaho, and construction
equipment in Utah.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Most contacts report a generally favorable outlook for agriculture. In California, most
vegetable crops are reported to be in good condition. Tree fruit yields are high, but sales are slow
and prices are low. In contrast, tomato yields are off but prices are reported very good. Cattle
prices are rebounding from summer lows, demand is good, and export volume is expected to rise.
Lumber prices are reported up 30 percent from a year earlier. A contact from Nevada reports that
new mines are opening due to higher gold prices; higher fuel taxes, however, will increase delivery
and transportation costs from remote locations.
Construction and Real Estate
District construction and real estate markets are mixed. In California, despite low interest
rates, single-family home sales are little changed from their year-earlier levels. In Hawaii, sales of
existing homes are down 18 percent from a year earlier. The median sales price in Honolulu,
however, stands at $358,000, up 5.6 percent from a year earlier and the highest in the nation. In
Oregon, immigration from California and low interest rates are reported to have stimulated housing
construction, and apartment market conditions are reported tight with vacancy rates less than 4
percent. In Washington, downtown office vacancy rates have stabilized, but no major new demand or
construction is reported except by owner/users. Reflecting at least in part a shift in aerospace
production, the Tucson housing market is booming both in new construction and sales of existing
homes. Idaho and Utah construction and real estate markets remain strong.

XII-4

Financial Institutions
Varied conditions are reported across District financial markets. In California, contacts report
conditions in the banking industry as showing modest signs of improvement; outstanding loan volume
continues to decline, but at slower pace than has been seen in recent months, while some measures of
asset quality are improving. One contact, however, reports that banks continue to be restrictive in
providing financing to small businesses throughout California. In Oregon, banking conditions are
reported good in part due to strong construction and mortgage lending in the Portland area. Contacts
in Utah report strong bank earnings for the first half of 1993 and improvement in balance sheets at
most financial institutions.

