For use at Noon, E.D.T.
Wednesday
May 10, 1995

Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

May 1995

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

MAY 1995

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUM M ARY

First District - Boston

.................

Third D istrict - Philadelphia

. II-1

..................................

III-1

..................................................

IV -1

...................................................

Fourth D istrict - Cleveland

. V-1

...................................................

Fifth District - Richm ond
Sixth D istrict - A tlanta

. I-1

........................................................

Second District - New York

...............................................
...................................................

Seventh D istrict - Chicago

i

............

........................................................

Eighth D istrict - St. Louis ...................................................

........

V I-1
V II-I
V III-1

N inth D istrict - M inneapolis

..................................................

IX -1

Tenth D istrict - K ansas City

...................................................

X -l

Eleventh District - Dallas

.....................................................

Twelfth District - San Francisco

..............................................

XI-1
X II-1

i
SUMMARY*

Most Federal Reserve District Banks reported continuing gains in economic
activity

from March

through April,

business

conditions

were

Chicago, Kansas

described

but at a somewhat
as

City, and Minneapolis

improving
Districts.

slower pace.

solidly

in

the

Overall

Cleveland,

Growth was reported

to be

continuing at a somewhat slower pace by Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis,
Dallas, and San Francisco.

Business activity was described as mixed in New York

and less strong in Philadelphia.

Most Districts

reported sluggish growth in

retail sales and declines in automobile sales, while manufacturing was up by
varying degrees in most Districts.
Although

reports

widespread, except

for

of

rising

construction

commodity

and

materials,

industrial

reports

prices

from many

remain

Districts

described these increases as moderate or not accelerating or indicated that they
were not being passed through to finished goods prices.

In addition, despite

tight labor markets in some sectors or regions, wage pressures were described as
moderate in most areas.
Retail
Most

Districts

reported

sluggish growth

in

general merchandise

sales,

although Chicago and Minneapolis reported improved sales and a few Districts (New
York, Cleveland, and Atlanta) noted some improvement in April compared to March.
Richmond indicated that sales growth was slowing.

In the Boston and Philadelphia

Districts sales were mixed and generally below expectations.

Store inventories

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia based on information
collected before May 1, 1995.
This document summarizes comments received from
businesses and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary
on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

ii
were on the rise, according to Philadelphia, Atlanta, Dallas, and San Francisco.
Auto sales softened in all Districts except Dallas.

Some weakening in sales of

home furnishings and consumer durables was also reported.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing

activity

Minneapolis, and Dallas.

remained

strong

in

Cleveland,

Kansas

City,

Continuing, but smaller, gains were reported by Boston,

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis.
electronics, and petrochemicals.

Demand was strong for capital goods,

However, even in Districts with increases in

overall manufacturing, demand for construction materials was easing.
San Francisco District manufacturers reported mixed results.

Aerospace

and lumber companies experienced declining demand, while producers of electronic
goods, machinery, and aluminum increased output.

Overall manufacturing activity

declined in the Philadelphia District.
Real Estate and Construction
Commercial real estate activity was improving in most Districts.

Office

leasing and construction were reported on the rise by Richmond, St. Louis, and
Minneapolis.

Dallas and Minneapolis noted increased construction of warehouses.

Nonresidential construction was mixed in the San Francisco District, moving up
outside of California, particularly in Nevada and Alaska, but easing in the Los
Angeles area.

Boston and New York gave mixed reports; gains in some parts of

those Districts were offset by declines in others.
Residential construction or sales were up somewhat in the Chicago and
Kansas City Districts, but were slipping in the Atlanta, St. Louis, Minneapolis,
and Dallas Districts.

San Francisco reported slower

growth in residential

construction. Multifamily construction was increasing, according to Atlanta and
Dallas, but real estate contacts in those Districts expressed concern that

iii
apartments were approaching an overbuilt situation.
Banking
Overall bank lending was increasing moderately in most Districts, with
gains most often noted in commercial and industrial lending.

All five District

Banks that reported on consumer lending (Philadelphia, Richmond, Cleveland, St.
Louis, and San Francisco) noted drops in the demand for consumer loans.
York, Richmond, and St. Louis reported increased real estate lending.

New

Lending

terms in April were reported to be substantially the same as earlier in the year,
but competition for business loans remains strong.
Agriculture
Several Districts noted

some

areas about the

concern in agricultural

outlook for summer crops because planting has been delayed. Cold and wet weather
has caused postponements in planting in the Cleveland, St. Louis, Minneapolis,
and San Francisco Districts, while dry weather has affected parts of the Richmond
and Dallas Districts.

According to agricultural contacts in Minneapolis, the

delay could curtail crop yields later this year regardless of weather conditions
during the summer.

But the winter wheat crop is in good condition, according to

reports received by St. Louis and Kansas City.
vegetable,

fruit,

and nut crops,

Floods in California have damaged

according to

obtained by San

information

Francisco, and some crop prices are expected to remain high through mid-summer.
Both Kansas City and Dallas report falling livestock prices.
Tourism
Spring tourism business has picked up in the Boston, Richmond, Minneapolis,
and San Francisco Districts, and part of the Atlanta District.
hoteliers in these regions expect a good summer.

Tour agencies and

Boston and Atlanta both noted

an increase in international visitors to some tourist regions.

Atlanta also

iv
noted, however,

that a weakening

in southern Florida

of tourism

attributed to the drop in the value of the peso.

has been

Boston also was told that

spending by domestic tourists appears to be off from prior years.
Energy and Mining
Recent
according

to

increases
the

in oil prices have boosted drilling activity a bit,

Kansas

City, Dallas,

and

Minneapolis

Districts.

But

a

relatively mild winter depressed demand for natural gas, and natural gas prices
and production remain weak.
Minneapolis reported that rising demand for gold and copper was prompting
output and employment increases in the District.

San Francisco also reported

increased production from gold and silver mines.
Prices
Except for prices of materials used in residential construction, reports
of rising commodity and industrial prices

remain widespread, although many

Districts described these increases as moderate or not accelerating (including
Philadelphia, Chicago, Atlanta, and Richmond) or indicated that they were not
being passed through to finished goods prices (including Philadelphia, Cleveland,
Atlanta, and Dallas).

Chicago was the only District that reported that input

price increases were more frequently being passed through to final goods prices.
While some business contacts told District Banks that the rise in commodity
prices appeared to be slowing, Boston, Chicago, and Cleveland reported the range
of commodities affected by the increases was expanding.

Cleveland and Kansas

City contacts said retail prices were steady, while Richmond contacts reported
higher retail prices.
Wages
Tight labor markets in some sectors or regions were reported by Cleveland,

v

Atlanta, Chicago, Richmond, Minneapolis, and Dallas, but wage increases were
described as moderate in most of these areas, and Kansas City noted few reports
of wage increases.

Demand in some Districts for both skilled and semi-skilled

workers, as well as technical and managerial workers, was strong.

Labor markets

appeared to be less tight in the Philadelphia District, where manufacturers
reduced work forces in April, and in the Boston District, where business contacts
gave no reports of labor shortages or growing wage pressures.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The pace of the expansion continues to moderate in the First
District.

Most retail contacts report disappointing sales results.

Manufacturing activity has slowed since the fourth quarter, but yearover-year gains reportedly continue at a satisfactory pace.
Retail
First District retailers report mixed results in March and April.
Sales activity ranged from an increase of 12 percent to a decline of 10
percent compared with year-earlier levels.

Most contacts express some

disappointment, in part because April sales were generally softer than
those of March, despite a late Easter.

Retail respondents' expectations

for the next six months also range widely, with some anticipating sales
declines and others single-digit growth.
Contacts note that vendor prices have inched up 1 to 3 percent
over the last year, with steeper increases in the prices of rubber,
cotton, leather, and especially paper.

Gross margins and profits for

1994 were up slightly from the previous year.

Most contacts plan zero

or very small increases in capital spending and employment this year.
Tourist industry contacts report a large increase in the number of
visitors to New England in March and April, particularly to the Boston
and Cape Cod area.

The rise is attributed to more international

travelers, Americans' current preference for family-oriented short
trips, and the 375th anniversary of the Pilgrims' landing.

Despite the

increased numbers, tourist officials observe that domestic visitors are
spending less in souvenir shops and restaurants.
Manufacturing
First District manufacturing contacts report a good first quarter.
In most cases, sales and orders were well above year-ago levels, with

I-2

gains ranging from 3 to 18 percent.

Nevertheless, two-thirds of the

respondents note a modest slowdown from the fourth quarter pace.

Demand

for construction-related products weakened most broadly, with
residential orders softer than commercial.

However, reports on

automotive products were mixed, with some manufacturers pleasantly
surprised by how well auto-related orders have held up.

Demand for

office machinery and other capital equipment generally remains strong.
Aerospace orders are also showing signs of life.

Several contacts

mentioned that dollar weakness is boosting sales.
Manufacturers described double-digit price increases for a wide
variety of commodities, including rubber and petroleum-based products,
paper, wood pulp and packaging materials, cotton, fabrics, and metals.
Several also mentioned the impact of the yen's appreciation on the cost
of inputs from Japan.
increases are abating.

Views were mixed on whether commodity price
Just over half of the respondents are starting

or continuing to raise selling prices on selected products.

The others,

facing ongoing competitive pressures, are holding the line.
Employment is slightly above year-ago levels at more than half of
the manufacturing contacts, and one-third plan selective hiring in the
coming months.

Still, several First District manufacturers remain in

the midst of previously announced consolidations; some of these firms
plan ongoing cutbacks but at a slower pace.
shortages or wage pressures.

No one noted any labor

Over half the contacts expect capital

spending in 1995 at or above last year's pace, with the focus on costcutting equipment and new product development.
Although growth is widely seen to be moderating in response to
higher interest rates, most contacts expect their own firms and the U.S.
economy to keep expanding at a satisfactory pace.

A few are keeping a

wary eye on the consumer, but most anticipate a "soft landing," with
little pickup in inflation.
Temporary Employment Firms
Steady, solid business characterizes the temporary services
industry in New England.

Contacts report that sales and profits are up

from year-ago levels, and they expect that growth to continue.

Workers

in biotechnology and health care, in particular, are in strong demand,
especially in the Boston area.

Overall, businesses continue to rely on

contingent workers to supplement a trimmed permanent work force, a
phenomenon personnel supply firms sense is here to stay.
Commercial Real Estate
Improvements in the First District commercial real estate market
are spotty, with some markets showing promise, while others show signs
of slowing.

The strongest office markets are in the Boston and

Providence suburbs, with much new leasing activity among start-up
companies leading to serious plans for new construction.

Contacts in

Portland and Providence say that confidence is rising in their downtown
office markets.

By contrast, the Hartford office market shows little

improvement, and new leasing activity in downtown Boston has slowed as
landlords have increased asking rents 10 to 15 percent in the last year.
Nonbank Financial Services
The majority of respondents at life insurance companies report an
increase in sales in the first quarter of 1995 compared to the first
quarter of 1994.

The increases were mostly in individual life insurance

and annuities, while sales of health insurance were reported to be down.
Employment at the responding companies was flat to down in the first
quarter, with only one contact reporting a modest increase.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT -- NEW YORK

Reports on District economic conditions were generally mixed in
recent weeks.

A number of District retailers reported that March

sales were below planned levels, although preliminary reports for
April suggest that sales have strengthened.

While the market for

office space in midtown Manhattan remained strong, office vacancy
rates in the downtown and New York City suburban areas generally rose
during the first quarter.

Finally, although aggregate loan demand

increased at small and midsized banks over the past two months, survey
respondents attributed the rise to seasonal factors.
Consumer Spending
Retailers expected sales this March to be weak relative to last
March because, unlike 1994, this year the Easter holidays fell in
April.

Despite only modest expectations, fully half of District

retail contacts reported that March sales were below plan while only
one contact reported above-plan results.

Weaker-than-expected sales

led several contacts to note that inventories had increased above
planned levels.
Year-over-year sales results ranged from losses of 5 percent to
gains of roughly 6 percent in March.
products sold well.

In general, apparel and home

One contact noted that sales of auto supplies,

particularly batteries and tires, had declined because the weather was
considerably milder than in March of last year.
Preliminary reports from several District retailers suggest that
sales rebounded in April and that combined March and April sales
growth may well be back on plan.
Construction and Real Estate
Although the market for office space in midtown Manhattan
remained robust during the first quarter, the downtown and suburban

II-2
Strong office leasing activity in midtown

markets generally weakened.

decreased available space and caused vacancy rates to decline.

For

the first time since the eighties, large blocks of contiguous midtown
office space are in short supply.

In contrast, a rise in downtown

leasing activity was more than offset by return of space to the market
as the financial sector downsized.

As a result, both vacancy rates

and available space downtown increased.

Office vacancy rates also

rose in Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, and Fairfield (CT) counties.
Residential construction across much of New York State and
northern New Jersey remained slow over the past two months; the usual
spring pick-up in traffic and sales has not yet occurred.

Several

builders expressed concern that rising inventories and aggressive
price-cutting in the market for existing homes would continue to
dampen the sale of new homes.

Homebuilding in the Albany area, which

showed strength early in the year, has been slowed by uncertainty over
proposals to reduce the size of the State workforce and relocate State
workers.
Other Business Activity
The unemployment rate in New York State increased 0.5 percentage
points in March to 6.6 percent, while the rate in New Jersey declined
0.3 percentage points to 5.8 percent.

Unlike earlier in the year,

there were few announcements of corporate downsizings.

The only

announcement of large-scale job cuts came from General Electric, which
announced that it will cut its Schenectady workforce by nearly 1,000
over the next six months.

On a more positive note, Wal-Mart announced

plans to build a merchandise return facility in the Albany area that
could eventually employ 400 people.

II-3
Financial Developments
Compared to two months ago, aggregate loan demand is higher at
about half of small and midsized banks surveyed in the District and
steady at over one-third.

Many of the senior loan officers surveyed

attribute this increase to seasonal factors.

The commercial and

industrial loan segment remains robust, with about forty percent of
the banks reporting higher demand and nearly half reporting steady
demand.

The residential mortgage segment is strengthening, with

demand higher at about one-third of the banks and lower at only onefifth.

Refinancing activity is still weak at almost all of the

participating banks.
About sixty percent of the senior loan officers surveyed are just
as willing to lend as they were two months ago, while about one-third
are more willing.

Nearly all banks have maintained their credit

standards, and have stable or lower delinquency rates.

Average loan

rates are steady or lower at more than three-quarters of the banks.
In particular, about half of those surveyed report lower rates on
residential mortgages.

The spread between the average lending and

deposit rates has narrowed at more than half of the banks, primarily
reflecting recent increases in rates paid on deposits.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications of business activity in the Third District showed less strength
in April than earlier in the year.
shipments.

Manufacturers reported a dip in orders and

Retailers said sales were running at a steady pace, but somewhat

below their expectations.

Auto dealers also reported that sales were below

forecasts for the month.

Bankers

generally indicated that loan demand was

modest. Consumer lending was dropping, mortgage activity was moving up slightly,
and business loan volume outstanding was about steady.
The outlook among business contacts surveyed for this report is subdued.
Manufacturers forecast slight increases in orders and shipments over the next six
months, but they are planning to trim payrolls.

Retailers are looking for a

seasonal upturn in sales, but they are being cautious in their planning.

Bankers

have mixed views on the future course of the economy but generally do not foresee
stronger loan demand in the near term.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District declined somewhat in April,
according

to

reports

from

industrial

firms.

While

about

half

of

the

manufacturers contacted during the month said operations at their plants were
running at a steady pace, about one-third indicated a slowdown from March, and
only one-fifth said business had improved. On balance, shipments from plants in
the region were off fractionally, and new orders were down compared to March.
Despite the slower shipments and order rates, manufacturers indicated that their
inventory levels had declined.

Plant managers reported that employment levels

111-2
were reduced in April compared to March, with cutbacks in both numbers of workers
and hours worked.
The outlook among Third District manufacturers is mixed. Positive opinions
just slightly outnumber negative views, resulting in a slight balance in favor
of improvement in orders and shipments, although order backlogs and inventories
are expected to continue trending down.

The overall forecast for employment is

also negative.
While Third District manufacturers continued

to note price hikes

for

inputs, the extent of the increases appeared to be moderating from the first
quarter.

For their own products, area manufacturers generally reported they were

holding prices steady.

Looking ahead, nearly half of the area firms surveyed

anticipate further increases in input costs and one-fourth plan to raise prices
for the goods they produce.
RETAIL
Third District retailers generally reported that sales in late April were
running about even with the pace set in March and early April and with the April
1994 rate.
that,

as

This was somewhat below merchants' expectations, and several noted
a

result,

inventories

were above

plan.

Additionally,

stores

in

Philadelphia suffered substantial reductions in sales during a two-week public
transit strike at the beginning of April, and they have recouped very little, if
any, of the lost business.
Most of the store executives surveyed for this report said they see few
signs that sales are picking up, although they hope that the onset of spring
weather will provide the usual seasonal upturn.

Most remain cautious in their

forecasts, however, and some said they may consider reducing planned purchases
of goods if the sales rate does not improve.

III-3
Auto dealers reported that sales in April were steady, but below the yearago pace and below their expectations.

They said inventories have edged up.

While dealers hope for the usual spring increase in sales, some believe the
current decline from last year's sales rate portends a cyclically slow period
ahead.
FINANCE
Third District bankers contacted in late April generally described overall
loan demand as modest. Most reported that commercial and industrial loan volumes
outstanding were level during April.

Some bankers said that total consumer

lending had slipped a bit, mainly due to a decline in auto loans.

Residential

mortgage lending activity appeared to be near steady, with recent increases in
purchase mortgages offsetting a continuing drop in refinancings.
Looking ahead, bankers in the District have mixed views about whether
economic growth will accelerate or remain at its current pace.

Nevertheless,

most said they see no current evidence that loan demand is rising.

Competition

for business loans remains strong, and, while terms are being eased, new business
has not been forthcoming.

Consumer lending also has shown no signs of picking

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

General Business Conditions
Overall, the District economy continues to move solidly ahead, with only scattered
indications of a falloff in business activity, mostly in retailing. A strong industrial sector
continues to pace the expansion. Production and orders growth are continuing, even in
the automotive area, where sales have been somewhat soft this year. Construction activity
has been mixed, with commercial building significantly stronger than residential. In
farming, a cold, wet spring has delayed the planting season by a few weeks.
Several District sources note a rise in labor turnover in recent months, and
applications for job openings are reportedly down. Skilled workers are particularly
difficult to find, although shortages of unskilled workers are also seen in some areas.
However, wage growth in the District remains moderate, reportedly in the 2 to 4 percent
per year range.
Manufacturing
District manufacturers report continued growth in production and orders, with
capital goods producers operating at a particularly high level. In some instances, orders
backlogs for capital goods now extend well into 1996. A few District producers indicate
that orders are hedging against potential price increases next year. Moreover, these orders
are not secured in the event of a deterioration in the economic climate. Several
manufacturers report continued orders growth from foreign customers, presumably the

IV-2
combined response of strengthening foreign economies and a further drop in the value of
the dollar.
Industrial space is said to be in short supply, and this has apparently put some
upward pressure on rents. Likewise, we continue to hear reports of rising prices for a
broad range of industrial commodities, particularly aluminum, steel, caustic soda, and
paper. However, resistance to finished goods price hikes continues, with capital goods
producers in the District appearing to hold the line on any increases.
Retailing
Fourth District retailers report weaker sales during much of the period since early
March. However, most also say that sales have improved somewhat in the past few
weeks. Large discounters are enjoying much of the recent sales improvement, while
specialty shops, such as women's apparel stores, appear to be faring the worst.
Unseasonably cold weather was the most consistently cited reason for retail sales
sluggishness last quarter, and indeed, observers have seen a marked improvement in traffic
and sales whenever spring-like conditions have occurred. Contributing to the weaker
first-quarter retail numbers was the late Easter. One District source also suggested that
the first-quarter numbers represented a "payback" for the strong fourth quarter.
Within the overall sales picture, some nondurable goods have been strengthening
slightly, while the demand for durables has flattened or declined. Furniture sales have
eased slightly, as have home decorating products more generally. One observer linked the
sales slump here to the drop-off in home sales last fall.

IV-3
Retail profit margins are said to be very thin as higher wholesale costs continue to
squeeze flat finished-goods prices.
Autos
Mixed impressions have emerged from the District's major auto markets, with
sales in Ohio better than in southwest Pennsylvania. On balance, however, District auto
sales during the last six weeks are down from the same period a year ago
Dealers cite a number of factors, including the unseasonable weather and higher
interest rates, for this weakness. New car loan rates are approaching, or in some cases
have already reached, double-digit levels. Surprisingly, auto credit is reported to be
readily available, and local finance markets are said to be aggressively competing for
borrowers. Moreover, higher bank rates for vehicle loans are being partially offset by
factory incentives, including special financing arrangements and cash rebates.
Auto inventories are higher than desired in many District markets. However, there
are still shortages of a few popular vehicles, apparently resulting from production glitches
rather than a shortage of capacity.
Banking and Credit
Loan activity is reported to be good, although some softening has been felt very
recently, particularly in consumer lending. Competition for borrowers continues to
intensify, and several sources note an easing in credit standards, although this may simply
be an adjustment to the "artificially" tight standards coming out of the last recession.
Indeed, delinquency rates in the District are reported to be extremely low. Deposit levels
were generally characterized as steady or growing slightly.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Overview: Economic activity in the Fifth District increased slightly in March and
April. Areas reporting growth included tourism, ports, temporary employment agencies,
commercial real estate, and state revenues. Areas exhibiting little or no growth included
services, finance, and residential real estate. Growth in consumer spending and
manufacturing activity was down, and conditions in agriculture were somewhat worse than a
year ago.
Consumer Spending: Indicators of retail activity growth generally decreased in
April from their March levels, according to preliminary results from a mail survey of
District retailers. Sales, wages, and inventories decreased. Employment and big-ticket sales
increased, however, and shopper traffic was unchanged. Survey respondents indicated that
retail prices rose 1.1 percent in April. They foresaw decreased demand for their products
and an increase of 2.0 percent in their prices during the next six months.
Service-Producing Firms: Indicators of service-sector activity growth changed little
in April from their March levels, according to preliminary results from a District mail
survey. Respondents indicated, however, that employment was lower. Service producers
reported that prices rose 0.6 percent in April. They expected a slight decrease in demand for
their services and an increase of 1.0 percent in their prices during the next six months.
Manufacturing: Most indicators of factory activity growth declined in April from
their March levels, according to preliminary results of a mail survey of District
manufacturers. The shipments, new orders, and employment indexes declined, and the
backlog and workweek indexes changed little. Manufacturers expected shipments, the
workweek, and capital expenditures to increase during the next six months. Finished goods

V-2
prices rose at the same rate in April as in March, and at a rate slightly below the general
inflation rate. Raw materials prices rose less in April than in March, and at a rate higher
than the general inflation rate. Respondents expected prices to rise slightly faster during the
next six months than they had expected in January.
Tourism: A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District
indicated that tourist activity in April was above that of March and a year ago. Spring
bookings at District hotels and motels were up compared to a year ago. Contacts expected
better-than-normal business this summer; one predicted "our biggest summer ever."
Ports: Representatives at District ports indicated that export and import levels in
March were higher than those in February and a year ago. They expected that, over the next
six months, exports would increase and imports would change little. One contact attributed
this outlook to the weak U.S. dollar.
Temporary Employment Agencies: A telephone survey of temporary employment
agencies indicated that labor markets were tight throughout the District. Demand for
temporary workers strengthened and wages rose somewhat in April compared to March and a
year ago. One contact suggested that there were "more jobs than people right now," and
another described "a bidding war" for workers. Demand was particularly strong from
manufacturers, warehousers, and distributors, and companies were seeking "anyone with
computer skills."
Finance: District financial institutions reported that credit conditions were mixed
during the past seven weeks. Interest rates rose moderately for consumer loans, fell for
mortgage loans, and were flat for commercial loans. Demand for mortgage loans increased
sharply; demand for commercial loans rose slightly; and demand for consumer loans
declined.

V-3
Residential Real Estate: According to a telephone survey of District realtors and
builders, residential real estate activity was unchanged in March and April. Building
permits, home sales, and buyer traffic were stable over the period. Housing starts were also
stable, except in West Virginia, where they decreased.

Contacts reported that lower- to

middle-priced homes were selling better than expensive homes. Home prices were steady,
although building materials prices rose.
Commercial Real Estate: District contacts reported that commercial real estate
activity increased slightly in late March and April. Leasing activity increased somewhat, but
contacts reported little new construction. Vacancy rates inched downward, except in
Maryland and the District of Columbia, where they were stable. Commercial rents changed
little, except in North Carolina and the District of Columbia suburbs, where they increased.
The availability of prime office space tightened in most District cities, and contacts reported
shortages of such space in Raleigh, N.C., and the District of Columbia.
State Revenues: State government forecasters said that tax collections grew in
March. Real revenue growth was strong in Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, and
Virginia; somewhat slower in West Virginia; and flat in the District of Columbia.
Agriculture: Agricultural conditions in April were somewhat worse than a year ago,
according to farm analysts. Despite some recent rainfall, soil moisture levels in most
District states were well below normal. Winter small-grain crops remained in generally good
condition, but damage from dry weather was apparent in some areas of the District. Spring
planting activity generally progressed at a normal pace, although in some areas of Virginia,
farmers were waiting for rain before resuming planting. Dry conditions contributed to forest
fires in Virginia and West Virginia.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview: According to most contacts in the District, the deceleration in the pace of
growth in the region was becoming more evident. Retailers generally said sales were flat during
March, but that they picked up in April. Comments from manufacturers were mixed, with some
increase from earlier in the year in the number of those indicating a deceleration. Business travel
is said to be up on a year-over-year basis, offsetting some weakness in tourism. Real estate
contacts report that single-family home sales and construction continue to cool throughout the
region, while activity in commercial and multifamily markets is still rising. Reports on prices
and wages suggest that pressures remain moderate.
Consumer Spending: Retailers reported that sales during March were restrained by
a late Easter season but improved during April. Inventory levels are generally deemed in good
shape, although a few contacts note that they have begun to rise by more than they would like.
Most retailers anticipate a good, but slowing, second quarter as compared to the first quarter.
Manufacturing:

Reports from manufacturers suggest, on balance, a deceleration in

growth that is becoming more generalized. Some firms linked to residential construction note
slowing production and sales. Carpet production is down from a year ago at some regional
plants and slack demand has forced layoffs. Producers of roofing products and concrete blocks
point to slowing orders, while shipments have declined for cabinet manufacturers.

A large

producer of industrial equipment and machinery reports declines in both shipments and in the
workweek, although new orders for export have recently picked up.

Layoffs by military

contractors continue to adversely affect the region, especially in Florida.
Other industrial respondents, however, report ongoing or new strength.

Apparel

contacts indicate that the two-year decline in employment at District plants has slowed. Denim
production continues to increase, with a jeans manufacturer saying they are booked up through

VI-2
the end of the year. There are scattered reports of apparel producers adding to capacity. The
weakness of the dollar is said to be generating significant increases in exports for Louisiana's
chemical industry. Contacts report that the region's paper industry continues to do well. Tire
producers say they are running at capacity and have shortages of some key materials such as
carbon black. Steel plants in Alabama are said to be aggressively adding to capacity in response
to strong demand.
Tourism and Business Travel: Although international travel is down for key parts of
Florida and the baseball strike hurt March hotel business, domestic business travel is currently
boosting occupancy at Florida hotels and in the rest of the region. Travel officials note a serious
decline in south Florida tourism, which they attribute to the decline in the Mexican peso. Cruise
companies out of Miami report a huge drop-off of bookings. In the wake of the dollar's decline,
the number of international tourists visiting New Orleans has increased dramatically and local
tour companies are reporting revenue gains.
Construction: According to real estate contacts, single-family home sales and building
continued to slow within the District during March and early April. Realtors continue to attribute
the slowdown to uncertainty on the part of buyers despite a recent decline in mortgage rates.
Several builders reported that new home inventories have begun to increase, and some added that
inventories are uncomfortably high. However, most contacts remain optimistic that sales will
pick up during the next couple of months.
Commercial and multifamily real estate contacts continue to report improving markets
throughout the District. Several developers indicate that strong demand is driving multifamily
construction; however, some are concerned that the pace of development within their market will
lead to oversupply.

Most contacts are optimistic and anticipate that both commercial and

multifamily markets will continue to strengthen during 1995.

VI-3
Financial Services: Bankers report that overall loan demand is moderate. Commercial
demand is growing, and was generally reported to be stronger than consumer loan demand.
Many contacts said there was strong competition on the commercial side, as institutions compete
to give borrowers the best deals. Home mortgage lending continues below last year's levels, but
some lenders noted increased activity in recent weeks. Auto finance is reported to be holding
steady at levels lower than a year ago.
Wages and Prices: Contacts indicate that wage and price pressures around the District
are generally moderate. Compared to the last Beigebook, fewer manufacturers report receiving
higher prices for their own finished products, and fewer expect to receive higher output prices
in the near future; however, they continue to say they are facing price pressures for materials.
Building material contacts note that prices are falling and inventories are up in some locations
because of a housing slowdown.

However, producers of transportation equipment, rubber,

plastic, paper, and textile goods report rising prices of raw materials. Wage increases were said
to be stable in most of the District, and reports of labor shortages continue to be confined mainly
to parts of Tennessee.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary. Seventh District economic activity gained momentum in April, after slowing in the
first quarter, while reports of price increases grew increasingly frequent and widespread. Retail sales and
housing activity showed signs of strengthening in March and April on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Manufacturing output continued to expand at a moderate pace. District labor markets remained tight.
Business loan demand remained quite strong, including financing demand for working capital, capital
equipment, plant expansion, and inventories.
Consumption/Housing. Surveys and reports from individual firms suggest that retail sales and
housing activity gained momentum in March and April in spite of lingering cold, wet weather. A survey
of Michigan retailers showed increased sales growth in March, while optimism about future sales gains
remained high. A survey in the Chicago area indicated that consumers' appraisals of their own financial
condition improved during the first quarter and into April, after weakening in the fourth quarter of 1994
and into January. Retailers and manufacturers' associations indicated that durable goods sales growth
(excluding autos) has not accelerated significantly since the fourth quarter of 1994, but sales results for
April were encouraging, and gains from a year ago remained substantial.
New vehicle sales remained relatively slow for the time of year, according to a survey of District
auto dealers, but dealer optimism remained high. Used vehicle sales continued to strengthen, particularly
for late-model cars, and dealer service revenues related to "fix-or-buy" decisions were not increasing in
line with what might have been expected if the new car market were fundamentally weakening. Vehicle
availability has improved, and a dealer association stated that "dealers still don't want to get caught short
like they did last year." Incentives declined from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the first quarter of 1995,
but area auto dealers expect higher rebates as well as increased dealer incentives in May and June.
Significant redesigns for half of the top 10 selling vehicles are reportedly constraining new vehicle sales.
A survey of auto dealers indicated that interest rates on new car loans continued to increase in recent
months.
Reports from District realtors suggest that existing home sales improved in March and April on a
seasonally adjusted basis, with declining interest rates on mortgage loans playing an important role.
Expectations for future sales have risen in recent months. An association of home builders stated that

VII-2
new home sales are still anticipated to decline slightly in 1995, after a very good year in 1994. "Builders
are prepared for some slowing, however, and inventories are not especially high." Traffic quality (buyer
interest, credit-worthiness) remains strong. Cement producers also expected somewhat slower growth in
shipments volume, partly because of weaker-than-expected public infrastructure spending. Shipments for
cement used in residential construction gained renewed momentum in the region in recent months,
however, and overall shipments volume is still expected to post a new record in 1995.
Manufacturing. Purchasing managers' surveys pointed to continued but somewhat slower
growth in District industrial output in the first quarter of 1995. The Chicago survey posted a small
increase in April, however, and first quarter earnings reports for large District industrial firms were
generally stronger than many analysts expected. Industrial power sales in the Detroit area posted a
significant increase in the first quarter (over a strong year-earlier period), according to an electric utility,
and power sales strengthened further in April. District steel production fell back somewhat during April
after a robust first quarter, but an industry analyst noted that an explosion and subsequent cutback at a
large furnace accounted for most of the decline. Heavy-duty truck orders climbed to a record during
March, and an industry analyst stated that order backlog quality remains high. Unit sales of construction
machinery rose nearly 20 percent in early 1995 over a particularly strong early-1994 period, but unit sales
gains are expected to moderate as 1995 progresses. An association of appliance manufacturers noted
some slowing in shipments growth in recent months, but still expected shipments this year to slightly
exceed their record level in 1994, as increased export shipments offset a small decline domestically.
Labor Markets. District labor markets remained tight. A recently released survey of job
openings in the Milwaukee metropolitan area showed a sharp increase in the share of employers
characterizing job openings as "hard to fill" in late 1994, with wage increases most clearly evident in the
lowest paying occupations. One of the survey's organizers stated that the market continued to tighten in
early 1995. A regional business analyst stated that many firms in Western Michigan face serious labor
shortages, particularly for "qualified" workers. These shortages have curtailed expansion plans, added to
recruitment and training costs, and combined with other factors to prompt some price increases in some
industries. A staffing services firm specializing in manufacturing occupations stated that producers are
paying higher salaries for executive positions, and manufacturers in the Midwest are incurring higher

VII-3
relocation costs with an increasing share of new workers recruited from other areas. The distribution
division of a large overseas-based manufacturer of heavy equipment stated that the firm was not keeping
up with market-driven salary increases for field service engineers, citing margin pressure from exchange
rate changes. An industry analyst believed that labor shortages have not yet resulted in significant wage
increases among production workers in the fragmented plastics industry, but stated "we may be at the
crux of this problem right now."
Prices. Purchasing managers' surveys suggested that purchased material price increases
moderated in the region during early 1995. However, reports from individual firms and manufacturers'
associations included increasingly frequent reports of price increases being passed through into final
goods prices. Price increases accounted for a greater share of expected revenue growth in several
industries anticipating slower growth in sales volume. A construction machinery industry analyst
expressed some surprise with the number and size of price increases in this industry in early 1995. Prices
paid by machinery dealers to manufacturers have been rising at a faster pace than list prices, while sales
terms and conditions have tightened as well. Cement producers are running at "extremely high levels,"
according to an industry analyst, and shortages are most severe in the Midwest. Customer dissatisfaction
with shortages is high -- not because price increases cannot be passed through, but because supply is still
short and delayed, even at the higher price. Construction contractors have been reporting raw material
price increases of about 30 percent in early 1995. An association of home builders expressed some
concern about appreciation in land prices, and expected them to combine with labor and material cost
increases to prompt greater increases in new home price increases in the latter half of 1995. A wide
variety of paper buyers reported continuing price increases, with one large company stating that the
increases "aren't stopping like we thought they would." Four times as many respondents to a survey of
retailers in Michigan reported higher consumer prices in recent months as those reporting declining
prices, while virtually all surveyed stores expected prices to increase in coming months.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The pace of District economic activity, while decelerating modestly in some areas,
exhibits few signs of a pending slump. Instead, most contacts believe the economy has
achieved its "soft landing" and do not foresee a sustained downturn in the near future. New
residential construction is below last year's level, but last year was a record year in most areas.
Commercial construction continues to increase at a steady pace, as vacancy rates decline and
rental rates increase. Total loans outstanding at large District banks rose modestly during the
past two months, spurred by strong growth in business loans. Banks continue to compete
aggressively for retail CDs as well as commercial loans, which are being priced below prime
by some institutions. Except for northern portions of the District, the pace of spring planting
is ahead of schedule.
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity
Most contacts continue to report slowing economic activity; they do not, however,
view this as a precursor to a sustained downturn anytime in the near future. Instead, this
slowing is attributed to the "soft landing" so often reported by the media. Some contacts still
report pockets of tight labor markets, especially for entry-level and some skilled workers. The
consensus is for further growth in sales and employment, but at a slower pace than previously
experienced.
A contact in the food and beverage industry reports slow, steady growth in sales of
about 1 percent over the past quarter. This contact noted, however, that the price of
aluminum-a major input-has been rising. Increases in productivity have mitigated this
firm's higher costs for the most part, although some cost pass-throughs have occurred in the

VIII-2
Midwest. One contact in the metal distributing industry reports excellent business through
the end of March, but some slowing in April because of price increases. Another contact in
the scrap metal industry reports transportation/distribution problems because there are not
enough rail cars available to move product to the steel mills.
A firm in the electrical equipment industry that supplies motors to defense contractors
reports strong demand, particularly for high horsepower motors, despite uncertainty about
future federal defense spending. A contact in the trucking industry reports that business is up
about 5 percent over last year. A contact in the public utilities industry reports strong growth
in the first quarter, but expects some slowing through the rest of the year. Suppliers to the
auto industry are experiencing a slowdown that is being driven by higher car prices and
consumers who are awaiting therelease of new models of the most popular lines.
Construction and Real Estate
Compared with last year's record pace, residential construction and sales activity
continues to slow in all parts of the District. Recent year-to-date declines in residential
permits ranged from 7 percent in Louisville to 33 percent in Little Rock. In addition, the
average price of homes in many areas is down slightly from one year ago. In some pockets,
like western Kentucky, however, the market is still strong.
Commercial construction continues its upward trend in the District. There is even talk
that speculative building might occur this year in the St. Louis and Memphis areas. Many
areas have seen office vacancy rates decline and rents increase. For example, the vacancy rate
in the St. Louis area has fallen to about 13 percent, its lowest level in 10 years. In Louisville,
it fell from 24 percent to 16 percent over the past year.

VIII-3
Banking and Finance
Total loans outstanding at 11 large District banks rose 2.3 percent between midFebruary and mid-April compared with a 1.1 percent increase during the same period one year
ago.

A 6.1 percent increase in commercial and industrial loans outstanding was the major

contributor to the overall increase. Real estate loans also increased in the two-month period,
by 2.1 percent. Consumer loans outstanding, however, declined by 0.8 percent, compared
with a 3.7 percent increase during the same period one year ago. District contacts continue
to report aggressive competition for deposits, especially retail CDs. On the lending side,
competition is reportedly fierce, and a number of banks are making below-prime rate loans
in an effort to build volume.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Cold weather and excessive rainfall have slowed the pace of corn planting in parts of
Illinois and northern Missouri.

In contrast, much-needed rains in Mississippi, southern

Indiana, southern Missouri and parts of Kentucky have allowed farmers to resume their field
work, where the pace of corn planting is well ahead of schedule. The condition of the winter
wheat crop looks good to excellent in nearly all areas. Despite falling slightly in late March
and early April, cotton prices in the Memphis market appear to be holding above the dollar
per pound level. High prices and strong demand for cotton is expected to boost cotton acreage
by more than 10 percent in the Delta region. Lower corn prices and a higher government setaside requirement, on the other hand, are expected to reduce corn acreage by an average of
about 5 percent in the District. Substantial year-over-year increases in fertilizer prices have
occurred for the second spring in a row, increasing total costs for wheat, corn and rice
producers.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
The Ninth District economy continues to grow at a healthy pace in spite of consumer
reluctance to purchase new homes and vehicles. Manufacturing is strong. Mines and paper
mills are running at capacity. Commercial construction is also robust. General merchandise
sales are good, with some sources noting an increase from the January-February period.
Tourist business is solid, but not spectacular. Labor markets remain tight, and many
employers find it difficult to hire new workers. Prices for industrial inputs continue to show
upward pressure but those for construction inputs have eased.
But interest-rate sensitive sectors clearly have slowed. Automobile sales are substantially
below year-earlier levels. Home construction has slowed in virtually all areas of the district
compared to 1994's heated pace. Weather rather than interest rates is the problem for
agriculture, where cold, wet weather has delayed planting and harmed beef producers.
Manufacturing
"Business is excellent, but margins are tight," sums up one Minnesota manufacturer.
Managers, news media, industrial electricity use, employment and earnings reports all point
to continuing strength in the manufacturing sector. Some firms squeezed by rising input costs
complain that passing along such increases in their product prices is difficult due to
competition.
Natural resource industries
Mining is geared up for a big year. Minnesota's mining employment is up 10 percent
from 1994. In South Dakota and Montana gold and copper mines are running at capacity.
Oil production is stable, but there are some indications of increased exploration activity.
Paper producers enjoy favorable prices and mills are running at capacity. Prices for
recycled paper and cardboard have risen substantially as producers compete for raw materials.
Construction and real estate
Construction remains strong, but has slackened from the heated pace that characterized
much of 1994. Commercial construction continues to outpace residential work. Large,
publicly let projects in Minnesota and the Dakotas are up about 1 percent for the first quarter
of 1995 compared to 1994. Commercial work such as warehouses, suburban office buildings

IX-2

and stores remains robust, but reportedly with less of a backlog than was common in the last
half of 1994.
Residential building is clearly down from year-earlier levels in most areas. New starts are
typically down 5 percent to 20 percent in metropolitan areas. The extreme was Sioux Falls,
S.D., where new permits for March declined 60 percent compared to a year earlier. But even
that decline was reported under the heading, "Builders positive despite drop." In most areas
declines are from a very fast pace set in 1994 and builders generally expect a satisfactory
season in 1995. Minnesota's construction employment for March was up 1.6 percent over a
year earlier. Reflecting strong commercial work, Minneapolis-St. Paul construction worker
numbers increased 6.5 percent in the same period.
Agriculture
Cold, wet weather has cast a pall over the outlook for agriculture. Cow-calf operators
experienced problems with rain and mud during calving, and calf mortality is reportedly
higher than usual, particularly in South Dakota. More importantly, tillage operations and
spring planting of wheat and other small grains have been seriously delayed by the
unseasonable weather. In general, crop operations are one week to two weeks behind
schedule. The delay is reaching a level where at least some potential yield is being sacrificed
even if conditions are optimal later in the season.
A cautious mood was apparent among farmers even prior to April's unseasonable weather.
Bankers responding to the Minneapolis Fed's first quarter 1995 survey of agricultural credit
conditions describe their farm borrowers as cautious, particularly in regard to capital
spending, citing low product prices and uncertainty about the future of federal agricultural
legislation. Rates of loan repayment are described as somewhat below normal and requests
for extensions somewhat higher, although most farm borrowers are reportedly able to service
their debts. Farm interest rates continue to edge up, with most categories in the 10 percent to
10.5 percent range.
Consumer spending and tourism
"Our retail sales continue to be very strong," reports the CEO of a firm with department
stores across the Ninth District. Across the region, sales of general merchandise appear to be
improved since the preceding report. Some mall managers describe a recent pick-up in traffic

IX-3

after a slump earlier in the year and national chains based in Minneapolis report improved
sales.
Vehicles are another story. New vehicle registrations for the year through March were
down about 8 percent for the state of South Dakota compared to the same period in 1994.
For Minnesota and North Dakota the declines were 6 percent and 10 percent respectively.
Dealers and association representatives agree that the strong sales climate which had
prevailed through most of 1994 is definitely over.
Sparse snow cover hampered winter tourism in Montana and many other areas, although
Michigan's Upper Peninsula had good cover through March and strong business. Tourism
inquiries for the summer are active and up from last year, except in Montana. In South
Dakota, visits to museums and major outdoor attractions are up sharply over last year and
tourism officials expect a very busy summer season. New motels are being built in a number
of South Dakota locations in anticipation of growing tourist business.
Employment, wages and prices
"Jobs aplenty" was the headline used by one newspaper to describe the labor market in
southwest Minnesota. It would be accurate in most other parts of the Ninth District. In South
Dakota, labor shortages continue to be described as a stumbling block to manufacturing
growth. One firm announced a new plant in northern Iowa because of the difficulty of
securing additional workers near its existing plant in South Dakota. One Minneapolis-St.
Paul multi-screen theater chain has cut the number of showings of less-popular movies
because of difficulty in hiring enough staff to keep the normal schedule. Managers who
expected that their firms' employment would increase in the next 12 months outnumbered
those expecting a decrease by two to one in a Minneapolis Fed poll of business people in
northwestern Minnesota and eastern North Dakota.
Prices continue to increase for industrial inputs, particularly paper, packaging and basic
chemicals. But lumber and other construction materials' prices have moderated somewhat.
One Montana mill reportedly cut 2x4 lumber prices sharply to move excess inventory.
Petroleum product prices rose in March and April, and are now about 4 percent above a year
ago. At the consumer level, some fresh vegetable prices are markedly higher but meat is
steady to lower. Few other price changes are reported.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview. The Tenth District economy grew at a strong pace over the past
month. Manufacturers continued to operate at high levels of capacity, homebuilding
activity picked up slightly, and the district's winter wheat crop was in good condition.
Amid ongoing strength in most sectors of the district economy, however, retail activity
appears to have slowed from its brisk pace earlier in the year. Across the district,
manufacturers continue to report increased materials prices, although few report upward
pressure on wages. Prices at the retail level remained steady.
Retail Sales. Retailers report sluggish growth in sales over the past month and
only slight improvement over year-ago sales. While apparel sales increased slightly,
home furnishing sales were weak. Information about the economic impacts of the
Oklahoma City bombing is still sketchy, but the disaster appears to have temporarily
depressed local retail sales. Although most retailers across the district report expanding
inventories compared with last month, current inventory levels are generally satisfactory.
Auto dealers report flat or slightly declining sales, due primarily to higher financing costs
for consumers. Nevertheless, most dealers expect increasing sales over the next few
months.
Manufacturing. Most firms continued to operate at high levels of capacity last
month. While difficulties in obtaining materials have been rare, some firms report
longer lead times. Respondents generally regard inventories as too high and plan to
reduce stocks during the coming months. Some firms report a sharp decline in exports

X-2
to Mexico, while others report a boost in exports to Europe.
Energy.

A surge in crude oil prices in April helped boost district drilling activity.

The average number of drilling rigs operating in the district picked up somewhat during
the month, ending a three-month decline. Natural gas prices, however, sank to their
lowest levels in three years and continued to curb overall activity in the district's energy
industry.
Housing. Builders report housing starts were up slightly last month due to a
pickup in single-family and multi-family construction. Housing starts remain below their
year-ago level, though, and most respondents expect building activity to remain sluggish
during the coming months. Some builders report sales of new homes remained stable
over the past month but were ahead of their year-ago pace. Building materials were
generally available with few delays.

While mortgage demand continued to decline,

lenders expect demand to level off or improve slightly in the near term.
Banking. Loans at reporting banks increased last month. Almost all banks saw
gains in commercial and industrial loans. Demand was up slightly for consumer loans
and commercial real estate loans, flat for home equity loans and agricultural loans, and
down slightly for residential construction loans. Loan-deposit ratios were generally up
from the previous month, while security investments were down slightly.
No respondents changed their prime rate last month and none expect to do so in
the near term. Few banks altered their consumer lending rates last month, and none
anticipate changes in the near future. Lending standards also were unchanged.
Deposits were up slightly last month. Demand deposits, money market deposit

X-3
accounts, large CDs, and small time and savings deposits rose slightly, while changes in
NOW accounts were mixed.
Agriculture.

District agricultural bankers report the winter wheat crop was in

good condition last month, with recent rains brightening yield prospects. While crops in
some parts of the district were damaged by an early-April frost, the damage was
localized. Spring planting has generally progressed on schedule. Most farmers have
completed fieldwork, although wet weather has hindered planting in some areas. Cash
rents on district cropland are unchanged from 1994, indicating expectations for flat farm
income in 1995.
Cattle feedlots in the district were relatively full last month but held fewer cattle
than a year ago. Bankers remain cautious about lending to cattle feeders, as many fear a
possible drop in cattle prices this fall. Despite record supplies of beef and low cattle
prices during the past year, few district cattle producers are reducing their cow numbers.
Prices and wages.

Retailers report stable prices due to sluggish sales, subdued

wage pressures, and increased competition. Most retailers expect sales to pick up over
the next three months, but expect prices to remain steady. While manufacturers report
some shortages of skilled labor, few report significant wage increases. Prices of
industrial materials, on the other hand, have increased from last month and last year.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Eleventh District economic activity continued to expand at the slower pace established in
January and February. Retail sales remained sluggish in March and April and sales along the border
continued to be very weak. Manufacturing orders were up although more contacts reported reduced
sales to Mexican customers. Demand for business services remained strong, however, and
construction activity was reported to be at good levels because of increased demand for
nonresidential space. Bankers said loan demand grew steadily. Rising energy prices boosted
respondents' outlooks, but domestic drilling activity remained below last year's levels. Agricultural
producers said that dry weather hampered production slightly.
Manufacturing and service contacts said that price and wage pressures remained in some
industries, much the same as reported in the last Beige Book. Rising prices for packaging and
shipping materials continued to boost costs for most manufacturers. Apparel producers said that
higher prices for cotton and some chemicals were adding to their costs, but that they had not
increased selling prices. Capacity constraints in the semiconductor industry pushed up costs for some
electronics manufacturers. In the services industry, fees and wages continued to rise at temporary help
firms. Rising competition had reduced fees at trucking firms, but a shortage of drivers continued to
push up wages. Retailers said their selling prices were lower than expected. Energy prices rose, but
natural gas prices were still at very low levels. Weakening livestock prices led to a decline in
agricultural prices.
Eleventh District manufacturing orders rose in March and early April. Demand for
electronics and petrochemicals remained very strong, but orders for paper softened slightly. Although
paper contacts noted a slowdown in demand, they said it was a welcome relief compared to the tight

XI-2

conditions of the past few months. A notable exception was corrugated box distributors who said that
demand had increased, likely a result of businesses trying to hedge another price increase. The
demand for most construction-related products rose, although orders from residential builders were
well below last year's levels. Brick producers said demand increased over the last six weeks, but sales
were off 20 percent from year-ago levels. Glass respondents said orders remained strong despite
rising competition from Mexican producers. Primary and fabricated metals producers said orders
continued to rise due to strength in the nonresidential construction sector. Lumber producers said that
demand had leveled off because of fewer housing starts. Orders remained strong for electronic
equipment, and competition continued to drive down prices. Apparel sales rose, but some respondents
noted increasing cautiousness in orders from retailers. Orders for food products increased, and
contacts in the frozen food industry said the California floods stimulated orders for frozen produce.
Domestic and international orders for chemicals were very strong, and contacts reported healthy
profits. After an extremely weak first quarter, refiners said margins improved slightly in April as
gasoline prices rose more quickly than crude prices.
Demand for business services continued to rise at a strong pace. Temporary employment
firms reported rising demand, and labor market tightness continued to drive up wages and fees for
skilled workers. Accounting and legal respondents reported growth in business activity such as
mergers and acquisitions. The outlook for business services firms was positive, with no slowdown
anticipated in coming months. Hotel contacts said business was up over last year, but that Easter
season was disappointing because fewer Mexican families vacationed in Texas. Respondents in the
transportation services industry said that demand was up slightly since the last Beige Book, but
trucking contacts said that increased competition had reduced business and fees.
Retail sales remained sluggish in March and April, and most contacts said that sales were
slower than expected. Larger than desired inventories at some stores was leading to a brief period of

XI-3
discounting. In general, selling prices were reported to be the same or slightly higher than last year.
Most retailers said that selling prices have not increased as much as they expected this year, and
indicated that they are resisting higher prices from manufacturers. Sales along the Mexican border
continued to be very weak. Auto sales improved in March and April but were below last year's levels.
District bankers reported steady loan demand. There was strong demand for construction
loans despite fewer residential mortgage loans. Bankers reported increased liquidity because higher
interest rates had reduced the relative attractiveness of non-bank investments.
Construction activity remained strong as nonresidential construction increased. Industrial
construction picked up, especially near the Texas/Mexico border where manufacturing expansions
boosted the demand for warehouse space. Apartment construction continued to increase at a rapid
pace, but some contacts were concerned that the market would not be able to absorb all the new
space. New home sales were weak, but contacts said that buyer traffic had picked up with the decline
in mortgage rates. Most were expecting some improvement in sales in the coming months.
Energy respondents reported that drilling activity in the Gulf of Mexico seemed to have
bottomed out in recent weeks, after declining about 10 percent during the first quarter. Although
domestic drilling activity remained weak, contacts working in international markets said activity there
had increased, more than offsetting the domestic losses. Crude oil prices increased from about $18 in
early March to over $20 in April, raising optimism among contacts, even though the futures market
suggests that $20 oil prices will not be maintained. Natural gas prices remained weak.
Eleventh District agricultural producers said dry conditions in west Texas were hampering
production slightly. Strong demand for cotton worldwide had increased prices and prospective cotton
acreage. Despite higher crop prices, lower prices for livestock caused the Texas All Farm Products
Index to fall 2.9 percent below the March 1994 level.

XII- 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO
Summary
Economic activity in the Twelfth District grew at a slower pace in the first quarter.
Weather disruptions caused some slowing in California's moderate recovery, and growth
continued to decelerate from high levels in the intermountain states. Retail sales growth
slowed further in March, especially for durable goods, and inventories were reported building
for some businesses. Heavy rains during March were blamed for some of the weakness in
California retail sales and caused substantial damage to several fruit and vegetable crops.
District service sector firms reported continued strong demand. Among manufacturers,
electronics, aluminum, and machinery producers report strong demand and tight capacity,
while orders and employment remain weak at aerospace and lumber firms. Residential
construction activity continued to slow in most parts of the District, but commercial activity
was strong outside of California. District banks reported strong loan demand but slowing
deposit growth.
Business Sentiment
Twelfth District business leaders continue to expect national economic growth to
moderate over the next year. About three-fifths of survey respondents project national output
to grow at its long-run historical average rate during the next four quarters following abovetrend growth in 1994. About half of the business leaders surveyed expect an increase in the
unemployment rate during the next year. However, respondents from California expect a
strengthening in employment growth for the state. In Southern California, two to three times

XII - 2

more firms plan to add workers than to cut jobs this year. While further layoffs related to
restructuring are anticipated, they are expected to be on a smaller scale and less widespread
than in the past several years.
Retail Trade and Services
District retailers report continued sluggish growth in sales, particularly in first quarter
sales of durable goods. Auto sales are reported down in Idaho, Oregon, Utah, and
Washington, and motor vehicle dealers in Idaho have cut their orders to manufacturers
substantially to stem the rise in inventories. Furniture sales for the first quarter fell below
year-earlier levels in parts of Oregon and Washington. Sales growth of nondurable goods is
reported flat or slowing by many retailers. Department store sales are reported flat compared
with the end of 1994, with inventories reported rising at general merchandise stores in
California. Reports attribute some of the slowing in California retail sales to heavy rains
during the first quarter.
The District's service sector shows continued strong demand. The tourism industry in
Southern California continues to strengthen. In San Diego, the America's Cup is reported to
have provided a boost to the growth of visitor spending. Growth in employment in the casino
and resort sector in Las Vegas has moderated from the rapid pace of the last several years.
Computer service firms in Oregon report rising revenues.
Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity remains mixed, as further weakness in the aerospace
sector in California and Washington is offset by strength elsewhere. In Oregon, several
electronics manufacturing firms are adding to capacity. In Utah, a major electronic-

XII - 3

components manufacturer announced plans to build a memory chip plant that will cost $1.3
billion and eventually employ 3,500 workers. Aluminum and machinery producers report
high capacity utilization and lengthening delivery lead times. Lumber companies report
shrinking product orders and rising inventories.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
District agricultural conditions are dominated by the effects of the March flooding in
California. Flooding caused damage to many tree crops as well as several winter vegetable
crops. Production of some fruits and nuts will be substantially lower this year. Prices for
some vegetables, especially lettuce, broccoli, and cauliflower, are expected to remain high
through mid-summer. On a more positive note, the heavy rains filled California's reservoirs,
allowing farmers to receive full irrigation allotments for the first time in several years.
Natural gas prices are reported well below year-earlier levels as a result of the mild
winter. Rising gold and silver prices are reported to be giving a boost to mining employment
in Nevada.
Real Estate and Construction
The growth in residential building continues to slow in most areas, while home sales
and prices are reported mixed. In Arizona, Nevada, and Utah, new home construction
generally is reported to be easing from last year's fast pace, although multi-family
construction remains strong in Las Vegas. In Oregon, housing starts are reported down
slightly from a year earlier. Home sales still are reported strong in Oregon, but in Idaho
home sales are slowing at the higher-priced end of the market. District home prices are
reported mixed, with prices up slightly in Los Angeles, flat in Seattle, and continuing to rise

XII-4

in Phoenix and Tucson.
Commercial construction activity remains weak in Los Angeles, but is strengthening in
other parts of the District. In Las Vegas, commercial vacancy rates are low and rents are
reported rising. Alaska commercial construction activity is being fueled by several public
works projects.
Financial Institutions
District banks report generally strong loan demand but slowing deposit growth. In
California, commercial and real estate lending is reported strengthening, while the level of
consumer installment debt outstanding continues to decline. Commercial loan demand has
increased sharply in Arizona, but mortgage applications and deposit growth are weak. Banks
throughout the District report continued efforts to reduce employment and overall costs.

