For use at Noon, E.S.T.
Wednesday
March 15, 1995

Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic

Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

March 1995

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

MARCH 1995

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .

. .

. . .

. .

. .

. ..

. .

.

First District - Boston . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Second District - New York .

i

.

I-1

. . . . . . . . . . ...

II-1

Third District - Philadelphia . . . . . . . . . . ...

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Eighth District - St. Louis .

.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

VII-1
VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis .

. . . . . . . . . . .. .

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas City .

. . . . . . . . . . .. .

X-l

Eleventh District - Dallas . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco . . . . . . . . . ..

XII-1

i
SUMMARY 1/

Reports from the twelve Federal Reserve districts suggest
that the pace of the economic expansion has moderated over the
past two months.

Half the districts note that growth has slowed,

while the remaining districts generally report that conditions
are mixed.

Retail sales and residential construction weakened

across much of the country.

In contrast, manufacturing continued

to grow in all but one of the regions and labor markets remained
strong.

Although commodity prices continued to rise, several

districts note that the rate of increase has decelerated.

There

is little evidence that strength in labor markets or increases in
commodity prices have spilled over into wages or prices of
finished goods.
Retail
Recent reports suggest that retail sales growth, measured on
a year-over-year basis, slowed in over two-thirds of the
districts.

Retailers in Boston report sales were flat or

declining for a broad range of merchandise, including winter
apparel, housewares, and sports equipment.

Minneapolis cites

news reports of a "retail slump," while retailers in both the
Dallas and San Francisco regions report that sales declined along
the Mexican border because of the weak peso.
1

While two districts

Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York based on
information collected before March 6, 1995. This document
summarizes comments received from businesses and other contacts
outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views
of Federal Reserve Officials.

ii
report noticeably stronger retail sales growth, they note that
much of the strength is attributable to special factors -weather in New York and clearance promotions in Kansas City.
Retail inventories have increased beyond planned levels in the
Cleveland, Richmond, Chicago, and Dallas districts.

Auto sales

have generally weakened; dealers in the San Francisco region are
using rebates and other incentives to bolster sales.
Manufacturing
Growth in the manufacturing sector has generally remained
strong since the beginning of the year.

Manufacturing

strengthened in Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas, while
remaining robust in Cleveland, Chicago, and Kansas City.

Sources

in Minneapolis describe the strongest manufacturing performance
in recent years.

Boston, New York, Atlanta, and San Francisco

report that conditions were mixed, with weakness in some segments
of manufacturing offsetting strength in others.

The sector

continued to grow but at a slower pace in St. Louis.

Preliminary

results of Richmond's survey of manufacturers show that new
orders, backlogs, and employment indexes were down slightly in
February from their January levels.

Contacts in three of the

districts expect the pace of manufacturing growth to moderate in
coming months.
Capital goods industries have been particularly robust.
Cleveland reports that orders of capital goods, led by strength
in export markets, have continued to grow strongly.

In St.

Louis, exports of capital goods included construction equipment

iii
shipped to Japan in the wake of the Kobe earthquake.

Computer

equipment, pulp and paper products, and electronics are also
repeatedly cited as sources of manufacturing strength.

Examples

of manufacturing weakness include the aerospace industry (Boston
and San Francisco), automobiles and auto supplies (Boston and
Chicago), and apparel (Atlanta and Dallas).
Construction and Real Estate
Construction of single-family homes continued to slow from
1994 levels across much of the country.

Atlanta, St. Louis,

Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco report that homebuilding
declined, while Philadelphia and Minneapolis report that activity
Looking forward, however, contacts in a third of

leveled off.

the districts expect demand to strengthen later this spring.

In

contrast to the weakness in single-family homes, the construction
of multifamily housing increased in both the Atlanta and Kansas
City regions.
Reports on commercial construction are more upbeat.
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas
note an increase in commercial construction, driven by such
diverse factors as a scarcity of large blocks of contiguous
office space (Atlanta), expansion of manufacturing capacity
(Chicago), and increased demand for warehouse space
(Minneapolis).
mixed, however.
Manhattan.

Reports on commercial real estate markets are
The market softened for office space in midtown

Philadelphia notes that its office market remains

iv

weak, although demand for industrial space has firmed.

Within

the San Francisco region, commercial real estate markets are weak
in California but strong elsewhere.
Banking and Finance
Loan demand was steady or higher in nearly all of the
districts.

The strength in lending was primarily attributable to

commercial and industrial loans.

In contrast, New York, Atlanta,

St. Louis, and Kansas City report that residential mortgage
lending slowed as the housing sector cooled; Cleveland notes that
mortgage refinancing is at a standstill.

Consumer lending --

especially automobile loans -- weakened in Philadelphia,

Cleveland, Atlanta, and St. Louis while remaining flat in
Richmond and Dallas.
Agriculture
Favorable weather conditions coupled with increases in crop
and livestock prices brightened the outlook for farm incomes.
Chicago reports that market conditions in the agricultural sector
held up better than expected.

Mild winter weather benefitted

livestock production in the Richmond and Minneapolis districts.
St. Louis, Dallas, and San Francisco note that strong domestic
demand coupled with reduced foreign supply boosted cotton prices.
Prices and Wages
Although commodity prices have continued to rise, several
districts report that the rate of increase seems to have eased.
Boston notes that some suppliers of steel and chemicals are now
offering customer rebates to soften the impact of price

v

Contacts in Cleveland report a moderation in the rate

increases.

of increase of industrial commodity prices.

Fewer manufacturers

in Minneapolis report delivery delays, while manufacturers in
Dallas expect price pressures to ease in coming months.

In

contrast, Chicago sees little evidence that manufacturers' input
prices have ebbed and notes that recovery abroad may put upward
pressure on commodity prices by tightening import supplies.
In general, the districts report that increases in commodity
prices have not spilled over into prices of finished goods.
Boston notes that finished goods prices have generally remained
stable, with increases for some products offset by decreases for
Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas report that intense

others.

competition among retailers kept prices flat despite increased
input costs.
Labor market conditions are generally strong.

Cleveland,

Chicago, and Minneapolis report that labor markets have remained
tight.

A survey by a large temporary help firm in Chicago showed

further strengthening in employers' hiring plans after record
high levels late last year.

Similarly, Minneapolis notes

shortages of skilled workers, particularly in manufacturing.

New

York, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Kansas City report spot shortages
of labor.

In contrast, manufacturers hiring for replacement

purposes in the Boston region had little difficulty finding
qualified workers.

Despite the strength in labor markets, the

districts report little evidence of upward pressure on wages.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The pace of New England's economic expansion shows some signs of
moderating.

Manufacturing activity continues to grow at a rate that

varies from modest to robust.

But most manufacturers also note selected

areas of market weakness, and the region's retailers report
disappointing results.

While commodity prices continue to rise, some

contacts report signs of deceleration; sales prices remain stable at
most firms.
Retail
First District retail contacts were disappointed with January and
February sales, which mostly ranged from level to 10 percent below yearago levels.

Retailers indicated, however, that year-over-year

comparisons were misleading because last year saw sales fluctuations
caused by winter storms while this year's weather is unseasonably warm.
Poor sellers were apparel, particularly winter clothing, snow-removal
equipment, housewares, sports equipment, and ready-to-assemble
furniture.

Home office and electronics continued to perform well.

Reports on price increases varied considerably.

A few retailers

cited an overall rise of 2 to 3 percent in vendor prices, and increases
of over 10 percent on leather, plastic, and paper products.

By

contrast, prices on apparel have dropped modestly, and food prices
remain level with the exception of meat, the price of which has
reportedly declined over 10 percent in the past year.
While gross margins have varied, profits are holding or increasing
modestly.

Capital spending plans are level with those of last year.

Employment is relatively flat, and wages are expected to increase 3 to 4
percent this year.

First District retail contacts expect only level to

modest sales gains over the next six months.

They sense the economy is

I-2

growing more slowly this year than last, and more respondents expressed
concern about interest rates than in the past.
Manufacturing
Most First District contacts report continued growth in orders and
sales, with year-over-year gains ranging from slight to 35 percent;
however, the majority also note weakness in one or more markets.

Demand

for capital equipment is mixed, with sales of machine tools and
networking equipment achieving double-digit gains while makers of other
computer-related products and instruments cite recent softness.

Sales

of construction-related products remain moderately strong as firms
expand factories, warehouses and hotels; however, the residential sector
is said to be slowing.

Orders from the aircraft industry remain subdued

and contacts report that auto makers have recently reduced orders or
asked that suppliers delay shipments.

Demand for medical equipment is

mixed at best, while disposable medical supplies are experiencing strong
single-digit growth, as are packaging materials.

Reflecting a

lackluster season in apparel, textile sales remain sluggish.

By

contrast, specialized consumer products are enjoying strong and
improving growth.
While several firms continue to report sharp increases in prices
for some commodities (particularly wool, polyethylene, and metals), a
few note signs of possible moderation.

One respondent noted that, while

steel and chemical prices continue to climb, suppliers have begun
offering rebates that soften the impact.

In addition, prices of

computer memory chips, which had been rising, have started to fall.
Another contact who had been building stocks of supplies in anticipation
of price increases is rethinking this strategy.

Sales prices generally

remain unchanged, although a few contacts are passing cost increases on

to customers or are raising prices on selected, particularly new,
products.

Others, citing fierce competition, report cutting prices by

double-digit amounts.
Employment is below year-ago levels at most respondent firms.
While one contact plans a significant layoff, most hope that their
employment levels will stabilize at current or slightly lower levels.
Firms hiring for replacement purposes generally have no trouble finding
qualified workers.
Most contacts plan to raise capital spending above 1994 levels,
with expected increases ranging from slight to over 20 percent.

These

funds will be used to expand capacity, introduce new products and cut
costs.
Most respondents foresee at least modest improvements in company
sales and profits in 1995.

As an exception, three instruments makers

describe 1995 as a challenging year.

More broadly, contacts expect U.S.

economic growth to slow; however, views are split as to whether the
economy will achieve a soft landing or slip into recession.
Nonbank Financial Services
Since the beginning of the year, assets under management increased
at the majority of respondents among investment management companies,
while the rest were unchanged.

Most attributed the increase in assets

under management to an increase in the market value of the assets.

A

few respondents had positive net sales, with most of the money flowing
into domestic stock funds.

Bond funds continue to experience net

outflows at most respondents, but these outflows slowed in February
compared to January of 1995.

Half of the respondents report stable

employment levels and the other half are hiring this year.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK
On balance, reports on District economic conditions suggest that
growth has slowed.

Although retail sales were above expectations, much

of the gain was attributable to better weather this year than last.
Despite the favorable weather, residential construction activity varied
widely.

Unemployment rates rose in both New York and New Jersey, while

announcements of corporate layoffs and military base closings foreshadow
future labor market weakness.

Eighty percent of senior loan officers at

small and midsized banks reported steady or weaker aggregate loan demand.
Consumer Spending
District retail sales rose strongly during February, with sales
gains ranging from +2 to +11 percent on a year-over-year basis.

Although

part of the gain was attributed to the unusually harsh weather which
depressed sales last February, most contacts reported above-plan sales
growth.

Several retailers noted that sales of women's apparel were

strong after months of disappointing performance.

Menswear, electronics,

housewares, and home improvement products also sold well.

Inventories

consist of current spring merchandise and are at planned levels.
Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction activity varied widely among regions
within the District in recent weeks.

Despite mild winter weather, weak

demand for housing due to corporate restructurings and base closings
slowed homebuilding across much of Central New York State and Northern
New Jersey.

Activity in Rochester and Buffalo is sluggish, but has

generally remained at 1994 levels.

In contrast, the Albany area, the

lower Hudson Valley, and Long Island showed somewhat greater strength.
After a strong fourth-quarter, the market for midtown Manhattan
office space softened in January due to an unusually sharp increase in

II-2
the amount of space returned to the market.

In contrast, conditions in

the long-struggling downtown office market improved somewhat, as a surge
in leasing activity caused vacancy rates to decline and asking rents to
firm.

Responding to the downtown market's long-term difficulties, Mayor

Guiliani recently announced a plan for the revitalization of lower
Manhattan, including tax incentives to stimulate leasing and zoning
changes to encourage the conversion of vacant office space to residential
use.
Other Business Activity
District unemployment rates rose in January, following three
straight months of declines.

New York's rate rose 0.3 percentage points

to 6.0 percent, while New Jersey's rate jumped a full percentage point to
7.2 percent.

A number of job cuts -- announced since mid-January --

provide evidence of continued corporate downsizing.

The roster of firms

announcing new cuts included Kodak, Martin Marietta, and Fisher-Price,
each planning to pare from 700 to 800 jobs by year-end.

Wall Street

continued to downsize, with announcements by Goldman Sachs, Salomon
Brothers, First Boston, and Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
Military base closings are also affecting District employment.
Over the next few months, 650 civilian jobs will be eliminated at Rome's
Griffiss Air Force Base, with much heavier civilian and military job
losses scheduled for later this spring.
closings -- announced February

th
28

The latest round of base

and occurring over the next few years

-- are expected to eliminate nearly 3,000 military and civilian jobs
within the District, including roughly 1,300 civilian jobs at the Bayonne
Military Ocean Terminal and 1,000 civilian jobs at Rome Laboratories.
On a more positive note, Tops Markets announced plans for an Erie
County grocery distribution center, expected to create 600 jobs.

In the

longer run, the Oneida Indian Nation's proposal to establish a casino in

II-3
Sullivan county (90 miles north of New York City) could boost service
employment in the Catskill region.
Purchasing managers in the Buffalo and New York metropolitan areas
reported that production in February declined from January levels; in the
downstate area, weakness in the non-manufacturing sector outweighed
strength in manufacturing.

Managers in both regions reported that price

pressures eased over the period.

Small manufacturers in Western New York

report spot shortages of skilled labor.
Financial Developments
Compared to two months ago, aggregate loan demand is steady at
about half of small and midsized banks surveyed in the District and lower
at over one-third.

The residential mortgage segment remains the weakest,

with demand lower at about half of the banks.

The non-residential

mortgage and commercial and industrial loan segments are the strongest.
Over half of those surveyed report steady demand and about two-tenths
report higher demand in each of these categories.

Refinancing activity

is steady or lower at all of the participating banks.
About seventy percent of the senior loan officers surveyed
maintained their willingness to lend over the past two months, while
thirty percent have increased their willingness.

At nearly all banks,

credit standards are unchanged, and about eighty percent have stable or
lower delinquency rates.

Loan rates are mainly higher or the same across

all categories of lending; a few banks report lower rates on residential
mortgages.

Almost half of the respondents note that recent increases in

rates paid on deposits have resulted in a narrowing of the spread between
the average lending and deposit rates.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from Third District business contacts were mixed for February but,
on balance, suggest a slackening rate of growth. Manufacturers noted some gains
in shipments and orders during the month although order backlogs continued to
Retailers generally said the February sales rate eased from January and

fall.

auto dealers noted a drop in sales as well.

Bankers indicated that loan demand

was soft with flat business lending and declining consumer lending.

Realtors

said home sales were steady in February and a large number of homes remain on the
market.

Commercial real estate conditions continued to be soft, according to

real estate contacts, but demand for industrial space was firming.

Construction

activity of all types remained low.
Looking ahead, manufacturers expect continued growth although the level of
optimism has declined somewhat from the beginning of the year.

Both general

merchants and auto dealers said they expect sales to pick up in the spring.
Bankers, however, expect economic growth to slacken, keeping lending activity
flat or possibly inducing a decline.

Residential realtors said sales could pick

up in the spring, especially if mortgage interest rates come down.

Commercial

realtors do not foresee much better conditions in the near future except for
industrial space and perhaps for office buildings in a few suburban locations in
the District.

Builders expect some stepped-up activity in the spring for home

building and commercial construction, primarily in suburban locations.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District moved up slightly in February,
according to survey contacts.

Just over one-fifth of the manufacturers polled

III-2
said business had picked up compared to January although about two-thirds said
operations at their plants were just steady.

Makers of nondurable goods fared
In particular,

slightly better for the month than producers of durable goods.

metal fabricators and producers of electrical machinery noted a falloff in demand
for their products.

Overall, however, about one-third of the industrial firms

surveyed reported increases in orders and shipments in February while just over
half said orders and shipments were steady.
Third District manufacturers added slightly to payrolls during February
although the average workweek was unchanged compared to January.

Manufacturers

With respect to prices, plant managers are

also reported steady inventories.

evenly divided between those reporting steady input prices and those reporting
increased costs for purchased inputs.

For their own products, two-thirds are

holding the line on prices although one-fifth have implemented increases.
While the outlook among Third District manufacturers is for continued
growth,

the number

forecasting

improvement has

slipped somewhat

since

the

beginning of the year. About half of the manufacturers contacted for this report
expect

business

to be

steady

during

anticipate continued improvement.

the

next

six months

while

one-third

On balance, local industrial firms expect

further gains in shipments and orders, but they anticipate that the current
downward trend in order backlogs will continue also.
RETAIL
Most of the Third District retailers contacted for this report said sales
in February eased from the January pace.

A slowdown in sales of furniture and

other big-ticket home furnishing items was cited by several merchants.

Store

executives generally indicated that the overall sales rate appeared to be steady
as the month came to a close, and they were not revising their expectations that

III-3
sales will pick up in the spring.
Auto dealers also noted a drop in sales in February compared to January.
Some said they believe that sales were held back by recent price increases and
a drop in consumer confidence.

Although dealers anticipate an upturn in the

spring, some said that a continuation of the lower sales rate in March would call
such a forecast into question.
FINANCE
Third District bankers generally described loan demand as soft at the end
of February.
industrial

Most of those contacted for this report said commercial and

loan volume

outstanding was

applications for new loans were falling.

flat

compared to January, and

that

They also reported softening consumer

lending as February came to a close, with declines in credit card balances and
other unsecured consumer loans as well as auto financing.

On balance, bankers

making forecasts for the year expect overall economic growth to slacken and
lending activity to remain flat or edge down for at least the first half of the
year, and possibly longer.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Third District realtors described the recent rate of home sales as steady
in most parts

of the District although a few noted

increased sales.

Home

builders reported some increases in traffic at their sites but said this had not
yet been reflected in increased sales.

Realtors indicated that the number of

homes listed for sale remains high, keeping a lid on price appreciation.

Some

realtors said they expect mortgage interest rates to ease by the spring and they
expect this easing and the usual seasonal pattern will lead to increased sales
at that time.
Demand for commercial real estate remains soft, according to commercial

III-4
realtors and building agents, especially in the Philadelphia central business
district.

Realtors estimate the office vacancy rate at about 15 percent in

Philadelphia and in the range of just under 15 percent to 20 percent in other
parts of the Third District.

Although this is an improvement from a year ago,

some of the improvement is due to a reduction in space available for lease.
Realtors

said the rebalancing of demand and

supply will only

gradually be

reflected in firming lease rates and purchase prices near the end of the year.
Demand for industrial space is stronger, according to realtors, and could result
in higher lease rates and purchase prices during the year.
According to contacts in the construction industry, building activity
remains soft throughout the District.

Expectations are that the pace will pick

up somewhat in the spring, with increases

in home building, construction of

industrial buildings, and perhaps some office buildings in suburban areas.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

General Business Conditions
There has been some slowing in the growth of District business activity, although
outright declines are rare and most industries are still reporting high levels of production.
Capital goods producers continue to pace industrial growth, led by a strengthening in
export markets. Employment conditions may have actually improved somewhat, and
unemployment in most regions is substantially below the national average. Nevertheless,
significant wage pressures are not reported. And while industrial materials costs are
continuing to rise at an above-average rate, few manufacturers indicate that these
increases are spilling into finished goods prices in any notable way.
Manufacturing
The District's industrial sector remains strong, with perhaps some modest slowing
in auto and auto-related manufacturing. Capital goods producers continue to report
orders growth, especially from foreign customers. Indeed, a slight slackening in domestic
demand for capital goods has been more than offset by an acceleration in exports.
A steady or slightly rising proportion of manufacturers are reporting higher
employment levels; only a small and declining number indicate reductions. In many
industries and regions, companies are having difficulty finding skilled laborers, and indeed,
unemployment rates in the District are among the nation's lowest. Several respondents
also reported higher rates of labor turnover. Nevertheless, signs of wage pressure are
difficult to find, and most companies are still reporting wage growth at, or perhaps slightly
below, the rate of inflation. A major commercial real estate firm reports a shortage of
industrial space, and industrial construction activity appears to be on the rise.
Several manufacturers report a moderation in the rise in industrial commodity
prices, although the number of goods whose cost has increased is still very large and
ranges from wood products (lumber, paper, and wallboard), to plastics (polyester and
PVC), to metals (aluminum, copper, and steel).

IV-2
Retailers
Although February is traditionally a slow month, District retailers were nonetheless
disappointed in this year's performance, and many are now reporting higher-than-desired
inventories. Most notable are the excess stocks of winter outer wear, a reflection of
unseasonably mild temperatures. While a few large chain stores indicate solid sales gains,
most report flat or declining receipts, and specialty stores, such as women's apparel and
furniture establishments, are down significantly. Some (if not most) retailers point to
higher interest rates as a key to the slowdown in durable goods sales, although much of
the slippage has reportedly come through a softening housing market. Retail market
analysts are cautious about the near-term outlook, in part because of the uncertain
significance of the recent sales slowdown. Moreover, they suggest that March sales will
be negatively influenced by a late Easter.
One of the District's largest furniture sellers reports that many suppliers will not
quote prices on orders more than 30 days in advance because of the uncertain cost of
wood and other furniture construction materials. However, price competition remains
severe and retailers say that it is virtually impossible to pass price increases through to
consumers.
Autos
Fourth District auto dealers report a downturn in new light vehicle sales between
late January and the end of February. The recent weakness may have actually begun in
November and has become more pronounced since the beginning of the year. However,
demand for some light trucks and sport/utility vehicles remains strong, and one market
analyst observed an improving market for used vehicles.
Slower auto sales have resulted in a considerable unplanned inventory buildup -- a
dramatic turnaround from the shortages that dealers complained about through the third
quarter of 1994. The buildup of vehicle stocks, combined with higher interest rates, has
reportedly caused a surge in floor plan costs.

IV-3

Auto dealers also point to higher interest rates as a pivotal development in the
new-car market, although bad weather in February may also have hurt sales. Still other
sources say that rising interest rates for new-car loans are not reducing sales as much as
are the restraining income effects of higher mortgage rates on disposable incomes. These
higher rates have virtually eliminated home refinancing while boosting mortgage payments
for households with variable-rate agreements. Fourth District auto dealers remain hopeful
that sales will improve in the months ahead, but few believe that the gains will rival last
spring's performance.
Price increases for 1995 new-car models were bumped marginally higher early this
year. However, incentive plans are becoming increasingly common, helping to offset the
higher costs.
Banking and Credit
Loan demand remains strong, especially in the commercial lending categories.
Business borrowing has recently broadened to include mergers and acquisitions, although
credit for capital expansion and inventory floor plans is also rising. While some slowing in
the growth of consumer borrowing is noted, it appears to be centered in new-auto credit.
Household borrowing in other non-real estate categories is still strong. Perhaps the most
significant drop-offin lending activity has been in the mortgage area, where refinancing
activity has slowed to a standstill and new-mortgage extensions are down substantially
from last fall.

V-1
FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview: Economic activity in the Fifth District changed little in January and
February. Areas exhibiting little or no growth included residential and commercial real
estate and the service-producing sector. Consumer spending and manufacturing activity were
down slightly. Activity at District ski resorts and ports was up, however, and loan demand
was stronger. Conditions in agriculture continued to be better than a year ago.
Consumer Spending: Preliminary results from a mail survey of retailers indicated
that District retail activity decreased in February. Sales and employment decreased, and
shopper traffic and wages were unchanged. Inventories were higher, and big-ticket sales
rose slightly. Survey respondents indicated that retail prices increased 0.8 percent in
February. They foresaw increased demand for their products and an increase of 1.5 percent
in their prices during the next six months.
Service-Producing Firms: Preliminary results from a mail survey indicated that
activity in the service-producing sector changed little in February. Revenues were
unchanged; wages rose; and employment rose slightly. Service producers indicated that
prices rose 0.2 percent in February. They expected increased demand for their services and
an increase of 0.7 percent in their prices during the next six months.
Manufacturing: Most indicators of factory activity declined slightly in February
from their January levels, according to preliminary results of a mail survey of District
manufacturers.

The shipments index changed little and the new orders, backlog, and

employment indexes declined somewhat. Manufacturers expected shipments, employment,
the workweek, and wages to increase during the next six months. Finished goods prices rose

V-2
more slowly in February than in January, and at a rate less than the general inflation rate.
Raw materials prices rose more in February than in January, and at a rate higher than the
general inflation rate. Respondents expected prices to rise less during the next six months
than they had in January.
Tourism: A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District
indicated that tourist activity in February was above that of January and a year ago. The ski
season got off to a slow start in December and January because of a lack of snow, but
activity at ski resorts rebounded with colder weather and more snow in February. Winter
bookings at District hotels and motels were mixed compared to a year ago. Contacts
expected better-than-normal business and moderate price increases over the next six months.
Ports: Representatives at District ports indicated that export and import levels in
January were higher than those in December and a year ago. They attributed increased
imports to strong economic growth domestically and increased exports to strong economic
growth abroad. The port representatives expected that, during the next six months, both
exports and imports would increase at similar rates.
Finance: District financial institutions reported that loan demand picked up during
the last seven weeks. Demand for mortgage loans increased sharply, that for commercial
loans increased moderately, and that for consumer loans remained steady. Interest rates were
higher on consumer and commercial loans, but were lower on mortgage loans.
Residential Real Estate: According to a telephone survey of District realtors and
builders, residential real estate activity was unchanged in late January and February.
Building permits, home sales, and housing starts were stable over the period. Buyer traffic,
however, increased. Home prices were steady, except in North Carolina, where they

V-3
decreased. District building material prices and subcontractor wages were unchanged.
Commercial Real Estate: District contacts reported that commercial real estate
activity changed little in late January and February compared to December. Real estate
contacts reported that construction activity increased, especially that of build-to-suit office
space around Washington, D.C. Posted commercial rental rates were unchanged.
Commercial vacancy rates remained steady, except in North Carolina and West Virginia,
where they declined. Leasing agents reported that the availability of prime office space
tightened in most District cities.
State Revenues: State government forecasters said that tax collections grew
moderately in January, and they expected similar rates of growth in February. Real revenue
growth remained strong in Maryland, North Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia;
somewhat weak in South Carolina; and flat in the District of Columbia.
Agriculture: Agricultural conditions in January and February remained better than a
year ago, according to District farm analysts. Warmer-than-normal temperatures led to
unusually high livestock survival rates and small-grain crop development. Fruit trees budded
prematurely, however, increasing their vulnerability to a late freeze. Pastures were in
excellent condition, leading to earlier-than-normal cattle grazing.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Overview: According to contacts around the District, the Southeast economy continued
to expand in early 1995, although reports showed some softness as well as strength.

Most

retailers reported flat February sales, but expect a good spring selling season. Tourism remains
depressed in some areas, but business and convention travel are strong. Single-family home
building and sales are still slowing, although the commercial real estate markets continue to
improve. District wage and price pressures remain moderate.
Consumer Spending: District retailers report that late January sales were up on a yearover-year basis, while February sales were generally flat. According to merchants, however,
bad weather was mainly responsible for February's disappointing performance. Most said that
they were pleased with current inventory levels. Retailers expect improved sales this spring.
Manufacturing: Manufacturing activity is characterized by increases in some sectors
offsetting scale-backs in others. Since the last Beigebook, both material and finished goods
inventories have increased moderately for most firms contacted. Some regional producers report
that weakness in the Mexican economy is slowing their exports and is forcing changes in capital
spending plans. In Tennessee, auto industry plants are said to be operating at capacity but there
is concern that any downturn in the national economy would have a quick adverse impact.
Suppliers to the region's vehicle assembly plants, however, remain optimistic about the near-term
outlook and expect orders to remain strong.

Contacts report that both the steel and rubber

industries in Alabama are doing much better than in the past few years. Some producers of
telecommunications equipment continue to report strong activity.

Increasing commercial

construction is stimulating demand at regional firms that fabricate building materials, and
manufacturers of lumber products report strong sales and orders. Paper and paperboard mills
are operating at or near capacity limitations. One contact, however, thinks that paper industry

VI-2
activity is currently peaking and will begin a gradual decline over the next few months.
Although there continues to be scattered reports of layoffs by small, niche-oriented apparel firms,
a few large apparel producers are adding to employment rolls and expanding capacity as a result
of strong product demand.
Tourism and Business Travel: While tourism is slumping in parts of the region,
business travel is reportedly taking up some of the slack, keeping hotel vacancies at low levels.
Strong convention activity continues on Mississippi's Gulf Coast and in central Florida; advance
1995 bookings for hotels in Atlanta are above year-ago levels. Overall, Florida tourism remains
lackluster, although attendance at major attractions is reportedly slowly trending upward. In
southern Florida, although Central and South American tourism remains strong, visits from other
areas have not met expectations. Contacts report that this is due in part to competition from
other destinations. Cruise ship bookings out of Miami are down sharply for some firms.
Construction: Most real estate contacts in the District report that single-family home
sales slowed once again and fell below last year's strong levels during January and February.
However, sales are described as respectable in most parts of the region. Realtors attribute the
continued slowdown to uncertainty on the part of buyers, but most anticipate that demand will
increase this spring. The majority of builders continue to be conservative, and, as a result, some
realtors are concerned that a short supply of new homes in some areas will limit sales. Several
areas continue to report a shortage of skilled construction workers, but wage pressures have
eased from earlier in the housing cycle.
Commercial and multifamily real estate contacts continue to report strengthening
markets.

Several areas of the District report that strong demand is driving apartment

construction. Large blocks of contiguous office space are reported to be scarce throughout the
region. However, the majority of commercial construction remains build-to-suit with very little

VI-3
speculative space available.

Realtors continue to be optimistic and anticipate that both

commercial and multifamily markets will continue to strengthen during 1995.
Financial Services: Reports from bankers around the region about loan demand were
mixed. Overall loan demand was steady. Home mortgage lending continues to slow as the
housing sector cools off. Auto lending also has cooled appreciably.

Consumer lending in

general was reported as steady or slowing slightly, while commercial loans continue to rise
slowly. However, several bankers noted that the economy was beginning to slow and they expect
that a slowing would quickly affect new loan generation.
Wages and Prices: Manufacturing contacts generally report higher prices for materials
and their own finished goods, but also anticipate less such price pressure in the future. Paper,
paperboard, and newsprint prices continue to rise boosting activity by producers but adversely
affecting publishers and others who use paper products. Producers of building materials, textiles,
apparel, furniture, and plastic products, report increasing prices paid for raw materials, and more
of these firms note that they are charging higher finished product prices than was the case late
last year. Labor availability problems and wage pressures are limited to a few parts of the region
and do not appear to be spreading at this time.

VII-1
SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO
Summary. Seventh District economic activity generally remained brisk in early 1995. Signs of
slower growth were concentrated in housing activity and the auto industry, but realtors, retailers and auto
dealers generally remained optimistic about future sales growth. Overall manufacturing output continued
to expand at a moderate to vigorous pace. Conditions in the agricultural sector held up better than
expected, and land values posted the greatest annual increase in 1994 in the past six years. Surveys and
reports from staffing services firms indicate that District labor markets remained tight, with little evidence
of any significant change in employment growth since the fourth quarter.
Manufacturing. District manufacturing activity generally remained vigorous in early 1995, after
closing out 1994 on a high note. The composite index of production components in purchasing managers'
surveys for Chicago, Detroit, and Milwaukee showed continued robust expansion in output in January
and February, in contrast to the slower growth indicated in the national data. Responses from auto
suppliers and other cyclically-sensitive industries contributed to a slower (but still substantial) growth rate
indicated in surveys in Western Michigan. At the same time, however, the production component of auto
industry responses to the Detroit purchasing managers' survey actually increased in January and February.
A large distributor of industrial materials stated that its own sales growth shows no sign of slowing. "If
you asked me two months ago," this contact observed, "I would have expected a slowdown in the second
half of this year. No longer." New capacity expansion projects by manufacturers have boosted this firm's
growth in sales to construction contractors, while direct sales to manufacturers remained strong. An
industry analyst reported that construction machinery sales remain robust in the face of higher interest
rates, with greater strengthening in nonresidential construction spending expected to bolster industry sales
growth further in coming months. A manufacturer of industrial equipment stated that demand has held up
very well in recent months, although a higher share of customers choose to rent (rather than buy)
equipment. A manufacturer of products linked to housing activity stated that orders slowed in early 1995;
"our backlog is still huge, but at current order rates we can probably say good-bye to seven day
workweeks."
Housing. Housing activity showed continued signs of slowing, but activity remained at relatively
high levels and most realtors remained upbeat. An association of realtors in Wisconsin reported new
year-over-year declines in transaction volume, but stated that "these figures are still pretty strong." One
large realtor stated that sales normally pick up substantially in February compared to January, but did not
do so this year, and this contact stated that "the last two rate increases seem to have put a damper on

VII-2
things." Nonetheless, "prices are still appreciating, we have plenty of buyers calling, and underlying
demand remains strong." One of the largest realtors in the District reported that transactions strengthened
somewhat in recent weeks, after rising interest rates and uncertainty about their future direction curtailed
sales in the fourth quarter. "We've been a little surprised, and salespeople actually seem to be getting a
little bullish again."
Retail Sales. Surveys and reports from large chains revealed little change in the pace of retail
sales growth in the District. A large retailer reported that its underlying sales momentum was slightly
stronger in recent months on a seasonally adjusted basis, led by continued strength in home furniture sales
and new strengthening in women's apparel. This contact stated that consumers "are still shopping closely
to need, as opposed to impulse." A major retail chain stated that its durable goods sales growth
moderated in recent months, despite increased promotional activity. This contact stated that inventories
have risen above plan in some product categories (including appliances), but the company has not yet
reduced its orders below previous plans. A large manufacturer of durable goods stated that orders from
dealers and retailers remained "amazingly strong" in recent weeks, with no sign of any change in
momentum since late 1994. The majority of Michigan retailers anticipating future sales growth in a
monthly survey reached its widest margin since last October, although some modest slowing in current
sales momentum was also indicated.
Discussions with auto dealers were mixed, with the majority indicating some slowing in sales
momentum in early 1995. One of the largest auto dealers in the District reported that traffic and sales
turned busier in the latter half of February and early March, however, after slowing significantly in
January and early February. This contact has not pulled back on orders from its earlier plans; "we've been
able to get some extra vehicles, unlike last year when things were really tight, and we're taking everything
we can get." This dealer expected sales to improve in coming months. Commenting on a competitor's
financing promotion, this contact stated that "if we did that, we just couldn't get enough vehicles to sell."
Another large auto dealer also reported weak sales in early 1995, partly due to vehicle price increases.
This contact stated that sales would likely increase from 1994 to 1995, if interest rate changes stabilize or
become less prominent.
Agriculture. Conditions in the District's farm sector are holding up better than had been
expected. Hog prices have improved considerably from the inordinately low levels of last fall, permitting
the most efficient producers to scratch out marginally positive returns. Moreover, unexpected trade
developments with respect to China have strengthened crop exports and prices. Our survey of District

VII-3
agricultural bankers found farmland values continued to trend upward last fall, with the increase for all of
1994 the largest annual rise in six years. The average loan-to-deposit ratio at the end of 1994 was the
highest for any year since 1979.
Labor Markets. District labor markets continued to strengthen in early 1995. Payroll
employment estimates for District states were recently revised upward in the annual benchmarking
process, and currently depict significantly faster employment growth in 1994 than in 1993. A recent
survey by a large temporary help company showed further strengthening in Midwest employers' hiring
plans in the first quarter of 1995, after this index climbed in 1994 to the highest annual average in the
survey's 18-year history. This survey showed stronger hiring plans among manufacturers than the overall
regional average, as has been the case since 1991, and purchasing managers' surveys also depicted
stronger manufacturing employment growth in recent months. A survey by a large executive recruiting
firm indicated that planned hiring of middle managers and professionals climbed in early 1995 to the
strongest pace since 1984, with the North Central region showing the strongest hiring plans in the nation.
A large staffing services firm saw "no sign of a slowdown" in its own temporary placements
growth in early 1995. Another staffing firm stated that "there's more business than we can handle, and a
tremendous shortage of applicants." This firm expected somewhat greater upward wage pressure in
coming months. A staffing firm specializing in professional services reported that robust billings growth
continued in recent months. "Clients are more than willing to ante up" if a good candidate is successfully
recruited. The manager of recruitment advertising for a newspaper stated that "right now, we couldn't
kick the business out of here with a stick." Help-wanted advertising in an industrial materials
newsmagazine climbed to record levels in recent weeks. A regional analyst stated that labor shortages in
Western Michigan continued to intensify, and noted increasing reports of business expansion plans being
constrained by worker shortages.
Prices. Manufacturing input price increases showed little sign of ebbing, while a growing
number of industrial contacts suggested that output price increases grew more feasible. Large retailers
continued to stress intense competition, however, with little if any room for price increases. The price
components of the District purchasing managers' surveys remained high or increased further in early
1995. The Chicago price component climbed in February to its highest level since July 1988 and its
second highest level since early 1980. A distributor of industrial materials stated that its prices continue
to escalate, and perhaps at a higher rate; hikes in base metal prices continue, while product shortages have
grown more frequent. A plastics industry analyst stated that resin prices were still climbing, with prices

VII-4
for some products reaching all-time highs. Several large manufacturers stated that the strengthening
recovery in Europe may have eased pricing constraints facing manufacturers, as import supplies become
increasingly tight. Commercial rents in the region have been on the rise as vacancy rates decline,
according to realtors, with particularly strong rent increases noted for industrial space. A distributor
stated that lumber prices have eased in recent months, however, citing slower demand from housing
construction contractors.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
The District economy continues to grow, but at a slower pace. Many contacts
expect this slowing to continue throughout the year. Nevertheless, the southern parts of
the District are still experiencing relatively strong growth. Fewer reports of tight labor
markets were noted this period relative to the last several periods. A quarterly survey of
small firms indicates that almost one-quarter plan to add employees over the next three
months. Residential real estate sales and starts have slowed after posting records in many
parts of the District last year. Though loan demand is still generally strong, some pockets
of weakness have developed; many District bankers are aggressively seeking retail
deposits. Record cotton futures prices have buoyed District cotton producers.
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity
District firms, manufacturers in particular, report mixed conditions, with slightly
more firms announcing consolidations and employment losses than previously. Northeast
Arkansas, western Tennessee and northern Mississippi, however, are experiencing strong
growth. An aerospace firm in the area recently received approval on a federal contract,
enabling it to hire 130 workers this year and at least 500 more next year. An auto parts
retailer and distributor reports that its corporate headquarters will move to Memphis this
summer, bringing about 800 jobs. Firms in the food processing and household electronics
industries will also expand in Memphis over the next few months. Spurred by the prior
boom in home construction and sales, a maker of household appliances in southern Indiana
added another 500 workers in January to meet demand. A contact in the constructionequipment industry reports strong sales because the earthquake in Kobe, Japan, disrupted

VIII-2
the production of four Japanese construction-equipment manufacturers, leaving American
firms with less competition.
Although fewer reports of tight labor markets were noted during this period relative
to the last several periods, some pockets of tight conditions still exist. For example, a
contact in the package delivery business reports that his firm is now offering a hiring
bonus for the first time in 10 years to attract workers. Smaller firms in western Tennessee
are also reporting difficulties in finding replacements for workers that leave. Much of this
sentiment is shown in a recent quarterly National Federation of Independent Businesses
(NFIB) survey of 265 District small firms, which found that 23 percent plan to add
employees over the next three months, up from 20 percent a year earlier.
Little Rock, southern Illinois and St. Louis are bearing the brunt of consolidations
in the District. For instance, a merger will close the corporate headquarters of a St.
Louis-based food processor, costing about 450 jobs. A Little Rock producer of medical
supplies will move to South Carolina, eliminating 300 jobs. A steel company laid off
about 100 southern Illinois employees as part of a cost-cutting program. The overall mood
in the District is one of cautious optimism; most contacts continue to see growth in their
areas, but at a slower pace. Many also believe that this slowing rate of growth will
continue throughout the year.
Inventories
The quarterly NFIB survey found that nearly 19 percent of firms plan to add to
their inventories during the next six months, about the same as one year ago, while slightly
more than 9 percent of firms plan to decrease their inventory levels. Of those firms
planning to add to their inventories, a disproportionate share are in the retail sector, with
very few in the wholesale sector.

VII-3
Real Estate and Construction
Residential construction and sales have slowed from their 1994 record levels in
most parts of the District. January building permits in St. Louis, Memphis, Louisville and
Little Rock are down substantially from the same period one year ago. Most contacts
continue to cite rising interest rates as the primary cause of this decline. Some parts of
western Kentucky, however, report a strong start to 1995 after experiencing declining
numbers in the final quarter of last year. Shortages of starter and mid-priced houses are
reported in Little Rock and central Kentucky.
Banking and Finance
Most contacts continue to report strong loan demand, although some areas of the
District have experienced slowdowns. Commercial loan demand is generally stronger than
consumer loan demand. Residential mortgage loan demand is still tapering off. Many
banks are aggressively pursuing retail deposits by raising deposit rates on savings accounts
and CDs. Some bankers note that funds that were previously leaving banks for mutual
funds and other investment vehicles are being funneled back into deposits.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Strong domestic demand for cotton and reduced foreign supplies have precipitated
record high prices in the futures markets. Several contacts expect cotton prices to stay at
relatively high levels throughout most of the summer. This prospect has caused a greaterthan-average number of producers to sell forward their 1995 cotton crop.

By most

estimates, Mid-South cotton producers will increase planted acreage between 10 percent
and 15 percent this spring. Elsewhere, Southern pine lumber mills report that orders are
running more than 15 percent above last year on a year-to-date basis.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

In late winter, the economy of the Ninth District remains strong, but consumers show increasing
caution, particularly in regard to home and vehicle purchases. Manufacturers remain active as do
construction firms. Iron and copper mining is strong. Paper production is going full steam. Weather and
soil moisture conditions are excellent going into the new crop season and the mild winter has been
beneficial for livestock producers. Office and commercial real estate rental markets are tight.
On the other side of the coin, sales of general merchandise are reportedly slack and auto dealers
across the district describe mild to sharp drops in sales. Some tourist businesses suffered from lack of
snow. Residential construction is slower than the previous two seasons.
Labor markets in most cities remain tight and skilled manufacturing workers are particularly hard to
get. However, reported wage increases are only marginally higher than those in the preceding three
years. Some raw material and intermediate goods prices continue to rise, although reports of delays in
delivery have moderated from last fall. Lumber prices have declined.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing is now the economy's bellwether. Directors, news media, advisory council members,
electrical utilization figures and industry sources all describe the strongest manufacturing sector in recent
years. Labor shortages are most pronounced in this sector, and the most common reports of price
increases concern purchased inputs for manufacturers.
Natural resource industries
The paper industry is coursing ahead with full sails after spending three or more years in the
doldrums. Sales of all grades of paper from coated magazine stock to newsprint and packaging are
reportedly very strong and most mills are running at capacity. One mill in Michigan's Upper Peninsula
is investing over $100 million in a new paper machine and related plant expansion. Other mills
reportedly are making improvements to eliminate bottlenecks. Lumber prices have softened somewhat
from 1994 levels, reportedly due to some slackening in demand for residential construction and to higher
than anticipated production in the Northwest.
Strong demand from the steel industry and high copper prices have been a boon to the two major
components of Ninth District mining. Iron mines on both shores of Lake Superior are running at
capacity and at much higher levels of productivity than prevailed before painful restructuring that

IX-2

occurred in the 1980s. One Minnesota mine expects to produce 14.5 million tons in 1995 with less than
1,500 workers, beating its previous record of 14.1 million tons set in 1981 with 4,200 workers. A new
copper mine in Wisconsin is producing at a higher rate than anticipated and older mines are reportedly
working at capacity.
Construction and real estate
Commercial construction continues to outpace residential work in many areas of the district.
Warehouse construction is particularly good, in part as a result of changing structural patterns in
wholesale-retail distribution, but also due to growing general demand. One Minneapolis-St. Paul
manufacturer noted that warehouse lease rates have increased by nearly 50 percent since last year.
Commercial construction is reportedly strong in Fargo, N.D., Sioux Falls, S.D., and other urban areas. A
Minnesota plumbing wholesaler said that requests for quotes for bidded projects were setting records.
Residential construction is apparently at a plateau, which building association officials describe as
good, but is clearly below the levels achieved in the preceding two seasons. Fargo, N.D., and Sioux Falls,
S.D, are areas of particular strength while western North Dakota is one area where residential work is
reportedly much stronger than commercial. One Montana source noted a shift from retail and
commercial work to government and industrial projects. Reports on sales of existing housing vary
between localities but on balance such sales appear depressed from normal levels. Higher mortgage
interest rates are cited by both builders and realtors as the principal cause of slowing in their businesses.
Agriculture
Fine weather and moderately stronger prices are setting a mood of cautious optimism as farmers
approach the 1995 spring planting season. Livestock prices remain well below year-earlier levels but
above the troughs reached in late 1994. Cattle numbers on January 1 were generally 1 percent to 2
percent above 1994's already high levels, thus promising no early price relief. Crop prices are similarly
below early 1994 levels but up from levels prevailing earlier in the winter.
The Minneapolis Fed quarterly survey of farm bankers reveals demand for all types of loans, together
with farm income and spending, as slightly below normal levels. Few bankers report customers having
problems with debt service, and feeder livestock and machinery loan volumes are described as below
usual levels.

IX-3

Consumer spending and tourism
The most marked turn in the economy appears to be in retail sales. After a good holiday season, sales
by general merchandisers in January and February were barely above year-earlier levels and news reports
describe a retail slump. One North Dakota regional mall manager described traffic as "so-so." Another
in South Dakota described business as "a bit slow" but noted that increased competition due to retail
sector overbuilding might be the cause rather than consumer reluctance.
"Auto sales are very soft," says a South Dakota dealers' association representative, citing higher
interest rates and caution by farmers as the principal reasons. After a strong showing through most of
1994, auto sales have declined in all parts of the district. During February, registrations of new passenger
cars and light trucks in Minnesota were down about 6 percent compared to year earlier levels. Similar
contractions are reported in the Dakotas and Wisconsin dealers confirm slowness in their region.
Winter tourism has generally suffered from sparse snow cover over much of the district.
Snowmobiling and cross country skiing are down from last year in many areas. However, the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan and areas of northern Minnesota with good snow conditions report very good
business. South Dakota and Minnesota officials report steady traffic to downhill ski areas and in
Montana most ski resorts have good snow and good business. Cuts in Amtrak service will dampen
activity in North Dakota and Montana, according to a resort executive.
Employment, wages and prices
Labor markets remain tight as unemployment rates in several metropolitan areas are below 4 percent.
Involuntary overtime has become an issue for some manufacturing and mining firms. Grievances have
been filed at one Minnesota mine where many workers have been putting in 60 hour weeks on a regular
basis. Some Minneapolis- St. Paul machine shops have foregone bidding on some jobs because of their
inability to hire new machinists. Plumbers, pipefitters and other skilled building tradespersons are also
reportedly in short supply. In spite of such apparent tightness, few sources report sharp wage increases.
Prices have risen sharply for paper products of all types, packaging materials and commodity
chemicals such as chlorine, caustic soda and methanol. Prices of intermediate goods including hardware,
machined assemblies and plastic components also are up, but delivery delays for steel and other materials
have abated. Nor is there much evidence of price increases at the final goods level. Petroleum product
prices are essentially unchanged from a year ago.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview. The Tenth District economy continued to grow at a strong pace over the
past month. Retail sales improved and manufacturers continued to operate at high levels of
capacity. While single-family homebuilding slowed further, multifamily construction picked
up in some parts of the district. The district's winter wheat crop was generally in good
condition, and recent gains in crop and livestock prices have brightened the outlook for
district farm incomes. While materials prices for manufacturers continued to rise throughout
the region, upward pressure on wages was less prevalent. Retailers held prices steady despite
increases in costs of goods and labor.
Retail Sales. Retailers report that sales improved over the past month and were
ahead of year-ago sales. Much of the improvement, however, can be attributed to recent
clearance promotions. Unseasonably warm weather continued to hamper sales of outerwear
and other seasonal merchandise. Although retailers trimmed inventories, current inventory
levels are generally considered satisfactory. Most auto dealers report slightly declining sales
over the past month, due primarily to higher financing costs for consumers. Nevertheless,
auto dealers expect sales to pick up in the spring.
Manufacturing. Most firms continued to operate at high levels of capacity last
month. Manufacturing lead times increased but are expected to shorten in the months ahead.
Firms are generally satisfied with current inventory levels, although a few may boost
inventories slightly to meet demand or to circumvent increases in input prices. For
manufacturers with significant export sales, growing sales to Europe last month appeared to

X-2
offset declining sales to Mexico.
Energy. Although crude oil prices firmed somewhat in recent weeks, low natural gas
prices continued to curb activity in the district's energy industry. The average number of
drilling rigs operating in district states fell in January and early February. As a result, the
region's drilling activity remained below its year-ago level for the ninth consecutive month.
Housing. Builders report a downturn in housing starts from both last month and a
year ago. The downturn was concentrated in single-family starts, while multi-family starts
rose slightly. Most respondents expect building activity to remain sluggish during the coming
months. Some builders report sales of new homes slowed over the past month but remained
slightly ahead of their year-ago pace. Builders report materials were available with few
delays. While mortgage demand declined considerably due to higher interest rates, most
lenders doubt that demand will continue to deteriorate.
Banking. Loan demand at reporting banks increased slightly last month. Banks
report higher demand for commercial and industrial loans, consumer loans, and commercial
real estate loans. Demand was largely unchanged for home equity loans, construction loans,
and agricultural loans. Most banks, however, report a decline in home mortgages. Loandeposit ratios were constant to up from the previous month, while changes in security
investments were mixed.
Many respondents raised their prime rate last month but expect the rate to hold steady
in the near future. While consumer lending rates increased, most banks do not expect
additional changes in the near term. Lending standards remain unchanged.
Changes in total deposits among reporting banks were mixed. IRA/Keogh accounts

X-3
rose, while demand deposits and NOW accounts fell. Changes in money market deposit
accounts and small time and savings deposits were also mixed.
Agriculture. The district's rangeland and winter wheat fields were generally in good
condition following a warm, dry winter. Forage supplies for grazing livestock were ample.
Timely spring rains are needed, however, to replenish soil moisture supplies.
District bankers report brisk demand for farm loans, although it appears that many
farmers used new loans to fund operating costs and past debts. Relatively little borrowing
during the month was for expansion of farm businesses, especially among livestock producers.
Spring credit reviews at district agricultural banks reveal a sharp drop in profits for
livestock producers in 1994 and a modest rebound for crop producers. Big crop yields
bolstered incomes for crop producers, despite lower crop prices. Weak livestock prices
triggered losses for livestock producers. Recent gains in crop and livestock prices have
slightly improved the outlook for district farm incomes in 1995.
Prices and wages. Several retailers report the costs of goods and labor increased last
month, but the increases were not passed on to customers. Manufacturers report input prices
increased and were up from a year ago. The steepest price increases were for chemicals,
paper, and rubber. While manufacturers in some parts of the district report tighter labor
markets, only a few report upward pressure on wages. A late-January survey of
manufacturing plants across the district showed a somewhat larger proportion of respondents
reporting increases in finished product prices than in October, when the last survey was taken.
Builders in Kansas City and Denver continued to report increases in the prices of building
materials, while materials prices in other parts of the district either leveled off or declined.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District economy continued to expand in late January and February but at a
slightly slower pace. Manufacturing orders rose, and activity at business service firms remained very
strong. Retail sales slowed, however, and some contacts said that Texas sales were among the
weakest in the nation. Construction activity was steady as an increase in commercial construction
offset a decline in homebuilding. Loan demand continued to rise. Energy activity declined seasonally
and remained below last year's levels. Agricultural production was better than expected. Despite the
growth in the district economy, respondents in several industries said expectations of a slowdown in
the U.S. economy and uncertainty over the effects of the Mexican peso devaluation had reduced their
optimism.
Eleventh District respondents continued to report price and wage pressures in some
industries, but several manufacturers expected price pressures to ease in the coming months. In the
service industry, fees continued to rise for temporary, consulting and legal services. Trucking fees
were down because Texas intrastate trucking deregulation resulted in increased competition. In
manufacturing, selling prices were up for paper products, raw timber and cement. Contacts in the
petrochemical, fabricated metals and glass industries said prices had likely peaked and expected prices
to soften in the spring. Retailers said prices were flat to down despite increased cost pressure from
suppliers. Oil prices were up slightly while natural gas prices had stabilized at a low level. In
agriculture, cotton prices were up and livestock prices remained low. Because of recruiting
difficulties, wage pressures rose in the temporary services, trucking and fabricated metals industries.
Manufacturing orders continued to rise, but respondents expressed less optimism that
economic activity would continue to increase at the current pace. Demand continued to be strongest

XI-2
for electronics, paper, petrochemicals and construction-related materials, while apparel orders
weakened. Semiconductor and computer-related orders rose at a strong pace and selling prices
remained stable. The demand for paper and boxes continued to increase despite falling orders from
Mexican customers. Orders for construction-related manufacturing products picked up as commercial
construction increased. Fabricated metals producers reported very strong demand and were finding it
difficult to hire qualified workers. Cement orders rose due to warmer-than-usual weather and
significant construction backlogs. Demand for lumber remained unchanged overall, but orders from
commercial contractors were up. Excluding jeans, apparel orders softened, a result of slower retail
sales. Contacts said higher prices for cotton and paper products had raised costs, although only a
small portion was passed on to customers. Garment finishers said that business was steady. Orders for
food products rose at a moderate pace and sales of low-fat products were strong. Demand continued
to be extremely strong for petrochemicals but additional capacity had dampened price pressures.
Demand for refined products was robust, with sales of gasoline and other products running at levels
above a year ago. The exception was fuel oil which did not sell well because of warm winter weather
in the Midwest and Northeast. Refiners shifted production toward gasoline which drove down prices
and kept margins thin. Orders for oil-field machinery were reported to be good, although the rig
count slipped as drilling declined seasonally.
Economic activity at business services firms continued to rise at a robust pace. Demand for
temporary services was strong and respondents said that recruiting problems remained. Demand for
management/consulting services rose as companies streamlined computer systems and prepared to
enter international markets. Legal firms said activity associated with mergers and acquisitions and
initial public offerings was still strong, but litigation business was flat. Transportation services
respondents said that air cargo volume rose and trucking demand was flat despite reduced shipments
to Mexico.

XI-3

Retail sales slowed in February, and sales along the Texas-Mexico border continued to
decline. Several national retailers said that Texas sales were among the weakest in the country. Sales
growth was reported to be slower than expected, and contacts said they were less optimistic than a
few weeks ago. One retailer said the weak Mexican peso appeared to be affecting sales throughout
Texas. Selling prices were reported to be stable or lower, despite increased cost pressure from
suppliers. Auto sales were also slower in February, and respondents said inventories were too large.
Construction activity in the Eleventh District was steady, as rising commercial activity
continued to offset declines in single-family construction. Home builders cut back on construction in
January and February as they tried to keep the supply of new homes in line with lower buyer
demand. Despite the cutback in building activity, inventories of new homes were rising. Commercial
construction remained robust and border contacts said that many projects are still in the works despite
the Mexican peso devaluation. Rising demand for industrial, retail and office space helped boost
commercial builders' expectations of growth in 1995.
Eleventh District bankers said overall loan demand grew steadily. Higher interest rates
continued to curb demand for residential construction projects, but lending for industrial projects
picked up. Competition from alternative credit sources kept consumer lending flat.
District energy producers said activity was generally unchanged. The domestic rig count fell
seasonally and remained below year-ago levels, but international activity improved with better oil
prices. Oil prices were between $18 and $19 per barrel over the past month which is slightly higher
than reported in the last beige book. Natural gas prices stabilized at about $1.40 per Mcf.
Favorable weather boosted the agricultural harvest. District farmers said the yields and
quality of most crops were good. Cotton production was raised by strong domestic demand, although
higher prices curbed international orders somewhat. Cattle prices remained low, keeping profit
margins just above break-even levels.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continues to strengthen modestly, although
there are reports of slowing in some sectors. The strengthening partly reflects some pick-up
in California's still moderate recovery. Activity continues to accelerate in Oregon, but growth
is easing from high levels in the intermountain states. On a sectoral basis, retail sales growth
slowed in January and early February, while service sector firms report generally strong
demand and some upward pressure on input prices. Computer, machinery, and paper
manufacturers report strong domestic and foreign demand, while lumber and aerospace firms
show continued weakness. Agricultural conditions generally are good, with strong exports to
Asia offsetting declining sales to Mexico. Residential real estate activity has slowed
noticeably in most areas, but commercial markets remain strong in the intermountain states
and the Pacific Northwest. District banks report slow deposit growth, but generally strong
loan demand.
Business Sentiment
Twelfth District business leaders expect national economic growth to moderate over
the next year. About three-fifths of survey respondents project national output growth to slow
to the long-run historical average pace, after above-average growth last year. One-third of
business leaders expect an increase in the unemployment rate during the next year, a marked
change from the last report when few projected a worsening in unemployment. Business
leaders expect continued strong growth in District exports to Asia and Europe, but weakness

XII-2
in sales to Canada and Mexico.
Retail Trade and Services
District retailers report some slowing of sales growth in January and early February.
Food store sales were slow and prices have yet to rise despite large increases in packaging
costs. Consumer soft good sales also were reported slow, with prices flat or declining. New
car sales in Idaho in December and January were reported down 9 percent from a year earlier.
Dealers have increased the use of rebates and other incentives to bolster sales. Retailers close
to the Mexican border near San Diego report sharp declines in sales since the devaluation of
the Mexican peso. In Idaho and Utah, reports indicate that entry-level retail workers are
increasingly difficult to hire, and wages have risen 3 to 3 1/2 percent.
Many District service providers report continued strong demand. Software and
communication firms in Washington continue to experience strong growth, but note some
upward pressure on input prices. Newspapers report excellent demand, but newsprint prices
are sharply higher. Lower health care premiums and slower growth in wages for health care
workers are reported in the Pacific Northwest. Hotel occupancy remains above 80 percent in
Salt Lake City, pushing room rates up 6 to 8 percent. In Southern California, hotel
occupancy and room rates are beginning to increase slowly.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity remains mixed. Tool and machinery manufacturers report
continued strong domestic and export demand, with prices rising for heavy construction

equipment. Pulp and paper product orders and prices have increased. Newsprint
manufacturers are operating at high levels of capacity utilization. Conversely, lumber sales

XII -3
continue to slow and prices are well below year earlier levels. Aerospace manufacturing
remains weak, as lower production at Boeing is expected to lead to layoffs at its suppliers in

the region this year. An additional 3,700 layoffs are expected at the Hanford nuclear facility
in Washington by September 1995.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural and resource industry conditions generally are good. Total District
agricultural exports continue to grow, as rising exports to Asia offset slowing sales to Mexico.
Arizona and California cotton producers report high production, prices, and export sales.
Washington apple exports are reaching Japan for the first time, but sales to Mexico have
slowed substantially. Cattle prices have risen, but reports from Arizona indicate that beef
exports to Mexico have virtually stopped. District farmers report lower feed grain prices and
significantly improved water availability, but pesticide and chemical prices have increased.
Farm worker wages are reported flat in most areas.
Timber exports to Japan have increased in response to demand from the Kobe
earthquake rebuilding effort. Electricity prices in the Pacific Northwest are expected to
remain low through the summer because of abundant hydroelectric supplies.
Real Estate and Construction
Residential home sales and construction activity are reported to have slowed in most
areas. Even with the recent slowing, the level of activity remains high in Arizona, Idaho,
Nevada, Oregon, and Utah; upward pressure on construction materials prices is reported in
those markets. In California, home sales are reported to have slowed from 1994's pace, but
sales and construction activity are expected to strengthen during the remainder of 1995.

XII-4
Commercial markets are strong outside of California. In Salt Lake City, low office,
industrial, and retail vacancy rates are spurring increases in rents and building activity. In
downtown Portland, Oregon, office vacancy rates are the lowest in the nation, and rents are
reported rising. Likewise, commercial and industrial office vacancy rates are falling and rents
are rising in the Puget Sound area. Commercial office vacancy rates remain high in Los
Angeles and San Francisco, and little new construction is reported, but some improvement in
activity is expected during 1995.
Financial Institutions
Banks in most parts of the District report slower deposit growth, but generally good
loan demand. Consumer and business loan demand is reported strong in Southern California.
In Northern California, loan demand is weaker, with competitive pressures on loan pricing
and underwriting criteria. Some reports from Oregon indicate a recent slowing in loan
demand. Upward pressure on wages are reported for entry-level workers at Oregon banks.
Loan demand and quality remain good in Utah.

