For use at Noon, E.S.T.
Wednesday
March 13,1996

Summary of Commentary on

Current
Economic
Conditions
by Federal Reserve District

March 1996

SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS
March 1996

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

First District - Boston

.

.

.

.

.

.

I-

- New York

Second District
Third District

. . . . .
. . .

- Philadelphia
- Cleveland

Fourth District

. .

. .

. . .

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

II-1
III-1

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond

. .

. .

. . .

Sixth District

. .

. .

. . . . . VI-1

- Chicago

. . .

. . . . . VII-1

- St. Louis

. . .

- Atlanta

Seventh District
Eighth District
Ninth District

- Minneapolis

Tenth District Eleventh District
Twelfth District

Kansas City
- Dallas

. .

. .

i

V-l

. . . . .

IX-1

.

.

XI-1

.

. . .

. .
. . .

- San Francisco

.

.

.

. XII-1

SUMMARY*

Reports from the 12 Federal Reserve districts suggest the national
economy grew modestly in January and February.

Over half the districts cite

moderate economic growth or continuing solid levels of economic activity.
Most of the others mention recent improvements, largely reflecting rebounds
from weather-related slowdowns earlier in the year.
Accounts of manufacturing activity are mixed.

More than half the

districts report gains in at least some industries or sub-regions, but Boston,
St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas suggest production is either
level or growing more slowly than in the last report.

Retail results

generally improved in February, but in several districts these improvements
represent only a partial recovery from weak sales during the holidays and
January.
Wage and price pressures are generally described as subdued,
notwithstanding observations of tight labor markets in several districts.
Wages are reported to be increasing at a modest pace.
rising only slightly if at all.

Retail prices are

Most commodity prices are said to be steady,

stabilizing, or increasing very little; a few are falling.

RETAIL
Districts across the country report weak retail sales in January; most,
but not all, note an encouraging pick-up in February.

Severe winter weather

contributed to January's slow pace, particularly on the East Coast.
February's uptick in sales was not seen in parts of the west and mid-west,
where the San Francisco, St. Louis, and Minneapolis districts note continued

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and based on information
collected before March 4, 1996. This document summarizes comments received
from businesses and other contacts outside the Federal Reserve and is not a
commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

sluggishness.

Durable goods and electronics are typically selling better than

apparel, although some respondents observe a rise in demand for selected
clothing items.

Contacts in New York and Chicago report the largest sales

gains in stores at the high end of the market.
Retailers in a majority of districts are optimistic that sales will pick
up in the next few months.

The outlook for those in the Cleveland, San

Francisco, Dallas, and Minneapolis districts is more guarded.
movements in retail prices continue to be limited.

Upward

Reports from Boston,

Atlanta, and St. Louis indicate vendor prices generally remain stable.
Auto dealers in the Philadelphia, Chicago, Cleveland, and Kansas City
districts report improved sales in February, following a disappointing
January.

Dallas notes sluggish sales in both months, leaving inventories

larger than desired.

Contacts in the Chicago, Cleveland, and Kansas City

districts express more optimism about this spring's auto sales than those in
Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia.

TOURISM
Excellent skiing conditions on the East Coast boosted tourism in the
Boston and Richmond districts.

Atlanta reports strong tourism and convention

business, particularly in Florida, where northerners are fleeing to escape
harsher than usual winter weather.

Minneapolis notes a drop in tourism

because of poor skiing conditions in Montana, an unfavorable Canadian exchange
rate, and the temporary federal shutdown of South Dakota's national parks and
monuments.

OTHER NON-FINANCIAL SERVICES
In most districts surveying business services, demand accelerated in
February from a seasonal or weather-related lull in January; elsewhere,
services continued to expand at a good pace over both months.

Dallas notes

gains in accounting and transportation while San Francisco reports growing
exports of high-tech services like telecommunications, software, and financial

iii
consulting.

The demand for temporary workers picked up in Richmond, Chicago,

and Dallas, with Chicago noting ongoing labor shortages and Richmond reporting
that temporary workers' wages rose faster than the general price level over
the last year.

MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity has been mixed but fairly flat on average.
Several Federal Reserve Banks in the middle of the country (Minneapolis,
Kansas City, and Dallas) report slightly slower sales and orders, while the
majority of districts to the east (Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, and
Atlanta) indicate a slight strengthening since the latter part of 1995 or the
beginning of 1996.

Only the San Francisco report has a generally positive

tone for recent months, based largely on trends for machinery and equipment.
A number of districts report growing demand for capital goods, notably
industrial machinery, with Cleveland, Atlanta, and Chicago citing a boost from
exports.

Sales of electronic and computer-related equipment appear to be

rising, although Minneapolis reports a slowing rate of growth for computer
components, and Dallas notes a drop-off in demand for memory chips and
microprocessors.

St. Louis and Dallas indicate robust markets for cement.

Auto-related and apparel demand are widely reported to be sluggish, and paper
mills are experiencing declining sales according to contacts in several
districts.
Manufacturers throughout the country report little or diminished
materials cost pressures.

Paper prices in particular are falling, and lumber

prices are either falling or have ceased to rise.

Several districts note

growing wage pressures or tight markets for some categories of manufacturing
workers.

Overall wage inflation reportedly remains moderate, however.

Philadelphia and Richmond report recent declines in finished goods prices,
while most other districts indicate little or no increase.

Several districts

attribute the modest size of upward price movements to competitive conditions
in addition to the lack of cost pressures.

REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
All districts report increased interest and activity in residential real
estate; most also report increased residential sales.

Among those with higher

sales, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas indicate
low-priced and subsidized houses have done better than higher-priced homes.
Upstate New York and Philadelphia continue having excess inventories of
housing stock.

Prices are said to be stable in most districts, but appear to

be showing some increase in the Kansas City (especially for low-priced homes)
and Richmond districts and in the San Francisco Bay area.

Richmond,

Minneapolis, and Kansas City are seeing an increase in new residential
construction, and San Francisco notes increased construction of apartment
buildings in Arizona.
Commercial real estate markets have also experienced increased activity.
New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Dallas report rising demand for
commercial space.

Vacancy rates are said to have dropped in the Philadelphia,

Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco districts.

Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta,

Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco report increased commercial
construction in their districts.
Contacts in all districts anticipate a strong and active spring season.
Despite some concern about interest rates and about overbuilding in selected
areas, respondents are optimistic about both residential and commercial real
estate activity during the upcoming months.

FINANCIAL SERVICES

Loan demand appears to be increasing in the majority of districts,
although it has eased in Cleveland and California.

Most districts indicate

that demand for commercial loans has risen more than the demand for consumer
credit.

Contacts in New York, Atlanta, and Cleveland report slightly higher

loan delinquencies.

Respondents in all districts reporting on bank activity

mention a surge in refinancing activity.

AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Arctic cold, drought, and fire have damaged the winter wheat crop and
pasturage in much of the St. Louis, Kansas City and Dallas districts.

In

addition, in the Richmond district, parts of the Pacific Northwest, and the
eastern Dakotas, floods or heavy snows have also hurt crops.

With uncertain

prospects for the 1996 harvest and tight global inventories, grain prices are
at their highest levels in many years.

While these conditions are benefiting

grain farmers in the parts of the Minneapolis and San Francisco districts that
have adequate moisture, ranchers are caught in a squeeze.

With the ratio of

livestock prices to grain prices unusually low, the Minneapolis, Kansas City,
and Dallas districts report declines in ranch profits.
bankers reportedly expect a rise in ranch liquidations.

In Minneapolis,
Beef exports to

Canada and Asia are helping to support producers in the San Francisco
district.
In other natural resource industries, conditions are mixed.

Iron mines

in the Minneapolis district shipped at the highest level in over a decade,
while output from nonferrous mines stayed stable.

Energy prices are

reportedly volatile, with natural gas and fuel oil prices fluctuating at high
levels, while crude oil prices are relatively weak.

Dallas and Minneapolis

report strong gas and oil exploration activity, but in Kansas City and Dallas,
the operating rig count remains low.

I-1
FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity continues to be sluggish in the First District.
Retail results range widely, with apparel and hardware stores seeing sales
decline.

Other stores are doing better, but all express concern about

consumer confidence.

Manufacturing activity is generally level with a year

ago, although some respondents have seen sales rise.
to be moderate.

Price pressures continue

The residential real estate market is picking up in most of

New England, with home prices stable.

Mutual fund firms in the region

continue to expand their assets under management and increase employment.
Retail
First District retailers report mixed results in January and February.
Sales activity compared with year-earlier levels ranged from double-digit
declines to an increase of over 10 percent.

Apparel and hardware contacts

suffered the most serious losses, but the apparel merchants saw a slight
improvement in late February and hope for sales equal to a year earlier
throughout the spring.

By contrast, non-apparel non-hardware retailers

anticipate sales growth of 4 to 15 percent over the next several months.

Even

those doing well agree that consumers' worries about job layoffs and the
economy are causing them to postpone discretionary purchases.

In response,

contacts are generally keeping inventories low and employment stable.
increases of 3 to 5 percent are planned for this year.

Wage

Only one contact plans

significant store expansions.
Retailers report most vendor prices remain stable; by exception, the
price of paper has fallen 10 percent over the last few months, following a
steep rise in the first half of last year.

Lumber prices are starting to

rise, in anticipation of the spring construction season.
increased profits in 1995.

Contacts note

I-2
Tourist offices report strong activity this winter throughout the
region, thanks to exceptional skiing conditions.

International travelers

remain the fastest-growing and most lucrative segment of visitors to New
England.
Manufacturing
Most First District manufacturing contacts report fairly flat sales
relative to a year ago.

By exception, sales of industrial parts, equipment

used in commercial construction, cabinetry, and some consumer nondurables have
risen.

A number of respondents indicate recent swings in business.

Some

makers of consumer products report that sales were weak in January and
stronger in February, a pattern they attribute to weather fluctuations.

A

parts manufacturer is benefitting from an end to temporary shutdowns of
automotive assembly plants.

Other respondents, including a paper manufacturer

and two firms supplying discount chains, report being hurt by greater-thananticipated reductions in inventories on the part of their customers.
Most manufacturers report that selling prices are flat or up modestly,
except for a decline in paper product prices since late 1995.

Trends for

materials costs vary: contacts indicate rising prices for specialty chemicals
and plastics and resins, falling prices for wood pulp and most grades of
paper, mixed trends for polyester products, and stabilized prices for lumber
and cotton (although the level of cotton prices reportedly remains high).
Some manufacturers lament that strong competition is limiting their ability to
raise prices, while others expect higher profit margins this year because of
weaker pressures from materials costs.
Half the firms contacted report that employment is little changed from
its year-earlier level, the remainder report decreases.
to be selective rather than across-the-board.
growing wage pressures.

Any new hiring tends

Several contacts indicate

Capital spending patterns vary widely.

The

I-3

largest increases are reported by businesses that are developing new products
or shifting production locations.

Other contacts indicate a pause or decline

following last year's heavy capital investments.
Residential Real Estate
The residential real estate market in New England is reported to be
doing well.

After a slow winter, with low activity almost everywhere (caused

partly by the large amount of snow),

business has been picking up.

Respondents report increased interest, high attendance at open houses, and
more people putting their houses on the market.

Although an increase in sales

has not yet followed, all contacts are optimistic about the spring season.
Prices have been stable, with no major changes in either direction, and
contacts do not anticipate any large changes in the near future.

While

inventories of existing houses are in line with the level of activity and
sales, respondents report overbuilding and excess supplies of new homes in
some areas.

Interest rates remain low, despite small increases in some places

recently, and credit is widely available.
optimism."

Most contacts express "guarded

The major worry is that interest rates will increase.

The state of the local economy remains a concern in some areas.
Connecticut and Maine continue to do poorly.

Conditions in Vermont, Rhode

Island, and the suburbs of Boston have improved, however.
Nonbank Financial Services
Investment management firms report increased assets under management in
the first two months of 1996.

Sales of equity funds were very strong, but

bond funds were in net liquidation.

Most respondents raised employment in the

first two months of 1996 and plan further increases during the rest of the
year.

II-1
SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK
Reports on Second District economic conditions were mixed, but on balance were more
positive than in recent months.

Beginning with the more upbeat developments, retail sales

strengthened considerably in February. Moreover, robust leasing activity led to improvement in
Manhattan's commercial real estate market. Finally, aggregate loan demand has strengthened over
the past two months. In contrast, reports on homebuilding and manufacturing activity were mixed.
The market for new homes in the New York City-Northern New Jersey area improved, while the
upstate market did not. Conversely, manufacturing output increased in the Buffalo region but
declined in the New York City area during February.
Consumer Spending
District retail sales strengthened in February, following disappointing January results. Yearover-year comparable-store sales gains ranged from +2 to +10 percent and averaged roughly 6
percent in February, nearly twice January's average result. Nearly all contacts report that February
sales were on plan and inventories were generally at desired levels. A broad range of products -including better apparel, home furnishings, and commodity consumables -- sold well. Several retail
contacts noted that competitive price-cutting was widespread during January; in contrast, February
saw a return to more "normal" pricing patterns.
Construction & Real Estate
Manhattan's commercial real estate market improved in January. Although leasing activity
in Midtown Manhattan rose to a five month high, the vacancy rate was virtually unchanged at 14.1
percent. In Downtown Manhattan, leasing activity was fairly brisk for the third month in a row,
pushing the vacancy rate down to 24.9 percent in January, from 25.1 percent in December and 25.4
percent in November.
The market for new homes has picked up in the New York City and Northern New Jersey
areas, but upstate New York's depressed market showed no improvement. Homebuilders in the

II-2
New York City area, which includes Long Island and the lower Hudson Valley, report that sales are
higher than a year ago; one contact described the market as "perky". Similarly, contacts in Northern
New Jersey report some pickup in both traffic and buying activity in the past six weeks, but this is
compared to an exceptionally weak market in late 1995. Also, some expressed concern that the
pickup in activity may just be a temporary spike, with the recent uptick in mortgage rates motivating
potential buyers with a sense of urgency.
Homebuilders in upstate New York report no recent improvement; they say demand for new
homes continues to be depressed by corporate and government down-sizing and pervasive
consumer pessimism.

Moreover, high inventories of unsold existing homes -- partly due to

corporations unloading homes of relocated employees onto the market -- are pushing down prices
and competing with the new-home market. Only the low-end of the market, particularly subsidized
units, is performing reasonably well. Contacts in both New York and New Jersey believe that the
market is too weak to support any increase in selling prices.
Manufacturing
Buffalo area purchasing managers report steady growth in manufacturing output in January
and February. In contrast, purchasers in the New York City area report a fairly sharp downturn in
local manufacturing activity in February (and a more modest decline in activity outside the
manufacturing sector).

Both surveys show commodity price pressures easing in February,

continuing recent trends.
Nearly two-thirds of District manufacturers polled in a recent Federal Reserve Bank of New
York survey expect unit sales to increase over the next six months, with exports expected to grow
more rapidly than domestic sales. Ninety percent of the respondents anticipate that prices will either
remain unchanged or decline; however, one-quarter reported that they had raised prices recently.
Wages are expected to rise 3 to 4 percent and capital spending will be similar to that of 1995.

Other Business Activity
Unemployment rates in the district were essentially unchanged in January. New York State's
rate held steady at 6.2 percent, while New Jersey's rate edged down to 6.5 percent. Both states
reported sharp drops in payroll employment in January, but these were attributed to temporary
factors: a blizzard that hit during the survey week and a building workers' strike in New York City.
Consumer confidence for the Middle Atlantic region (New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania) rebounded in February, after falling to its lowest level in more than 2 years. Still,
residents remain exceptionally pessimistic about job prospects. More large corporations have
announced workforce reductions in New York State: TRW, General Electric, Nationwide, Bausch and
Lomb, Pratt and Lambert, Deluxe Corporation, Reader's Digest and UPS announced layoffs totaling
nearly 2,000 workers.
Financial Developments
Demand for nearly all types of loans strengthened over the past two months, according to
a survey of senior loan officers at small and medium-sized banks. In general, loan demand was
stronger at more than 25 percent of the banks surveyed and steady at over 55 percent. The largest
increase in activity occurred in the consumer loan segment, with demand higher at nearly 45 percent
of the banks and steady at close to 40 percent. Refinancing activity for all types of loans increased,
and is now higher at approximately 40 percent of the banks.
Average loan rates were steady or lower at nearly all of the reporting banks, resulting in a
narrower spread between lending and deposit rates at almost 65 percent of the banks.

Loan

delinquencies were higher at 20 percent of the banks and steady at 70 percent, with the
nonresidential mortgage segment experiencing the largest increase in delinquencies. Although
several of the survey participants tightened credit standards, nearly 60 percent of the banks were
just as or more willing to lend than they were two months ago.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from major business sectors in the Third District in February indicated that
economic activity has picked up after a storm-induced slowdown in January. However, the gain
has not been sharp, and, according to these reports, business in the region has been relatively
steady in recent weeks. Manufacturers generally indicated that while shipments were up a bit,
new orders were flat. Retailers said sales had rebounded from January when snowstorms kept
shoppers out of the stores, but most merchants indicated they were not making up all the lost
sales and were merely back on a steady track. Auto dealers gave similar reports. Bankers said
lending was either flat at their institutions or growing sluggishly. There were some positive
reports from the real estate sector. Residential real estate agents and home builders were
experiencing some increased traffic and greater sales. Commercial real estate agents said
demand for office space appeared to be firming, and leasing and construction of industrial
buildings were moving up.
Expectations vary within the Third District business community. Manufacturers
anticipate some improvement in the next two quarters. Retailers do not foresee immediate gains,
but they are hopeful the pace of sales will improve in the spring. Auto dealers expect only a
steady sales rate. Bankers report no evidence that loan demand will accelerate soon. However,
real estate agents expect continued modest improvement in both residential and commercial
markets.

III-2
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing activity in the Third District maintained a level pace in February
according to reports from industrial firms, although slightly more firms said they were
experiencing a pickup than said business was off. Firms in most of the major manufacturing
sectors in the District indicated that demand for their products was just steady. However, some
gains in orders were noted by firms producing metal products, nonelectrical machinery,
chemicals, paper products, and textiles. Overall, however, demand for manufactured products
did not appear to be strengthening for firms in the region; on balance, they reported that order
backlogs continued on the downward trend that began late last year. A dip in employment and a
decline in industrial prices that manufacturers noted in February are further evidence of slack in
the goods-producing sector of the District.
Looking ahead, most of the Third District manufacturers contacted in February expect
demand for their products to pick up by summer. On balance, they foresee a rising pace of
orders and shipments, but they do not expect order backlogs to move up strongly. Likewise, they
anticipate only very slight increases in employment.
RETAIL
Most of the retailers contacted for this report said sales at their stores rebounded in
February from the slackened pace of January when snowstorms seriously hampered road travel
and kept shoppers at home. Some store officials think they may have recouped some of the sales
lost in January. However, the pickup appears only to have put retail sales in the District back on
a steady course; February sales just matched expectations of most of the retailers surveyed at the
end of the month. Selling strategies remain promotional and price markdowns are common.

III-3
Store officials are hopeful that sales will improve as spring approaches.
Auto dealers also noted a pickup in sales in February following a poor January.
However, they said sales were running at a pace just matching last year's at this time, and they
expect that rate to continue in the months ahead.
FINANCE
Most of the Third District banks contacted for this report said overall loan demand was
nearly flat or growing sluggishly in February. Lending officers continued to describe the market
for business loans as very competitive. They said nonbank lenders were aggressively seeking to
expand lending to large companies and competition was strong among banks for middle-market
customers. Consumer lending was relatively level according to bankers because the usual
seasonal decline in credit card loan volumes was offset by some gains in other types of personal
loans. Some banks were stepping up commercial real estate lending and lending to home
builders, but credit officers at these banks said this lending was confined to borrowers with
significant equity stakes in their properties. In general, bankers expect overall lending to trend
up slightly in the next few months.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Residential realtors surveyed in February said traffic at their offices had increased
noticeably and serious interest in home buying was evident in some areas of the Third District.
While reports varied around the District, in some local markets sellers were getting multiple
offers for their homes and selling them relatively quickly. However, realtors noted that the
inventory of homes for sale remains large and that asking prices and bids have been fairly stable.
New home sales may be gaining also; several builders noted increased traffic at their

III-4
developments and a pickup in the signing of contracts for new homes.
Commercial realtors said demand for industrial space, especially for warehouses and
distribution centers, has been increasing. They attribute this to moves by several firms to
consolidate activities into large buildings in the region. Realtors expect further increases in land
development activity and construction for these types of buildings.
Office markets in the Third District appeared to be firming, according to commercial
realtors and building managers. Vacancy rates at the end of 1995 were estimated at 15 percent
for the Philadelphia central business district and in the range of 15 to 20 percent in suburban
markets. Realtors expect a slow downward trend in vacancy rates in the absence of new
construction. Some realtors noted increased interest in the purchase of office buildings by real
estate investment trusts.

IV-1
FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Overview
The District economy has marginally improved since the last report, although only
construction activity has shown any broad-based growth since the first of the year.
Housing sales are reported to be strong in many areas, commercial construction activity
has been especially vibrant, and suppliers of commercial construction materials and
equipment have seen decidedly higher order and production numbers.
Unemployment in the District has been trending mostly upward since last spring,
particularly in the manufacturing-intensive regions such as northern Ohio. In more
diversified economies, including central Ohio and eastern Kentucky, labor markets have
generally been steadier. Still, most regions continue to post jobless rates that are under
the national average and low relative to historical averages. Survey data suggest new
hiring plans are running about the same as this time last year -- perhaps a sign that labor
markets are expected to firm a bit this spring.
Although some firms continue to see labor shortages, wage and cost pressures are
reportedly light. Wage growth appears to be comparable to the rise in the cost of living -in the 2% to 3% range. Area purchasing managers are noting only moderate (and limited)
commodity price increases.
Manufacturing
After showing little net growth during the second half of 1995, industrial activity in
the region appears to have strengthened a bit in early 1996. District manufacturers report

IV-2
small gains in orders and production, although the growth rate varies by industry. Where
production cuts have occurred, the reductions have resulted in a paring of overtime hours.
Indeed, none of our contacts is reporting layoffs, and many plants are still operating at
rates equal to or above their historical averages.
Auto and auto-related manufacturing is still soft, and inventories remain somewhat
high. Industry sources anticipate additional production cuts unless a sustained
improvement in consumer auto sales occurs. Heavy truck manufacturing, which has
shown a 10 percent drop in production since last summer, has recently posted small gains
in orders.
Other capital goods industries are reporting stronger numbers. Many of the
industries we contacted saw double-digit sales growth last year, and early indications for
1996 suggest a continuation of that trend. Firms with significant export markets are
noting particularly large orders growth.
Retailing
Retail sales in the District were hurt by bad weather in January and saw only a
modest overall improvement in February. Both January and February sales appear to have
surpassed last year's comparable monthly rates, which were weak. Apparel sales,
particularly of clearance items and spring-season casuals, are reported to be stronger than
sales of formal apparel and hard goods.
Inventories are near desired levels, however, and although retailers are reluctant to
predict future performance based on activity over the past two months, many still report a
positive near-term outlook.

IV-3

Auto Sales
Despite the negative effect of poor weather during the first weeks of January,
auto sales in the District improved throughout the month and into February, giving dealers
reason for optimism. Many reported that January sales were slow and below expectations,
particularly in the southern portion of the District. However, they also noted that despite
the sluggishness, sales were up from January 1995. Low interest rates are reported to have
positively affected sales.
Inventories are "desired" to "slightly heavy," ranging from a 40- to 90-day
supply. However, many dealers are anticipating March to be a stronger month, so heavier
inventories are not particularly disconcerting.
Banking
All of the District banks we contacted indicated a significant slowdown in
borrowing activity, with the possible exception of mortgage refinancing. The drop-off in
commercial borrowing has been especially severe. While consumer borrowing has
moderated in most regions and institutions compared with the previous report, consumer
credit demands are still generally expanding.
Delinquency rates continue to rise, though, and several banks are expressing
concerns about credit quality. Deposit growth remains moderate, with transaction
deposits basically flat. Some drain of deposits to money market funds was noted. Majormarket banks have witnessed a further shrinking in margins and are anticipating a
substantial slowdown in profitability this year compared to 1995.

V-1
FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview: The pace of economic activity in the Fifth District quickened in late
January and February, but some respondents indicated that the recent uptick was a rebound
from January's weather-induced sluggishness. Retailers, manufacturers, and service
producers reported that growth picked up in their industries. Growth in the real estate and
financial sectors also increased. Employment agencies saw stronger demand for temporary
workers. Area port representatives, however, reported slower business. Abundant snowfall
boosted tourism at ski resorts, but harmed farmers.
Retail Trade: Preliminary results from a monthly mail survey of District retailers
pointed to stronger retail conditions in February. Growth of sales revenues, employment,
wages, big-ticket sales, and shopper traffic increased, while inventory growth slowed.
Survey respondents said that retail prices rose more slowly in February than in January.
They expected price increases during the next six months to be in line with their January
forecasts.
Service Production: Service-sector growth increased in February, according to
preliminary results from a monthly District mail survey. Several respondents reported that
inclement weather adversely affected their businesses. Despite the weather, revenues and
employment grew somewhat faster, although wages grew more slowly. Service prices rose
more slowly in February than in January. Respondents expected larger price increases
during the next six months than they had in January.
Manufacturing: Most indicators of manufacturing activity increased in February
from their January levels, according to preliminary results from a monthly mail survey of

V-2
District manufacturers; this was the first such increase since September. Survey respondents
reported that shipments, new orders, order backlogs, and the workweek increased;
employment changed little. They were more optimistic about their prospects during the next
six months than they had been in January, but they continued to report a scarcity of skilled
labor. Manufacturers indicated that finished goods prices declined in February from the
month before, but that raw materials prices rose. Compared to January, respondents
expected raw materials prices to rise less rapidly during the next six months.
Tourism: A telephone survey of hotels, motels, and resorts throughout the District
indicated that tourist activity in February was above that in January and a year ago. Ski
resorts in North Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia reported unusually good business as
record snowfalls continued to boost winter bookings above year-ago levels. Contacts
expected better-than-normal business and some price increases during the next six months.
Port Activity: Representatives at District ports indicated that both export and import
levels in January were lower than in December and a year ago. Severe weather hampered
activity in Hampton Roads (Va.) and Baltimore. Contacts continued to expect exports and
imports to increase during the next six months.
Temporary Employment: A telephone survey of Fifth District temporary
employment agencies indicated that the demand for temporary workers rose in February,
although it was unchanged from a year ago. One contact in Columbia, S.C. said that
increased business development boosted demand in that area. Temporary workers' wages
rose faster than the general price level during the past year. Most contacts expected wages
to stabilize but demand to rise during the next six months.
Finance: District financial institutions reported that lending activity increased during

V-3
January and February. Demand changed little for consumer loans but increased for
commercial and mortgage loans. A mortgage lender in North Carolina said that refinancings
boosted activity at his institution to its highest level in several years. Compared to
December, interest rates were lower on commercial and consumer loans, and higher on
mortgage loans.
Residential Real Estate: According to a telephone survey of District real estate
agents and homebuilders, residential real estate activity increased in January and February.
Housing starts, sales, and prices were up compared to December. Participants reported a
strong increase in customer traffic, which they attributed to recent declines in mortgage
interest rates. Building permit levels changed little throughout the District, except in West
Virginia where they decreased. Construction wages were steady and some materials prices
declined slightly.
Commercial Real Estate: Commercial real estate activity strengthened in January
and February. Leasing activity increased sharply and commercial rents rose in most areas of
the District. Office vacancy rates decreased, except in the District of Columbia and
Maryland where they were unchanged. The availability of prime office space continued to
tighten, and many contacts reported shortages. Respondents in Virginia and the Carolinas
said that some new construction was underway in their areas.
Agriculture: Adverse weather damaged some crops and farm buildings in recent
weeks, according to District agricultural analysts. Near-record January and early February
snowfalls and low temperatures stunted late-winter, small-grains crops in some areas. Heavy
snows also collapsed numerous farm buildings, and flooding caused scattered crop losses in
several District states. On the plus side, the cold temperatures benefited fruit growers in the
Carolinas by preventing fruit tree overbudding.

VI-1
SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Overview

Reports from contacts in the District suggest that the Southeast economy

grew moderately in January and February, despite the adverse effects of some locally harsh winter
weather.

Retail sales in January were damped throughout much of the District by weather

conditions which forced stores to close or cut hours; however, some retailers report a rebound in
February. Manufacturing performance edged up, halting a slowdown reported previously, but
near-term expectations became more restrained. Tourism and business travel continued to grow
vigorously throughout the District. Although bad weather slowed construction in many areas of
the District, single-family home sales picked up in January and February after slowing at the end
of last year. Commercial and multifamily markets continued to improve. Bankers characterized
overall loan demand as mixed. Most contacts reported that wages and prices remained steady.
Consumer Spending- District retailers report that January sales were weak around the
region; February sales results continued to be weak in the northern part of the District but
rebounded in the south. Merchants in the north, an area hit by harsh winter weather, reported
disappointing sales in February. Many stores operated on restricted hours or closed their doors
because of icy conditions early in the month. As a result, inventories are a little heavy. These
retailers noted that sales picked up at the end of February as the weather warmed up. Merchants
in warmer climates reported a year-over-year rise in sales in February--a rebound from January-and describe current inventories as on target. Retailers throughout the District are optimistic that
spring sales will exceed year-ago levels.
Manufacturing: Factory performance improved in late January and February after two
weak months,

with modest gains in shipments and production, according to most industry

spokespersons. The volume of new orders also picked up, and more employers added to their

VI-2
payrolls.

Most contacts said inventories declined moderately.

Expectations of future

improvements in manufacturing conditions generally declined, despite the recent pickup in
activity. Contacts generally expect production, new orders, employment, and the workweek to
wane over the next six months; however, they expect capital spending to continue to increase as
manufacturers seek to become more competitive in domestic and international markets.

A

regional producer of industrial machinery reports that strong foreign markets have increased his
firm's order backlogs. Electrical and electronic equipment producers across the District also
report increasing business. Regional chemical producers continue to operate at full capacity. By
contrast, suppliers to the auto industry describe conditions within the District as sluggish. Some
apparel producers report continued weakness in their industry, with the factory workweek and
volume of new orders remaining below year-ago levels.

Orders are declining for a paper

manufacturer, and packagers note slowing production and sales.
Tourism and Business Travel: The tourism, convention, and business travel industry
continues to lift the region's economy. Representatives for Atlanta's tourist industry say the area's
convention attendance is surging and is not expected to decline this year over last, even though
the Olympics will engage major facilities in a portion of the summer.

Officials for South

Florida's tourism industry report that hotel and motel bookings hit a peak in February with
Northerners escaping the miserable weather. The number of domestic, European, and Brazilian
tourists has increased significantly in Florida, but Mexican tourists have stayed away. Tourism
officials expect that hotel occupancies in New Orleans will be greater in 1996 than in 1995
because of a series of large meetings booked there and a continued strong flow of visitors to the
city's attractions.

VI-3
Construction: Most real estate contacts reported that single-family home sales
rebounded in January and February after slowing at the end of last year. Home sales in January
and February generally surpassed last year's disappointing levels. However, construction was
slow in many areas because of extreme cold. Inventories of new and existing homes continue to
run low in several markets. Most Realtors and builders expect a strong spring housing market.
Contacts from across the District report that commercial and multifamily real estate
markets continue to improve.

Low vacancy rates and higher rents continue to propel new

apartment and office development. While most commercial projects continue to be build-to-suit,
several speculative developments are underway and more are anticipated this year. The retail
market remains strong in most areas, but several contacts report an increase in vacancy rates after
some stores went out of business following the holiday season. Most real estate professionals
continue to anticipate that new commercial and multifamily construction will grow this year.
Financial Services: Contacts in the banking industry described overall loan demand as

mixed. As in previous reports, contacts in most areas report that commercial lending is stronger
than consumer lending. Mortgage refinancing continues to increase, but several contacts noted
that auto lending remains weak and credit card delinquencies are on the rise.
Wages and Prices: Wages generally remain stable in the region since the previous

Beigebook, even with scattered reports of labor shortages. Most contacts say that prices paid for
materials and finished goods have remained essentially unchanged. Fewer contacts than in our
previous survey anticipate that prices paid for materials or finished goods will increase over the
next few months.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary. Economic activity in the Seventh District remained at relatively high levels in January
and February, although growth remained slow and was uneven across sectors and sub-regions. Despite
adverse weather in February, retail sales improved somewhat from a soft January. Housing and
construction activity remained relatively strong in the District, buoyed by a pickup in first and second-time
home buyers. Manufacturing and banking activity, however, has become increasingly mixed since the
beginning of the year. Job creation in the District continued to outperform the nation as a whole in early
1996 and labor markets remained very tight, while increases in wages and prices remained subdued.
Retail sales. Retail sales were generally described as soft in February, but better than January.
Several large retail chains reported that February sales for their Midwest stores were slightly above the
company-wide average, with one retailer showing the region as its second strongest market. Sales of
durable goods and electronics are still leading other market segments, although one large retailer cited a
shift toward soft goods, particularly in women's apparel. A general manager at a Chicago area shopping
mall stated that their retailers were still experiencing double-digit growth in sales, but felt that their stores'
sales were better than the regional average. Weather conditions in February slowed sales in the region and,
in some cases, led to some stores being temporarily closed. A survey of small independent retailers in
Michigan showed that retail sales continued to be slow in January, but retailers' optimism for the spring
season remains high. A recent report also showed that supermarket sales in both the Chicago and Detroit
areas were growing faster than for the nation as a whole over the last two quarters. A consumer finance
company reported an increase in consumer bankruptcies, but consumers in the District appear to be in
better financial shape than those in other regions of the country. Several auto dealerships reported that
sales had been improving over the last several weeks, but a dealer noted that used car sales had softened.
Housing/Construction. Housing and construction activity remained relatively strong during
January and February despite severe winter weather. Realtors and bankers across the District reported that

VII-2
sales of existing homes in January were up considerably in year-over-year comparisons and that this trend
had carried over into February. Homebuilders also reported that sales of new dwellings were up markedly
from January last year, and a national survey showed both increased traffic and sales in the Midwest region
for February. Several contacts attribute the continued high demand for housing to strength in the labor
markets and low mortgage interest rates. Sales have been strong in lower and medium-priced homes, led
by first and second-time buyers; sales at the upper end have been slow for several months. Several
contacts reported that industrial real estate demand was quite strong in early 1996 and prospects for
construction opportunities were increasing. Capacity utilization at factories that supply materials to the
construction industry remained at historically high levels in January and February, but growth appears to
be flat. One cement producer in the District reported that the industry continues to add capacity in
expectation of increased public construction and steady demand from residential construction. Despite
continued high demand, sources reported that prices remain in check at both the producer and consumer
levels.
Manufacturing Activity. Manufacturing activity in the District was mixed in February.
Purchasing managers' surveys from around the District varied, with the Chicago area showing contractions
among the its key components (including prices) and Milwaukee continuing to show fairly solid
expansion. A diversified producer of equipment and basic materials reported that machinery orders and
backlogs in January generally were up from a year ago, but food machinery orders have been weak and
signs of weakness are emerging in chemical markets, Several auto suppliers reported that sales were down
in January and February, but one supplier attributed part of the weakness to its strong sales in December
and noted that it was expanding capacity to support expected orders over the rest of the year. After a sharp
decline in December, an appliance industry analyst noted that sales in January were flat year-over-year,
with small appliances accounting for much of the recent slowing. A heavy construction equipment
producer indicated that sales through February were about in line with an expected slowdown that has been
underway since mid-1995. Several steel producers, however, reported orders for both sheet and structural

VII-3
steels to be quite strong, with one mill receiving orders at a rate 10% above its capacity through the second
quarter.
Banking. Banks generally reported that the level of lending was quite strong, but the patterns of
growth varied by location and market segment. A large bank in the Chicago area reported that loan
demand was still increasing across most market segments. Several Michigan banks described lending
activity as strong, but C&I lending (especially to auto suppliers) was off from peak levels last year. Also,
global and large corporate markets were strong, while middle markets have slowed since January.
However, a western Illinois bank reported strong growth in total loan demand, with its commercial and
consumer loan volume up significantly. Most banks indicated that mortgage lending was increasing,
although as much as one-half or more of the activity was in refinancing. Several banks cited lending to
retailers as their only weak market, with several small retailers in the process of going out of business.
Labor markets. Labor markets remained tight through January and February, although job
growth appears to be less robust than the same period last year. Labor market analysts in most of the
District's metropolitan areas detect little change in employment numbers from late 1995 outside of normal
seasonal variations, although a downturn was evident in average weekly hours worked in those areas
dependent on durable manufacturing industries. Help-wanted advertising ticked up in January, although it
remained below last year's high levels. A national survey of hiring plans suggested that employers in the
Midwest region were the most optimistic in the nation for job growth heading into the second quarter of
1996, with gains anticipated in the nondurable manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and service
industries. Durable manufacturers were less optimistic about job growth in this survey. Temporary help
agencies reported that labor shortages continued to be their major concern. Most sources reported that
upward wage pressure was modest.

VIII-1
EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary
District economic activity continues to expand at a slow and steady pace. While a few contacts
noted some softening in the economy at the beginning of the year, they expect a slight pickup as the
second quarter approaches. Reports indicate that the southern part of the District is growing somewhat
faster than the northern part. Monthly residential and nonresidential building permit levels declined in
most District metropolitan areas in December. Loan demand, especially for commercial loans, is still
strong in most parts of the District. Significant crop and livestock damage occurred because of
February's arctic cold snap.
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity
District firms report that economic growth has proceeded at a slower pace than that of the past
few months. Firms in the southern part of the District report slightly stronger activity than their northern
counterparts.

Some contacts expect the pace to pick up somewhat as the second quarter of the year

approaches. For example, a survey of small businesses in the District found that about one-quarter plan
to hire additional workers over the next three months, with about three-quarters planning no changes.
This survey also found that about one-quarter of the respondents increased employee compensation
during the past three months, while one-fifth plan to increase it over the next three months. Contacts
report, however, that there has been little upward pressure on costs so far this year, and that competition
is not allowing firms to raise consumer prices.
Contacts in northern Mississippi generally report that sales for the past month or two are at levels
comparable with a year ago, but signs of new growth have appeared. A producer of prefabricated metal
buildings and several furniture manufacturers report unchanged sales in January, but have seen slight
increases in February. Expectations are for less than 5 percent growth in the coming months. A brick

VIII-2
manufacturer reports record sales for 1995, noting that this pace has continued into 1996. Demand for
mobile homes has been particularly strong in Mississippi, requiring several local manufacturers to add
employees. Firms targeting specialty markets, like gourmet stoves and home decorating, report that
sales are remaining steady at high levels.
In Arkansas, a cement supplier recently had to purchase 15 new delivery trucks to meet its high
demand. A maker of glass containers reports that sales since the beginning of the year are up about 12
percent over the same period last year. A company producing military and civilian boots will take over
a recently closed shoe factory in western Tennessee and hire about 150 of the previously laid-off
workers. A producer of truck transmissions and a maker of outdoor leisure products, however, have
seen year-to-date sales fall 2 to 5 percent from last year.
In Missouri and Kentucky, reports are more mixed. A large defense contractor in the St. Louis
area announced layoffs for about 470 workers because of lulls in production for some products. At the
same time, this company received a new fighter jet contract worth almost $600 million, which will secure
other jobs for the time being. An auto producer has reopened its Missouri plant as scheduled, employing
about 2,400 people. A printing company in southern Illinois, trying to reorganize through bankruptcy,
closed in late February, eliminating 850 jobs. Another high-sulfur coal mine in Illinois is closing, leaving
behind 200 jobs. A major department store retailer, however, moved its credit department from
Maryland to St. Louis and created 350 new jobs.
Real Estate and Construction
Residential building permits in December 1995 were above their year-ago levels in five of the
District's 12 metropolitan areas. Only two metro areas, though-Fayetteville, Arkansas, and Memphis,
Tennessee-experienced an increase in the number of residential permits between November and
December. Most other District metro areas saw sharp declines in activity in December, including some
of the areas that had levels above those of one year ago. Nonresidential building permits in December

VIII-3

were above their year-ago levels in only three of the District's metropolitan areas. Pine Bluff, Arkansas,
was the only District metro area to experience an increase in permits between November and December.
The level of nonresidential permits in all other areas fell off sharply in December.
Banking and Finance
Loan demand continues to be characterized as strong by most respondents, although signs of
softening are scattered throughout the District. Commercial and industrial (C & I) loans appear to be the
strongest segment of the loan market; respondents are divided, however, about the riskiness of new C & I
loans. Pricing is still described as aggressive in a number of District markets, but respondents in other
markets report a lessening of competition. A few respondents report a recent surge in refinancing in their
areas.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
February's cold snap adversely affected the District's agricultural sector. Reports from crop
analysts suggest that the wheat crop in Illinois, Indiana and Missouri, which was already hurting from
inadequate soil moisture, suffered additional freeze damage. Although the true extent of the damage is
yet unknown, one report indicates that a five-county area in southern Illinois was especially hard hit.
Some farmers will be forced to plow their wheat fields under this spring and plant corn, soybeans or milo.
The cold weather also hurt livestock producers. For example, Mississippi catfish farmers
reportedly suffered substantial losses because of ponds freezing over. On the positive side, cotton analysts
said the cold weather destroyed a significant percentage of the boll weevil population. An increasing
number of farmers indicate that the uncertainty surrounding the 1996 Farm Bill legislation has delayed
final plantings. As a result, many farm lenders are reportedly proceeding at a cautious pace. Delta farmers
are expected to reduce planted cotton acreage by about 10 percent this spring. In response to high grain
prices, most of this acreage will be planted to corn or soybeans instead.

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS
Overall, economic activity in the Ninth District economy remains moderate, but there is
widespread feeling among businesspeople that the pace of growth is slowing. On one side of
the coin, construction continues strong and builders expect another active season. Rising grain
prices have generally increased optimism in the agricultural sector, in spite of the squeeze that
such prices put on ranchers and on farmers who raise livestock as well as grain. Tourist
businesses in eastern areas of the district report good activity, but Montana and the Dakotas
have had a disappointing season. Metal mining output remains strong, but some profit margins
are eroding as prices for nonferrous and precious metals soften. Labor markets remain tight
and unemployment rates low, but there are few reports of wage or price pressures.
On the other side of the coin, manufacturers continue to report slackening orders. Retailers
are experiencing sluggish sales of a wide range of durable and nondurable goods. With the
exception of a few areas, auto dealers describe sales as slow. There are increasing reports of
paper mills cutting production. Agricultural bankers in towns where cattle ranching
predominates express alarm about the degree of price declines for feeder cattle and expect that
some ranchers will choose or be forced to liquidate their operations.
Construction
"It's just like the Energizer bunny, it just keeps going and going," is how one South Dakota
builder's spokesman describes residential and commercial building in his area. That
characterization is valid for nearly all of the Minneapolis district as construction approaches a
fourth consecutive strong season. Residential building demand, which had slackened
somewhat in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area in mid-1995, appears to be regaining strength,
reportedly in response to lower mortgage interest rates. Sioux Falls, S. D., and Missoula,
Mont., anticipate a booming construction season in 1996. Fargo and Grand Forks, N.D., also
expect a high level of residential building, although perhaps somewhat down from the fevered
pace of 1994 and 1995. Dickinson, in western North Dakota, has near-zero available housing
as a result of oilfield activity and expects its strongest construction season in years. "Motel
construction booms" is the headline in a Rapid City, S. D., newspaper, and Montana sources
report that "big box" store building continues despite slow retail sales. Large, publicly let
contracts apparently are about level with last year.
Natural resource industries
Ninth District iron mines shipped 47 million metric tons in 1995, the highest level in over a
decade, and expect a strong year in 1996. Increasing amounts of taconite pellets are being
shipped by rail, reducing the usual winter slowing. Nonferrous mine output is stable in spite of

IX-2

copper prices some 15 percent below year-ago levels and recent slight drops in gold prices. Oil
and gas exploration remains active through the winter. Paper mills are slowing output and
discounting output prices. Little change is reported in lumber and building board production.

Agriculture
Record corn prices and much higher wheat prices have brought greater optimism to crop
farmers, according to a mid-February survey of agricultural bankers. The mood in grain
producing areas is reportedly the most optimistic in more than a decade. Seed corn sales are
hitting records, and orders for other inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides are strong. There
is some increase in demand for tractors and implements, and good used equipment is reportedly
selling well. Uncertainty about federal farm legislation continues, but several sources note that
most farmers expect passage of some version of the "Freedom to Farm Act" and no annual
acreage set asides or planting restrictions in the next few years.
However, this optimism on the crop side is at least partially offset by depressed livestock
prices. The problems of livestock producers have been exacerbated by rising grain prices; the
hog-to-corn and cattle-to-corn price ratios are at their most unfavorable levels in decades.
Cow-calf producers are the end of the whip that is being cracked, as higher feed costs drive
down prices for feeder cattle. Western South Dakota and ranching areas of Montana are
particularly hard hit. Bankers and ranchers in these areas expect the level of voluntary and
forced liquidations to rise dramatically in 1996.
As the winter ends, winter wheat conditions in Montana and South Dakota are generally
good, and soil moisture levels in most areas are excellent. A few areas in the eastern Dakotas
continue to suffer from excess moisture and localized flooding.
Manufacturing
"Orders have been lagging in the first six weeks of 1996, and we expect to turn out less
product this year than last," says the owner of a North Dakota manufacturing firm. His
sentiments are echoed by the CEO of a Minnesota manufacturer of industrial painting and
lubrication equipment. "Business is soft and getting softer," he says. Other sources report that
business is still good for medical equipment and computer component manufacturers, but
orders are slowing. These reports and other indicators, such as industrial electricity use,
generally point to significant slowing in manufacturing. One exception seems to be the
printing industry.

IX-3

Consumer spending
"People seem to have a wait-and-see attitude," a Montana retailer reported in mid-February.
Her view is corroborated by lackluster sales reports from large retail chains. "Traffic is OK but
not great," says a South Dakota mall manager. A Minnesota department store manager notes
that small items are selling normally but that buyers seem reluctant to move on washers,
refrigerators and other big ticket items.
Automobile sales are similarly slack in most areas. A western Montana dealer reports that
1995 sales were down 12 percent from 1994 and that "our outlook for 1996 is very cautious."
Some areas report better sales; oil and wheat producing areas of North Dakota and Montana
seem to have stronger-than-average vehicle sales. A Minneapolis-St. Paul dealer, however,
describes business as "so-so." On balance, consumer buying seems to be quite slow.
Tourism
Many ski resorts in northwest Montana are having a slow season due to an unfavorable
Canadian exchange rate and poor snow conditions, according to a resort executive. The
government shutdown hampered visitations to national parks and monuments in South Dakota.
A ski resort in northern Minnesota reports level sales compared to last year and looks forward
to a strong March. Good snow conditions in northern Wisconsin have boosted snowmobiling
and cross-country skiing for January and February compared to a year earlier.
Employment, wages and prices
"The shortage of labor has driven up wages a bit," comments a building union official from
western Wisconsin. "Our area has been phenomenal in the last two years and there is a
shortage of qualified labor." A North Dakota business owner reports "the labor shortage is an
ongoing battle." Unemployment rates remain well below national averages. Opinion is
divided on which types of labor are scarcest. There are many reports of difficulty in filling
entry level positions, and "Help wanted" signs remain ubiquitous, but one manufacturer says,
"White collar help is harder to get than assembly line." Reported wage increases continue in
the 2 percent to 4 percent range.
Many Ninth District commodities, including copper, paper, lumber and livestock, have
decreased in price. Grains are the strong exception. Because slaughter livestock prices
continue low, there is little evidence that sharp increases in grain prices have had effects at the
consumer level. But some voices of concern are heard. "I just can't believe the press isn't
following these grain prices," says a commodity analyst for a major Minnesota food
manufacturer. "We potentially face a supply situation much worse than 1973-74."

X-1
TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Overview. The Tenth District economy continued to grow at a moderate pace during the
past month. Retail sales increased modestly and homebuilding activity strengthened.
Manufacturing activity slowed slightly. Energy activity remained sluggish, while weak profits in
the cattle industry held down farm income. Labor markets remained tight in much of the district,
but wages generally held steady and retail prices rose only slightly.
Retail Sales. Retailers report sales increased modestly over the past month and remained
above last year's level. Some retailers report sales of apparel were strong, while sales of home
furnishings were weak. Retailers generally expect sales to strengthen during the next few
months. Most retailers indicate satisfaction with their inventory levels and expect to hold
inventories steady in the months ahead. Automobile dealers report sales increased slightly last
month from the sluggish pace the month before, and most dealers are optimistic that sales will
strengthen further this spring.
Manufacturing. District manufacturers continued to operate at high levels of capacity
last month, although there were some signs of slowing in manufacturing activity. No production
bottlenecks due to capacity constraints were reported. Manufacturing materials were readily
available, and most manufacturers noticed a decline in lead times required to obtain materials. A
January survey of district manufacturers indicated most manufacturers were trimming materials
inventories and were planning further inventory reductions in the months ahead.
Housing. Builders generally report housing starts increased last month and remained
above last year's level. Construction of single-family homes improved, while multifamily

X-2
construction remained steady. Builders expect housing starts to strengthen further with warmer
spring weather. Sales of new homes increased slightly last month and remained above last
year's pace. Builders report the inventory of unsold homes was generally lean and new home
prices continued to rise, especially for low-priced homes, which have been in shortest supply.
Building materials are readily available, and builders anticipate little change in the availability or
prices of materials in the next few months, despite a recent rise in lumber and concrete prices.
Most mortgage lenders expect mortgage demand to strengthen further in the months ahead.
Banking. Banks generally report loan demand was unchanged last month, holding loandeposit ratios steady. Some banks report gains in consumer loans and home mortgage loans.
Commercial and industrial loans, home equity loans, residential construction loans, and
commercial real estate loans all held steady, while agricultural loans declined slightly. Security
investments held steady.
Most bankers report gains in total deposits, supported by increases in MMDAs and small
time and savings deposits. Demand deposits, NOW accounts, large CDs, and IRA and Keogh
accounts held steady.
All respondent banks reduced their prime rate last month, and most expect a further cut in
the near future. Most banks also reduced their consumer lending rates, with half of the banks
anticipating further reductions. Lending standards were generally unchanged.
Energy. Activity in the district energy industry slowed further last month. Demand for
heating fuel boosted natural gas prices, but crude oil prices remained weak. As a result, the
number of drilling rigs operating in the district declined slightly and remained well below last
year's level.

X-3
Agriculture. Dry, cold weather is eroding yield prospects for the district's winter wheat
crop. Much of the crop is in poor condition in the district's primary wheat producing region in
central Kansas and central Oklahoma, where the moisture shortage is most severe. The crop is
generally in fair condition in other parts of the district, although timely spring rains will be
required to ensure normal yields. With uncertain prospects for this year's harvest and tight
global inventories, crop prices have risen to the highest level in years.
High feed costs and low cattle prices continue to hold down profits in the district cattle
industry. Most district feedlots continue to earn modest profits, due to low prices for young
feeder cattle. Low feeder cattle prices, however, have resulted in losses for district ranchers,
who have begun to trim the size of their breeding herds. Agricultural bankers expect continued
weak profits in the cattle industry to limit improvement in overall farm income in 1996, even
though higher crop prices may boost profits for crop producers.
Wages and Prices. Upward pressure on wages and prices in the district remains
subdued. Parts of the district continue to report tight labor markets, especially for entry-level
workers, but reports of rising wages are few and widely scattered. Manufacturers report
declining prices for some raw materials, such as steel and aluminum, and rising prices for other
materials, such as rubber and some chemicals. Retailers report only slight price increases and
most expect prices to remain stable in the months ahead.

XI-1
ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Eleventh District economic activity continued to expand at a moderate pace in January and
February, although weaker demand led to falling prices or inventory build up in several industries.
Most contacts do not expect to change employment growth, and several major expansion plans remain
in place. Manufacturing orders continued to weaken, but production remained at moderate levels.
Demand for business services expanded. Retail sales were sluggish in January but picked up in
February. Lending activity was unchanged, with the exception of an increase in residential real estate.
Construction activity continued to expand, but some apartment and retail projects were scaled back
because of concerns about overbuilding. Energy activity was at a high level. Agricultural conditions
worsened.
Contacts reported falling prices for several products, although energy prices were higher and
there was continued upward pressure on wages for skilled workers in some industries. In February,
paper and box prices fell about 8 percent from the previous month, and contacts expect prices to fall
another 5 to 10 percent over the next 3 to 6 months. Semiconductor prices had dropped
"precipitously" since the last beige book, and stiff competition forced computer manufacturers to pass
lower input costs to their customers. Petrochemical prices were pushed to low levels as slower
demand, particularly for olefins, led producers to dump products on the spot market. Contacts expect
any significant economic upturn to push chemical prices back up, however. Lower livestock prices
outweighed a slight increase in crop prices, leading to a 1.0 percent drop in the January Texas All
Farm Products Price Index from the previous month. Retailers reported little change in selling prices.
Input costs were higher for apparel products, but selling prices were unchanged. Weather extremes,
and changing expectations about Iraqi oil re-entering the market, kept crude oil and heating fuel

XI-2
prices swinging. Prices for most energy products, particularly natural gas and fuel oil, were high and
volatile during the past two months.
Manufacturing orders continued to weaken, but production remained at moderate levels.
Demand had slowed for paper, boxes, apparel, primary metals, petrochemicals and semiconductors.
Inventories were up for paper, apparel, primary metals and some types of semiconductors. Producers
reported a slight increase in demand for computers and specialized semiconductors, but demand for
memory computer chips and microprocessors dropped off significantly in the last 6 weeks. Overall,
semiconductor sales were weaker than expected, and contacts expect demand to increase at a slower
pace than in 1995. Petrochemical markets continued to soften. Chemical producers said there had
been no significant inventory build up and sales were still profitable, which is unusual when demand
is weak. Cold weather boosted demand for refined products, although rising crude prices kept profits
mediocre. Low inventories of crude forced refiners to purchase crude on the spot market to raise
output and take advantage of high product prices. Producers reported a slight pickup in demand for
oil field machinery and lumber, and demand remained steady and strong for cement and fabricated
metals.
Demand for business services continued to expand at a good pace. Accounting firms said
demand was strong. Activity at temporary firms picked up in February after a seasonal slow down in
January. Transportation firms reported steady cargo volume and a slight increase in passenger traffic.
Retail sales were sluggish in January but picked up in February. Retailers were cautious
about drawing conclusions from stronger sales in February, what a contact referred to as "one short
month." District sales were reported to be about even with the rest of the country after several months
of reports that sales were slower than the nation. The change may have been a result of an
improvement in sales comparisons along the Texas-Mexico border, rather than any relative change in
consumer spending. Dealers reported that auto sales were sluggish in January and February, leaving

XI-3
them with larger than desired inventories.
The financial services industry reported no change in lending activity, with the exception of
an increase in residential real estate. Contacts said that the increase was spurred by lower interest
rates and was mostly due to refinancings. Residential loan demand continued to decline in Laredo,
however, where economic activity has been sluggish since the peso devaluation. District lenders are
cautiously optimistic about the outlook for loan demand over the next 3 to 12 months and expect all
types of lending to increase. Contacts reported that there is a lot of discussion about further mergers
and acquisitions among financial services companies.
Construction activity expanded, but some apartment and retail projects were scaled back
because of concerns about overbuilding. Lower mortgage rates boosted sales of new and existing
homes. Demand for commercial space remained high, and industrial demand was very strong. While
the construction of office space is sparse, some contacts said rising office occupancies in the suburbs
may spur new construction in 1996.
Energy activity remained at a high level since the last beige book. Demand for oil services
and equipment continued to strengthen, thanks to offshore drilling in the Gulf of Mexico and around
the world. Oil services contacts reported that strong demand had boosted profits well above
expectations. Higher capital budgets for exploration from integrated companies are expected to lead to
another good year in 1996. The domestic U.S. and Texas rig count continued to be low, however,
operating at levels comparable to this time last year.
Agricultural conditions worsened in January and February. Continued drought led to more
than 350 fires which destroyed more than 20,000 acres of pasture land. Hay shortages still were
reported in many areas. Supplemental feeding of livestock continued and rising feed prices were
cutting into profits. As planting gets underway, some farmers expressed concern about having
adequate water to produce a good quality yield.

XII

-

1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary
Reports from contacts in the 12th District in early 1996 suggest generally solid
economic activity, albeit with some sources of slack reported. Despite respondents' concerns
regarding moderation in the national economy, most expect stability or improvement in their
respective regional economies. In the recent period, District manufacturing activity has been
particularly strong in the industrial machinery and high-tech sectors, although international
competition had a moderating influence on the former. Activity in high-tech services, such
as computer software, also exhibits ongoing strength. However, retail sales markets are
weak. Despite reported capacity constraints and wage increases in some sectors, upward
pressure on wages and prices is limited overall.

Business Sentiment
District respondents, while continuing to expect some slowing in the national
economy, are looking for improved conditions in their respective regional economies.
Among respondents, about half expect that national unemployment will increase and national
economic growth will be below its long-run average, while most of the others expect average
growth and no change in unemployment. In contrast, an overwhelming majority of
respondents expect more rapid growth in their region than in the U.S. as a whole.
Consistent with this, 80-95 percent of respondents expect improved or constant business
investment, housing starts, consumer spending, and trade balances in their respective regions.

XII

- 2

Retail Trade and Services
Weakness in retail sales apparently continued after the holiday season. Respondents
in several areas noted that consumer demand is insufficient to sustain existing retail
establishments. Sales of soft consumer goods--particularly apparel--continue to be low.
In contrast, service industries--particularly those that are technology-intensive--are
expanding rapidly. District sales of computer software and financial consulting services to
Europe and Japan reportedly are increasing. A major California supplier of
telecommunications services reports increased demand and sales in late 1995, particularly to
businesses. Also in California, recent state mandates have lowered electricity prices by 6
percent for all customer classes.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity is moderate to strong in the District. Industrial and
construction machinery sales remain high in Utah and Nevada, with many firms facing
capacity constraints; a sharp jump in order backlogs was reported. Despite this strong
domestic demand, prices are being held down by foreign competition, and export markets for
machinery reportedly are weak. However, continued expansion of semiconductor
manufacturing plants is underway in Oregon, with similar expansion of high-tech
manufacturing underway or planned in Washington state. In general, District exports of
high- tech components to the Pacific Basin countries (and to a lesser extent Europe) are
rising. Also, strong commercial airline demand--particularly for exports--is boosting
production by District airline manufacturers and their suppliers.

XII

- 3

In contrast, a District metal products company reports reduced export demand and
lower levels of investment spending in its industry. Some District manufacturers--in
sporting goods, for example--reportedly are moving production offshore. Also, demand and
prices for most Pacific Northwest forest products continue to hover at low levels.

Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Agricultural activity in the District is mixed. Apple exports from Washington have
been weak, but strong grain demand (particularly for wheat) has pushed prices to new highs
throughout the District. District beef production reportedly is being propped up largely by
high levels of exports to Canada and Asia. In contrast, with the exception of cotton growers,
Central California farmers report strong sales and low inventories. However, the Alaskan
salmon industry is suffering due to a worldwide glut, and recent heavy flooding in the Pacific
Northwest caused uncertain but perhaps substantial inventory losses on some crops.

Real Estate and Construction
Reports suggest stable to moderately improving conditions in the District real estate
and construction sectors. In Southern California, commercial vacancy rates are declining
slowly from high levels, but rental rates have not increased sufficiently to spark substantial
new commercial construction. In the San Francisco Bay Area, current commercial vacancy
rates are low and recent sale prices for existing homes have exhibited modest increases. In
Arizona, home building reportedly has peaked, but apartment construction continues
unabated. Rebuilding following the recent severe flooding in Washington and Oregon is

XII

- 4

expected to increase construction activity in affected regions in the near future. This will
place additional pressure on the very tight Oregon construction industry; wages reportedly
increased 13 percent in this sector during the year ending in January, primarily due to
extensive nonresidential construction activity.

Financial Institutions
District bank respondents generally report strong earnings and good credit quality,
despite stiff competition for loans and deposits. Slight easing of business loan demand is
reported in California, but the level is still high, and consumer credit demand is increasing in
the state. Furthermore, California thrifts reportedly are benefitting from improved residential
housing markets.

