For use at 2:00 PM EDT
Wednesday
June 2, 2021

The Beige Book
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions
By Federal Reserve District

May 2021

Federal Reserve Districts

Boston

Minneapolis

New York
Chicago

Cleveland

Philadelphia

San Francisco
Kansas City

St. Louis

Richmond

Atlanta
Dallas

Alaska and Hawaii
are part of the
San Francisco District.

The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serve s the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands; the San Francisco Bank serve s
American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.

This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland based on information collected on
or before May 25, 2021. This document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.

National Summary
Boston

1
A-1

First District

New York

B-1

Second District

Philadelphia

C-1

Third District

Cleveland

D-1

Fourth District

Richmond

E-1

Fifth District

Atlanta

F-1

Sixth District

Chicago

G-1

Seventh District

St. Louis

H-1

Eighth District

Minneapolis

I-1

Ninth District

Kansas City

J-1

Tenth District

Dallas

K-1

Eleventh District

San Francisco
Twelfth District

L-1

What is the Beige Book?

The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It characterizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly f rom each District’s
sources. Reports are published eight times per year.

What is the purpose of the Beige Book?

The Beige Book is intended to characterize the change in economic
conditions since the last report. Outreach for the Beige Book is one of
many ways the Federal Reserve System engages with businesses and
other organizations about economic developments in their communities. Because this information is collected f rom a wide range of contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, the Beige Book
can complement other forms of regional information gathering. The
Beige Book is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve
officials.

How is the information collected?

Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers information on current economic
conditions in its District through reports from Bank and Branch directors, plus interviews and online questionnaires completed by businesses, community organizations, economists, market experts, and other
sources. Contacts are not selected at random; rather, Banks strive to
curate a diverse set of sources that can provide accurate and objective
information about a broad range of economic activities. The Beige
Book serves as a regular summary of this information for the public.

How is the information used?

The information f rom contacts supplements the data and analysis used
by Federal Reserve economists and staff to assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. The qualitative nature of the
Beige Book creates an opportunity to characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy that may not be readily apparent in
the available economic data. This information enables comparison of
economic conditions in different parts of the country, which can be
helpful for assessing the outlook for the national economy.

The Beige Book does not have the type of information I’m looking
for. What other information is available?

The Federal Reserve System conducts a wide array of recurring surveys of businesses, households, and community organizations. A list of
statistical releases compiled by the Federal Reserve Board is available
here, links to each of the Federal Reserve Banks are available here,
and a summary of the System’s community outreach is available here.
In addition, Fed Listens events have been held around the country to
hear about how monetary policy affects peoples’ daily lives and livelihoods. The System also relies on a variety of advisory councils—
whose members are drawn f rom a wide array of businesses, non-profit
organizations, and community groups—to hear diverse perspectives on
the economy in carrying out its responsibilities.

National Summary
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Overall Economic Activity
The national economy expanded at a moderate pace from early April to late May, a somewhat faster rate than the prior reporting period. Several Districts cited the positive effects on the economy of increased vaccination rates and relaxed social
distancing measures, while they also noted the adverse impacts of supply chain disruptions. The effects of expanded vaccination rates were perhaps most notable in consumer spending in which increases in leisure travel and restaurant spending
augmented ongoing strength in other spending categories. Light vehicle sales remained solid but were often constrained by
tight inventories. Factory output increased further even as significant supply chain challenges continued to disrupt production.
Manufacturers reported that widespread shortages of materials and labor along with delivery delays made it difficult to get
products to customers. Similar challenges persisted in construction. Homebuilders often noted that strong demand, buoyed
by low mortgage interest rates, outpaced their capacity to build, leading some to limit sales. Nonresidential construction increased at a moderate pace, on balance, even as contacts in several Districts said that supply chain disruptions pushed costs
higher and, in some cases, delayed projects. Demand for professional and business services increased moderately, while
demand for transportation services (including at ports) was exceptionally strong. Lending volumes increased modestly, with
gains in both household and business loans. Overall, expectations changed little, with contacts optimistic that economic
growth will remain solid.

Employment and Wages

Staffing levels increased at a relatively steady pace, with two-thirds of Districts reporting modest employment growth over the
reporting period and the remainder indicating employment gains were moderate. As the spread of COVID-19 continued to
slow, employment growth was strongest in food services, hospitality, and retail. Manufacturers also added workers in several
Districts. It remained difficult for many firms to hire new workers, especially low-wage hourly workers, truck drivers, and
skilled tradespeople. The lack of job candidates prevented some firms from increasing output and, less commonly, led some
businesses to reduce their hours of operation. Overall, wage growth was moderate, and a growing number of firms offered
signing bonuses and increased starting wages to attract and retain workers. Contacts expected that labor demand will remain
strong, but supply constrained, in the months ahead.

Prices
On balance, overall price pressures increased further since the last report. Selling prices increased moderately, while input
costs rose more briskly. Input costs have continued to increase across the board, with many contacts noting sharp increases
in construction and manufacturing raw materials prices. Increases were also noted in freight, packaging, and petrochemicals
prices. Contacts reported that continuing supply chain disruptions intensified cost pressures. Strengthening demand, however, allowed some businesses, particularly manufacturers, builders, and transportation companies, to pass through much of
the cost increases to their customers. Looking forward, contacts anticipate facing cost increases and charging higher prices in
coming months.

Highlights by Federal Reserve District
New York

Boston

The regional economy continued to grow at a strong pace,
with growth broad-based across industries. Hiring picked up
and wages continued to grow moderately, with availability of
workers cited as a top concern. Consumer spending and
tourism picked up noticeably. Input price pressures have
intensified further, and more businesses are raising their
selling prices.

Business activity in the First District expanded at a moderate pace. Restaurant sales were up sharply, and restaurant
openings buoyed retail property leasing. Labor demand
strengthened but hiring was held back by labor shortages.
Recruiting efforts intensified, with varying degrees of wage
increases. Prices held mostly steady despite growing cost
pressures.

1

National Summary
Philadelphia

Minneapolis

Business activity continued at a moderate pace of growth
during the current Beige Book period – still below levels
attained prior to the pandemic. Supply constraints continued to limit growth but may also be contributing to overstated perceptions of strong demand for labor and parts. Employment continued to grow modestly as did wage growth,
while prices grew moderately.

The District economy saw robust demand, tempered by
inventory shortages and rising prices. Job openings increased, but wage growth was not well aligned with firms ’
broader concerns over labor availability, and workforce
contacts cited low wages as a barrier to job seekers taking
available jobs. Manufacturing and construction activity
continued to grow despite strong input cost pressures.
Agricultural incomes grew sharply.

Cleveland

Kansas City

The pace of business activity quickened, and contacts
expect that demand will remain strong in the near term.
However, supply chain bottlenecks constrained growth and
caused materials costs to escalate. Price hikes became
more widespread as firms attempted to keep up with rising
costs. Hiring activity was reportedly modest because of a
dearth of job applicants. A greater share of firms boosted
wages, especially for hourly workers.

Economic activity rose moderately since the last survey.
Consumer spending increased moderately, and sales were
above pre-pandemic levels for the majority of retail, restaurant, and auto contacts. Most other sectors expanded as
well, including commercial real estate, which increased for
the first time since the pandemic started. However, about
two-thirds of firms reported a negative impact from rising
material prices and lack of availability.

Richmond

The regional economy expanded moderately in recent
weeks. Manufacturers and service providers reported increased activity but also faced higher labor and input costs
as well as shortages of materials. Employment rose moderately but was constrained by challenges filling open positions. Prices rose briskly in recent weeks as some increased costs of business were passed along to customers.

Dallas

Atlanta

San Francisco

The District economy expanded at a solid rate, bolstered by
continued strong growth in housing, manufacturing, and
nonfinancial services. Drilling activity rose further. Price
pressures intensified. Reports of labor shortages were more
widespread across sectors and skill levels than the last
report. Outlooks stayed positive.

Economic activity e xpanded at a moderate pace. Labor
markets improved and wage pressures picked up for some
positions. Some nonlabor costs remained elevated. Retail
sales increased. Leisure, hospitality, and tourism activity
strengthened. Residential real estate demand remained
strong. Commercial real estate conditions were mixed.
Manufacturing activity improved. Banking conditions were
steady.

Economic activity in the District expanded significantly, and
labor market conditions continued to improve modestly.
Wages and inflation picked up further. Retail sales increased, and activity in the services sector strengthened
moderately. Conditions in the manufacturing and agriculture
sectors continued to improve. Residential construction
remained strong, while lending activity grew somewhat.

Chicago
Economic activity increased moderately. Employment,
consumer spending, business spending, and manufacturing
production all increased moderately, while construction and
real estate was flat. Wages and prices rose moderately and
financial conditions improved slightly. Prospects for agriculture income in 2021 improved.

St. Louis
Contacts reported that economic conditions have moderately improved since our previous report. Many contacts described a situation in which growth in demand for their
products or services is outpacing their growth in capacity.

2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Boston
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Business activity in the First District expanded at a moderate pace on average, with notable variation across sectors.
Restaurant sales were up sharply in recent months, surpassing their comparable 2019 levels. Automobile and home
furnishings sales were flat but at very high levels, and a discount retailer saw moderate sales increases. Most manufacturers reported moderate to strong revenue increases, while two had flat but robust sales. Commercial real estate markets were mostly stable but retail leasing increased notably. Residential real estate sales rose moderately as recent
data point to increased listings. Labor demand strengthened, but hiring was held back by widespread labor shortages.
Amidst intensified recruiting efforts, wage increases varied across sectors. Prices held mostly steady despite growing
cost pressures at some businesses, although restaurant prices rose sharply. Contacts generally maintained a cautiously
optimistic outlook.
labor and food costs, and a furniture retailer faced increased wholesale pricing pressure but did not report
any price increases. Staffing bill rates were either flat or
up slightly.

Employment and Wages
Labor demand strengthened but many firms reported
difficulties in hiring and retention. Staffing firms reported
high demand for labor across a range of sectors. Retail
headcounts were level despite accelerating labor demand, as firms—especially restaurants—faced pronounced labor shortages. Manufacturers described
ambitious hiring goals: one planned to hire 10,000 workers and another had open positions equal to more than
10 percent of total staff. While the former firm did not
anticipate market constraints on labor supply, other
manufacturers reported unusual difficulties finding workers. In this context of higher labor demand, wage increases were slight to moderate among manufacturers,
wages for restaurant workers also went up, and selected
hourly workers enjoyed wage increases of up to 30
percent. Signing bonuses and enhanced recruiting efforts were mentioned with increased frequency. Among
the barriers to labor supply, firms cited generous unemployment benefits, childcare responsibilities, and safety
concerns.

Retail and Tourism
According to contacts, since March retail sales were
stable or moderately higher and restaurant sales surged,
while through March hotel occupancy rates showed little
improvement from winter. New and used automobile
sales were roughly steady at a very strong pace, straining inventories. The scarcity of processing chips continued to restrain production at some carmakers, threatening an otherwise strong market for 2021. A salvaged
goods chain reported moderately increased sales in
recent months, with revenues up 6 percent from the
same period in 2019. Online sales of home furnishings
remained robust and sales of outdoor furniture increased
earlier in the season than expected. A contact perceives
that the market for outdoor furniture expanded in the
pandemic and will stay strong.
Restaurants across Massachusetts experienced a dramatic uptick in sales in April and May, with recent revenues exceeding those in the same period of 2019. April
also brought the reopening of the majority of the roughly
500-700 restaurants in the state that temporarily closed
over the winter. The return of widespread outdoor dining
fueled the initial surge in sales, but more recently dining
room sales increased as well. Conventions in Boston

Prices
High demand and low inventory in the auto industry led
to modest price increases. A few manufacturers complained of further upward pressure on input prices—such
as freight—but held back from raising prices in favor of
cost-cutting measures. Others manufacturers reported
no substantive pricing pressures. In Massachusetts,
restaurant prices increased sharply to cover increased

A-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
remain canceled through the fall, but major outdoor
events slated for October—including the Boston Marathon—are anticipated to bring large numbers of visitors
to the area. As of March hotel occupancy rates in greater
Boston stood at around 25 percent, similar to the previous report, but contacts remain optimistic for summer
tourism.

least a modest boost in labor supply as vaccination rates
climbed and infection rates declined.

Commercial Real Estate
Commercial real estate markets in the First District were
stable or improving. Robust demand for warehouse
space amid low inventories translated into very rapid
sales of listed properties. Industrial construction was
seen as still profitable despite high construction costs,
but some contacts warned that further cost increases
could become prohibitive. Life sciences construction
plans expanded moderately to include Rhode Island,
despite remaining concentrated in the Boston area.
Contacts were encouraged by fresh gains in retail leasing activity, due to a spate of openings and relaunches of
restaurants and smaller stores, but noted that largeformat retail leasing remained weak. Office leasing
showed no signs of improvement and the outlook for
eventual office occupancy rates and rents remains uncertain. Contacts expect to have a clearer picture of the
office market after Labor Day, which is when many firms
are expected to bring greater numbers of workers back
to the office.

Manufacturing and Related Services
Of the eight firms contacted this cycle, six reported moderate to strong revenue gains in 2021Q1 from the previous quarter and two said that sales were roughly flat. All
reported higher sales versus the same period a year
ago. Year-over-year growth was exceptionally strong for
suppliers to the semiconductor and health care industries, respectively, and a provider of diagnostic services
to veterinarians also reported strong sales increases
from one year ago. These results were not distorted by
pandemic-related declines in 2020. Two firms that reported being inundated with orders pointed out that
customers were placing the same order with multiple
suppliers, and so felt that results were perhaps inflated
relative to true demand.
Contacts cited two main limits to growth: labor scarcity
and supply chain issues. The dearth of semiconductors
remains a major problem, but contacts also cited long
lead times for a variety of other inputs. Supply constraints held back production for some contacts, but
most were able to meet their output goals and none
made major revisions to their capital expenditures plans.
All contacts were optimistic for the rest of 2021 and
some revised their forecasts up. All anticipated relaxing
any remaining COVID restrictions over the summer.

Residential Real Estate
Residential real estate markets posted robust sales and
further price increases to March and April 2021, with
growing strength in condominium sales. Vermont reported changes from March 2020 to March 2021 while all
other reporting areas provided changes from April 2020
to April 2021; Connecticut data were unavailable.
Closed sales, pending sales, and median sales prices
increased by moderate-to-large margins over-the-year in
all reporting areas, indicating a moderate acceleration in
activity since the previous report. Condominium sales
showed particular strength, with pending condo sales up
more than 100 percent in all reporting markets. However,
the outsized over-the-year sales gains in part reflect the
low sales levels in March and April of 2020, when the
market was on pause due to COVID-19. As in the last
report, homes for sale are down by double digit percentages for all reporting markets, although the Boston condo market saw a moderate increase in supply. Although
contacts continued to worry about low inventories, the
Massachusetts contact pointed out a substantial increase in listings in April, and some expected a seasonal
increase in listings in the coming months.■

Staffing Services
First District staffing firms reported mixed results ranging
from modest revenue declines to robust gains in the first
quarter of 2021 from the previous quarter. Two out of
four firms said that 2021Q1 had been their strongest
quarter since before the pandemic, with sales increases
as high as 28 percent. Firms described labor demand as
robust across most fields, and especially strong for direct
hires in skilled positions. Conversions from temporary to
permanent employment increased. Contacts expressed
growing concerns about weak labor supply, but one said
there was an ongoing surplus of low-skilled workers.
One firm reported sharply higher pay rates for selected
positions and said that the higher rates reflected a combination of labor scarcity and growing business confidence. Other firms launched new recruiting campaigns
to combat labor scarcity. Some contacts perceived that
generous unemployment benefits were the deciding
factor holding back labor supply, but others expected at

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy

A-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

New York
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Second District continued to grow strongly in the latest reporting period, as vaccinations expanded and COVID cases abated across the District. Business contacts expressed widespread optimism about the near
-term outlook. The labor market has strengthened further, with contacts reporting increased employment and wages, as
well as difficulties hiring and retaining staff. Input price pressures have intensified further, and more businesses report
that they are raising their selling prices. Consumer spending has strengthened, bolstered by accelerating auto and retail
sales and rising tourism. Housing markets have been steady to stronger, while markets for office and retail space appear to have stabilized at weak levels. Finally, contacts in the broad finance sector reported moderate improvement in
conditions, while regional banks reported higher loan demand and little change in delinquency rates.

Employment and Wages

Prices

The job market strengthened further in recent weeks,
with more businesses reporting a pickup in employment
and widespread labor shortages. A major New York City
employment agency noted a significant increase in hiring
and a greater sense of urgency to fill open positions.
Similarly, an upstate employment agency noted increased hiring activity for both payroll and contract workers and indicated that filling job openings have been
challenging. Many business contacts ranked staffing as
a top business concern, especially at the lower end of
the wage spectrum, and attributed this to a combination
of workers’ health concerns, child-care constraints, and
generous unemployment benefits.

Firms’ input prices have continued to accelerate across
the board, with an overwhelming majority of contacts in
construction and manufacturing noting increases. Businesses in all sectors expect widespread hikes in prices
they pay in the months ahead.
Selling prices accelerated modestly, with hikes widely
reported in manufacturing, retail, wholesale trade, and
transportation but steady prices in most other sectors.
The vast majority of manufacturers, retailers, wholesalers, and transportation firms plan price hikes in the
months ahead. More moderate increases were anticipated in other industry sectors. Uncertainty about future
inflation was also cited as a concern in planning and
formulating contracts.

A broad array of businesses plans to add staff in the
coming months—particularly those engaged in leisure &
hospitality, manufacturing, retail, and wholesale trade. A
major employment services firm expects the tight labor
market to intensity, as businesses bring staff back to the
office and many workers are looking to change jobs.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending picked up to a strong pace of
growth in recent weeks. Non-auto retailers reported a
substantial increase in business, with some reports of a
sharp rebound in demand for luggage and formal wear.
A major retail chain noted that its sales in the region
have exceeded plan, though sales in New York City
continued to lag, partly due to weak international tourism. Retailers also expressed increasing optimism about
the near-term outlook. Consumer confidence among

Wages have continued to grow moderately, with especially widespread increases in the retail and wholesale
trade sectors. Looking ahead, a substantial proportion of
businesses across all major industry sectors plan to
raise wages.

B-1

Federal Reserve Bank of New York
bidding wars. In Manhattan, sales volume has picked up
strongly, while the inventory of homes for sale has receded somewhat from the peak levels of last October but
remains higher than normal. Prices have stabilized at
about 6 percent below pre-pandemic levels.

New York State residents surged to a two-year high.
Sales of both new and used vehicles have strengthened
noticeably since the last report, far surpassing prepandemic levels, despite low inventories. However, a
persistent shortage of microchips is expected to keep
inventories lean for a number of months, and this is
expected to severely restrain new vehicle sales. Dealers
reported that credit availability continues to be satisfactory.

New York City’s rental market remains soft but appears
to have hit bottom. Rents in Manhattan are still down
roughly 20 percent from early-2020 level and down 1015 percent in Brooklyn and Queens. However, leasing
activity has picked up substantially across the city reaching the highest levels in well over a decade. A local real
estate expert ascribes this largely to more people moving for better deals.

Manufacturing and Distribution
Activity continued to grow strongly in the manufacturing
and wholesale trade sectors but slowed somewhat in
transportation & warehousing. Contacts continued to
report widespread supply disruptions and delays at ports
and in trucking. Looking ahead, businesses in all these
sectors continued to express widespread optimism about
near-term business prospects, despite ongoing concerns
about the future availability of workers and materials.

Commercial real estate markets have remained mixed
across the District but have shown signs of stabilizing
overall. Office markets in and around New York City
continued to slacken, with vacancy and availability rates
continuing to trend up and rents steady but moderately
below year-earlier levels in Manhattan and modestly
below across the rest of the metro region. Office markets
across upstate New York have been steady. The market
for retail space has stabilized, with scattered signs of a
pickup in some areas. The industrial market remains
fairly robust, with vacancy rates steady at low levels and
rents up 5-10 percent from a year earlier.

Services
Service industry contacts also reported sturdy growth in
the latest reporting period. Contacts in the hard-hit leisure & hospitality sector noted exceptionally strong gains
in business activity. Businesses in the information, professional & business services, and education & health
sectors all noted a continuation of fairly brisk growth.
Looking to the months ahead, contacts in all these sectors expressed widespread optimism about business
prospects.

New office construction has remained sluggish, but
multifamily residential construction has picked up outside
New York City. Contacts in the District’s construction
industry have grown somewhat more positive about
current conditions and substantially more optimistic
about the near-term outlook, though there is widespread
concern about the cost and availability of materials,
especially lumber, and workers.

Tourism has strengthened further, particularly in New
York City, though the volume of international and business visitors has remained well below pre-pandemic
levels. In New York City, hotel occupancy rates have
continued to rise, exceeding 50 percent for the first time
since before the pandemic, with weekend occupancy
rates noticeably higher. Nightly room rates have risen
but remained well below normal levels. Moreover, as
restrictions have been lifted, a number of New York City
hotels have re-opened, and the city has waived the hotel
occupancy tax for the third quarter of this year. Museums
and restaurants have also seen a rebound in business.

Banking and Finance
Businesses in the broad finance sector noted moderate
improvement in business activity. Bankers reported a
pickup in loan demand, mainly from the commercial
sector. Credit standards were unchanged, except on
residential mortgages where bankers tightened standards. Loan spreads were little changed. Delinquency
rates were generally flat overall—down modestly for C&I
loans, but up somewhat for residential mortgages. Banks
reported that they have become less lenient toward
delinquent accounts, except for commercial mortgages.■

Real Estate and Construction
Housing markets continued to strengthen in the latest
reporting period. Sales markets outside of Manhattan
have remained quite robust, with rising sales volume,
lean inventories, strong price appreciation, and frequent

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy

B-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Philadelphia
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
On balance, business activity in the Third District continued to grow moderately during the current Beige Book period;
however, activity in most sectors remained below levels observed prior to the pandemic. The share of adults who have
received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine has climbed well past 50 percent. As normal activity resumes, contacts have reported increasing demand. However, labor shortages and supply chain disruptions have also continued.
Some contacts observed that some of the perceived strong demand may represent the broader (duplicative) search
efforts of employers for labor and producers for parts. On the housing front, an overly hot market may be discouraging
buyers. Net employment continued at a modest pace of growth, while wages and prices continued to grow modestly and
moderately, respectively. About two-thirds of the firms expressed positive expectations for continued growth over the
next six months – broadening among nonmanufacturers but narrowing among manufacturers since the prior period.

Employment and Wages

Prices

Employment continued to grow modestly overall. The
share of firms reporting employment increases broadened to one-third among nonmanufacturers, while reported increases edged back to one-fourth among manufacturing firms. Overall, average hours worked rose
again but for a smaller share of all firms.

On balance, prices continued to rise moderately over the
period. The share of manufacturers reporting higher
prices for factor inputs remained at about three-fourths,
while those receiving higher prices for their own products
rose well above one-third. In turn, the share of nonmanufacturers reporting higher prices for their inputs rose to
one-half; however, the share receiving higher prices from
consumers for their own goods and services fell to onefifth.

Nearly all firms reported difficulty hiring sufficient labor.
Contacts at staffing firms reported ongoing demand for
workers, unusually high levels of open orders, and a
dearth of qualified job candidates. While demand clearly
exceeds the supply, contacts did note that perceived
demand may be overstated by clients placing orders with
more staffing firms than is typical.

Contacts continued to note severe supply chain disruptions impacting most sectors of the economy. Microchip
shortages continued to limit current and future production plans, and container shortages continued to disrupt
logistics.

Wages continued to rise modestly. The percentage of
nonmanufacturing firms reporting higher wage and benefit costs per employee edged above one-third, while the
share reporting lower wages remained very low. Prior to
the pandemic, the share of firms reporting compensation
increases averaged well over one-third. Across all sectors, firms continued to report raising wages and offering
signing bonuses, retention bonuses, and referral bonuses to compete for scarce labor resources.

Looking ahead one year, the prices that firms anticipate
receiving for their own goods and services rose further
still – after the firms reported moderately high expectations last quarter. Firm expectations for compensation
increases were slightly higher than those for their own
prices, and expectations of general consumer price
increases rose the most. Unlike in prior quarters, firms
now expect general consumer inflation to be even higher
than firm prices.

C-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Manufacturing

only slightly, while home mortgages were flat. Credit
card volumes were also flat – in contrast, volumes grew
at a modest pace over the same period in 2019.

On average, manufacturing activity continued growing
moderately. About 40 percent of the firms reported that
increases of shipments and new orders were somewhat
higher. On net, manufacturing activity remained below
pre-pandemic levels.

Bankers, accountants, and bankruptcy attorneys continued to report that relatively few problems with bad debt
had emerged. Optimism had grown for many of their
clients in recent weeks; however, some creditors and
landlords have become impatient to collect, evict, or
foreclose. A credit counselor reported increasing activity
to fix credit scores for prospective first-time homebuyers,
to keep current homeowners in their houses, and to
consider personal bankruptcy options.

As with perceived demand at staffing firms, many manufacturers have stated that their production would be
higher but for labor shortages and supply chain disruptions. A good portion of the perceived demand appears
to be real, as order backlogs, inventories, and delivery
times increased further and were at or near record levels
in May.

An accountant reported more mergers and acquisitions,
with some clients choosing to sell their businesses –
giving reasons of retirement, uncertainty, stress, and
high valuations as motivating factors. A corporate lawyer
noted that a few smaller clients had simply paid their
debts and closed down their businesses.

Consumer Spending
Contacts reported continued modest growth of nonauto
retail sales. Survivors in the retail and restaurant sectors
are reporting strong sales and profits even against 2019
levels. Rising vaccination rates and an anticipated return
to “normal” are feeding positive expectations for the
remainder of the year.

Real Estate and Construction
Homebuilders reported modest growth in new contracts
as sales traffic slowed, yet construction activity continued apace. Contacts noted that higher prices and extended delivery times have dissuaded some buyers,
while builders remain challenged by the high costs of
building materials, ongoing supply chain disruptions, and
the unreliability of subcontractor scheduling.

Reports from auto dealers suggest that sales grew moderately. In some markets, year-to-date sales now equal
their 2019 sales for the comparable period. Some contacts suggested that buyers may have hastened recent
purchases to avoid an anticipated decline in dealer inventory as manufacturers contend with the microchip
shortage. Despite the tightening constraint on new car
sales, stronger used car sales and higher prices have
boosted profit margins.

Existing home sales were flat, as new listings continued
to fall – availability dropped below a one-month supply in
many locations. In the face of ongoing demand, contacts
noted a strong sellers’ market in which offers were often
above asking price, in all cash, or without inspections or
other buyer protections. One contact noted that some
potential buyers were giving up, while others commented
on the rising unaffordability, especially for buyers who
qualify for FHA but not conventional financing.

Overall, tourism continued to grow modestly – reflecting
a slow recovery as more potential leisure travelers are
vaccinated. Consumers have pent-up demand for travel
experiences, and many have extra savings to spend.
Contacts also noted improvements in business travel but
don’t expect a full recovery this year or next.

Philadelphia’s commercial construction activity appeared
to have improved slightly to 85 or 90 percent of prepandemic levels. Little change was evident in nonresidential leasing activity, although reports of future office
downsizing continued to grow. Demand for warehouse
space remained strong, and the weak supply of for-sale
homes appears to be boosting demand for rental units. ■

Nonfinancial Services
On balance, nonmanufacturing activity continued at a
moderate pace of growth. Over one-third of the firms
reported increases in sales or revenues; however, most
firms continued to note that output remains below prepandemic levels.

Financial Services
The volume of bank lending fell slightly during the period
(not seasonally adjusted); compared with the same
period in 2019, by contrast, loan volumes grew modestly.
Commercial and industrial loans, home equity lines, and
other consumer loans fell moderately, while auto lending
fell slightly. Commercial real estate lending grew, but

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regionaleconomy

C-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Cleveland
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
The economic recovery gained strength in recent weeks, and contacts across an array of industries reported healthy
gains in customer demand. Contacts often pointed to progress in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, the easing
of government-mandated restrictions, and the release of pent-up demand as key drivers of the recent improvement in
customer demand. For these same reasons, firms were decidedly upbeat that demand will continue to improve in the
near-term. That said, many contacts commented that supply chain bottlenecks were constraining growth by causing
extended lead times, depleted inventories, and escalating materials and transportation costs. Hiring activity was reportedly modest despite the improvement in customer demand, and many firms indicated they were operating with fewer
staff members than they would like because of a dearth of job applicants. Consequently, a greater share of firms boosted wages, particularly for hourly workers on the lower end of the pay scale. Price hikes became more widespread as
firms attempted to keep up with rising costs for materials and labor.

Employment and Wages

freight contacts. One staffing company contact remarked
that he turned away prospective clients that offered
starting wages of less than $13 per hour because he will
not be able to find anyone at that wage.

Staff levels increased modestly, despite widespread
reports that customer demand had strengthened. Many
firms commented that their headcounts were below
desired levels because there were too few applicants for
open positions. The problem was acute for firms in consumer-facing industries. A few retailers and restaurants
noted they operated with reduced hours or had closed
locations because they were short-staffed. One convenience store chain tried to increase its staff level for the
past month, but unsuccessfully. As a result, 10 of its
stores operated for four fewer hours than desired each
day. Many manufacturers also said they were shortstaffed, and several noted they were using overtime to fill
the staffing gap. Others indicated that they were automating processes to keep up with demand and to reduce
labor needs. Contacts in several industries observed an
increase in employee turnover, which they attributed to
workers’ feeling more confident leaving their jobs for
higher wages or for more suitable positions.

Prices
Reports of rising input costs have grown more widespread. About three-fourths of contacts reported that
their nonlabor costs had increased in the last two
months. This share is up from about two-thirds in the last
report. Cost increases were broad across items and
were especially sharp for resins, metals, lumber, packaging, and freight services. Rising input costs were partly
attributed to supply chain challenges caused by suppliers who often did not have enough workers to meet
demand. A few manufacturing and construction firms
reported that suppliers were raising their prices more
frequently. One real estate developer said that quotes
from general contractors were now valid for only 10
days, whereas before the pandemic quotes would be
valid for 30 days or even as many as 180 days. Looking
to the second half of 2021, roughly 60 percent of contacts expect their nonlabor costs will increase by an
amount comparable to or more than the increases they
experienced in the first half of 2021.

The dearth of available workers motivated a greater
share of firms to raise wages. About 55 percent of our
survey respondents increased wages over the past two
months, up from about 40 percent in the prior period.
Reports of wage increases were widespread and were
especially common among manufacturing, retail, and

Reports of firms’ raising their selling prices also became

D-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
more widespread. Many of the firms that raised prices
suggested they were able to pass through most of their
cost increases to customers. Contacts now expect it to
take longer than previously anticipated for these supply
chain issues to be resolved. This expectation motivated
some of them to be more aggressive with their pricing.
Looking ahead, about half of contacts plan to raise their
selling prices in the second half of the year, with most of
those firms intending to do so to an extent that will at
least preserve their margins.

strong, while others predicted that elevated prices would
discourage potential homebuyers.
Nonresidential construction and real estate activity increased in nearly all sectors as workers began to return
to their offices, more consumers resumed in-store shopping, and overall economic conditions continued to improve. Overall, nonresidential contacts were optimistic
that demand would increase further as the economy
continues to reopen and pent-up demand is released.
However, one contractor suggested that rising prices
and materials shortages may curtail construction.

Consumer Spending
Reports suggest that consumer spending grew significantly. General merchandisers and apparel retailers said
that demand remained strong beyond the expected
boost from stimulus funds in March. Several contacts
believed there was a good deal of pent-up demand that
was being released as government restrictions were
being eased. Hoteliers reported improvements in leisure
travel, and auto dealers commented that sales were
strong despite limited inventory and higher selling prices.
Contacts were optimistic that consumer spending would
continue to improve in the coming months thanks to
growing vaccination numbers and easing of governmentmandated restrictions.

Financial Services
Banking activity increased moderately. Contacts noted
that demand for auto loans and mortgages remained
strong, although the recent uptick in interest rates and
limited inventories in both markets dampened activity.
Multiple contacts reported improvements in business
lending, especially for commercial real estate loans.
However, overall loan demand remained relatively soft.
Lenders said that delinquency rates for consumer and
commercial loans were still low and that the number of
active forbearance agreements continued to drop. Bankers were optimistic that loan demand would continue to
pick up as social distancing restrictions ease, but they
also noted that potentially higher interest rates clouded
their outlooks. They were also concerned that supply
challenges could curtail their clients’ sales and soften
their demand for credit.

Manufacturing
Demand for manufactured goods continued to increase
strongly. Contacts cited strength in demand for products
related to housing, autos, and other durable consumer
goods. Aerospace-related production continued its modest recovery, although demand remained weak on balance. Many contacts noted that output growth was constrained by shortages of hourly-wage workers, extended
lead times for inputs, and depleted inventories. Many
contacts reported their capacity utilization was within its
normal range, although a sizeable minority reported
above-normal capacity utilization. Manufacturers generally expected demand to continue to rise in coming
months.

Professional and Business Services
Demand for professional and business services remained strong. Authentication services continued to
benefit from the further expansion of ecommerce. Also,
demand for consulting and technical services increased
as more companies began to recover from the pandemic. Overall, contacts anticipated that demand would
continue to grow as firms feel more comfortable moving
forward with projects that had previously been put on
hold.

Real Estate and Construction

Freight
Demand for freight services remained robust, and volumes increased as the broader economy continued to
recover. Contacts commented that shortages of shipping
containers and bottlenecks at ports continue to be problematic. Looking forward, contacts expected demand to
improve further in coming months, although many anticipate that a persistent driver shortage will constrain
growth. ■

Demand for residential construction and real estate
remained elevated as homebuyers continued to take
advantage of low mortgage interest rates. Even so, a few
contacts remarked that escalating construction costs
may have sapped some of the momentum in homebuilding. One homebuilder observed that elevated prices
made some customers hesitant to move forward with
projects. A realtor observed a slowdown in lot purchases
as builders in her market waited for construction prices
to settle. Expectations for demand were mixed. Some
contacts believed that housing demand would remain

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.clevelandfed.org/region

D-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Richmond
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
The regional economy expanded moderately since our previous report. Manufacturers reported strong growth in shipments and new orders, intensifying already-sizeable backlogs and long lead times. Port and trucking volumes also rose
as both import and export activity picked up. Retailers experienced moderate growth and increased foot traffic at physical stores. New car sales were limited by low inventories, which spurred higher demand for used vehicles. Consumer
travel and tourism rose, particularly for weekend destinations, while business travel remained low. Despite the easing of
COVID-related restrictions, some restaurants and hospitality services were unable to open to full capacity because they
were unable to hire more workers. Similarly, demand for nonfinancial services rose but growth was constrained by labor
shortages. The demand for residential real estate remained high amid very low inventory levels. Commercial real estate
leasing increased moderately, including some office leasing as businesses returned to working in-person. Loan activity
rose, particularly for business loans. Employment increased modestly, but many firms reported having difficulties filling
open positions. Prices rose sharply in recent weeks as shortages of labor and materials led to higher costs, some of
which translated to higher prices to customers.

ance manufacturer was able to pass along price increases because others in their industry faced similar rising
input costs and were also raising prices.

Employment and Wages

Employment rose modestly in recent weeks, but job
growth was somewhat constrained by labor shortages as
firms across a variety of industries reported having difficulty filling open positions. One contact speaking about
the hospitality sector thought that many former workers
were either choosing to remain unemployed or had found
new jobs in another industry. Several contacts also noted
increased turnover and one reported that employees
were leaving for advancement opportunities. Wages
increased moderately, overall. Strong demand for workers, particularly at the entry-level, drove up starting wages. Several employers also noted that raising wages for
entry-level positions led them to raise wages to retain
more experienced staff.

Manufacturing

Fifth District manufacturers saw strong growth in demand in recent weeks, as both shipments and new orders increased. Manufacturers of materials, home
goods, and food reported especially high demand. Lead
times lengthened, and inventories of inputs fell. Backlogs
of orders grew, as shortages of labor and input goods
constrained production. Trucking and shipping container
shortages, as well as delays at ports, contributed to
difficulties in receiving inputs and in getting final goods to
customers. Because of the delays in receiving and high
costs of inputs, many manufacturers looked for substitutions for regular inputs and eliminated certain products.

Prices

Overall, prices increased sharply in recent weeks. Price
increases were largely attributed to strong demand,
rising input costs, and supply constraints. Firms across
goods-producing and service-providing industries experienced increased prices paid for labor, energy, shipping,
raw materials, and inventories, but the degree to which
those price increases were passed on to customers
varied. For example, a furniture store said that they were
unable to pass along increased costs because of online
competition and MSRP pricing. In contrast, a small appli-

Ports and Transportation

Fifth District ports saw robust growth in recent weeks, as
volumes continued to break records. Growth of both
imports and exports was strong, with notable acceleration in the growth of exports. On the import side, volumes were driven by retail goods, especially furniture,
home goods, and home improvement goods. On the
export side, volumes of agricultural products were high.
Both imports and exports of automobiles were volatile,

E-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
which contacts attributed to the microchip shortage.

and rental rates rose. Retail leasing strengthened, leading to falling vacancy rates as stores and restaurants
opened and expanded, and contacts noted an increase
in new construction. Office leasing improved as businesses returned to the workplace, and some agreed to
longer-term leases than in the past year and took advantage of leasing concessions. Industrial leasing remained strong despite increasing rates, and new construction continued.

Fifth District trucking companies reported moderate
growth from already high volumes in recent weeks.
Demand exceeded supply, as labor and equipment
constraints caused truckers to turn business away.
Shipments of most goods rose, as volumes of home
improvement goods were especially strong, and some
supplies for business conventions began to move. Supply shortages and long lead times for new tractors and
trailers led companies to rely more heavily on repairing
and reusing older equipment.

Banking and Finance

Overall loan demand rose moderately this period due in
part to the need for increased capital as businesses
continuing to emerge from the pandemic. Financial institutions indicated a moderate demand for conventional
commercial lending driven by improving consumer and
business sentiment as well as sustained low rates. In
addition, contacts noted a continued slight growth in
mortgage lending, but reported a slight decline in refinancing requests. Deposit growth was strong owing to
the recent round of stimulus payments. This has led to
increased competition among financial institutions as
firms seek to deploy these deposits. Credit quality and
delinquencies remained good.

Retail, Travel, and Tourism

Fifth District retailers reported moderate growth in demand and revenues in recent weeks. Shopper traffic
increased, and shoppers were generally serious about
making purchases. Clothing sales began to increase
after a soft year, and demand for home goods remained
strong. However, many retailers reported that supply
chain disruptions, such as shipping and production
delays, were limiting inventories. Auto inventories were
especially low and continued to shrink, as the microchip
shortage limited supply of new cars and increased demand for used vehicles, which were also in short supply.

Nonfinancial Services

Travel and tourism increased moderately in the Fifth
District since our last report. Visitation was especially
strong at beaches and other outdoor attractions. Some
museums and restaurants opened amid strengthening
business conditions. Hotels saw short booking-windows
but high occupancy on weekends, which contacts attributed to leisure travel, mostly from people who live in
drivable distance. Hotel occupancy was lower during the
week, as group and business traveled remained soft,
but inquiries for group travel increased. Restaurants,
hotels, and other attractions reported cutting services
and restricting capacity because of labor constraints.

The demand for nonfinancial services rose moderately in
recent weeks. An increase in health services demand
was driven by non-COVID-related services and elective
procedures. A university president reported a substantial
spike in applications, but noted that applications from
lower income students were down slightly. Meanwhile,
an advertising agency reported solid growth in new ad
spending, particularly from small businesses. There were
several reports, however, that the inability to find additional workers was limiting sales and revenue growth. ■

Real Estate and Construction

Demand for homes held fairly steady at high levels since
our last report. Prices continued to rise, and the average
time to sell a home shortened. Builders saw a continued
drop in inventories, with some communities selling out of
homes. Agents noted that more resale homes were
being put on the market but were being absorbed too
quickly to boost inventories. Construction and material
costs continued to increase, and shortages of materials
caused building delays. Real estate agents noted that
mortgage applications were getting approved, but they
were increasingly seeing cash sales.
Commercial real estate leasing expanded moderately in
recent weeks, but new projects were delayed by shortages and high costs of inputs. Multifamily occupancy

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis

E-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Atlanta
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Sixth District expanded at a moderate pace, on net, from April through mid-May. Demand for
labor strengthened, though shortages among low-skilled workers persisted. Wage pressures increased for positions in
high demand. Some nonlabor costs continued to rise, and pricing power remained mixed. Retail sales activity increased,
and auto sales rose more than expected. Hotel occupancy levels rose due to robust leisure travel activity; however,
hotels dependent on business travel continued to struggle. Demand for housing remained strong and home prices continued to rise. Conditions in commercial real estate were mixed. Manufacturing activity strengthened as new orders and
production levels rose. Conditions at financial institutions were stable, and consumer loan demand grew slightly.

Prices

Employment and Wages

District contacts reported that input costs, particularly for
lumber, steel, transportation, and shipping remained at
elevated levels. Increased costs in construction materials
and labor slowed business expansion projects. Reports
on pricing power were mixed, but many contacts cited the removal of promotional pricing to maintain margins. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations
survey showed year-over-year unit costs increased
significantly to 2.8 percent on average in May. Yearahead expectations increased to 2.8 percent in May, up
f rom 2.5 percent in April.

Overall employment in the District increased since the
previous report. Contacts reported strengthening demand for labor as economies in the region began to
reopen. Demand was strongest among lower-skilled
positions, and employers reported that labor availability
among that segment was very low. Shortages were also
noted among skilled trade workers, nurses, IT workers
and commercial drivers. Many employers continued to
state that expanded unemployment insurance benefits
and stimulus payments were keeping would-be workers
on the sidelines; others indicated that childcare, transportation issues, and the inability to guarantee hours
were key f actors in preventing potential workers f rom
seeking employment. Employers indicated there was a
great deal of churn among low-skill, low-wage positions,
and many reported that labor shortages had a limiting
eff ect on services to customers, as well as the production of goods, which is contributing to supply chain disruptions. Several contacts anticipate that labor shortages
will abate this fall but there is a great deal of uncertainty
around how much supply will materialize. For firms with
limited supply of labor in their markets, opportunities to
offer remote work for some positions have removed
geographic barriers, allowing employers broader access
to talent.

Consumer Spending and Tourism

District retailers continued to report healthy sales activity
over the reporting period, driven largely by tourism.
Although auto production and inventory levels f ell due to
tight chip supplies, sales rose well above forecasted
levels for April.

Travel and tourism contacts across the District reported
continued strong demand in leisure travel, with hotel
occupancy levels in the 80-90 percent range. Contacts
noted an uptick in bookings for business travel, conventions and special events planned for the second half of
the year. International travel activity continued to be
constrained as vaccine distribution in other countries
remained slow.

Wage pressure picked up f rom April through mid-May,
and upward pressure was most notable among lowskilled positions. Within this segment, reports of wage
increases were more widespread with referral and signing bonuses becoming increasingly more common.
Among the more skilled positions, wage increases were
more modest.

Construction and Real Estate

Housing activity throughout the District remained strong
over the reporting period. Relatively low interest rates
and a shift f rom renting towards home buying remained
primary drivers of demand, as well as an increase in
buyers moving to the region from higher cost markets in

F-1

-

Energy
-

Manufacturing

Agriculture

-

-

Transportation

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Banking and Finance

F-2
-

-

Federal Reserve Bank of

Chicago
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased moderately in April and early May and approached its pre-pandemic
level. Contacts expected strong growth in the coming months. Employment, consumer spending, business spending,
and manufacturing production all increased moderately, while construction and real estate was flat. Wages and prices
rose moderately and financial conditions improved slightly. Prospects for agriculture income in 2021 improved.

Employment and Wages

food products, PVC pipes, and lumber were noticeably
higher. Business output prices moved up moderately,
driven by passthrough of higher material, energy, and
transportation costs. Many manufacturers said that unlike usual, they were able to raise prices with little
pushback. Consumer prices moved up moderately due
largely to increased costs; in response there were reports of some retailers limiting operating hours or trying
to cut costs by renegotiating leases.

Employment increased moderately over the reporting
period, and contacts expected a strong increase over the
next 12 months. Contacts again reported minimal employee absenteeism due to Covid-19 infections or exposures. Help wanted signs sprouted across the District as
businesses sought to meet growing demand. Contacts
across sectors reported greater difficulty in finding workers, particularly at the entry level. Employers, temp
agencies, and workforce development organizations
pointed to a number of factors limiting labor supply,
including health safety concerns, childcare challenges,
cutbacks in public transportation schedules, job search
fatigue, and financial support from the government.
Overall, wage and benefit costs increased moderately.
However, contacts across sectors noted strong pressure
to raise wages, particularly at the entry level, and there
were widespread reports of businesses offering signing
bonuses. In addition, there was an increase in reports of
firms hiring employees away from other firms by offering
greater pay.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending increased moderately over the
reporting period. Contacts said that looser pandemicrelated restrictions and stimulus payments from the
American Rescue Plan supported activity, though the
impact of the payments had waned in recent weeks.
Spending on leisure and hospitality services rose but
stayed below pre-pandemic levels. Nonauto retail sales
increased moderately, with continuing high levels of
demand for furniture, home furnishings, home improvements, electronics, appliances, and sporting goods.
Grocery store sales remained healthy and there were
again reports of consumers trading up for more expensive items, such as premium meat cuts, finer wines, and
seafood. Contacts from some large open-air shopping
centers reported that consumer traffic levels had recovered to or remained just below 2019 levels. New and

Prices
Overall, prices rose moderately in April and early May,
and contacts expected similar-sized increases over the
next 12 months. Contacts noted that prices for copper,
steel, aluminum, metal products, resins, natural gas,

G-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
used light vehicle sales increased modestly from a high
level, but with sales constrained by issues of vehicle
availability.

ness was above pre-pandemic levels. Auto output declined slightly due to parts shortages, notably of microchips. Steel production increased moderately to meet
growing demand from manufacturers, builders, and the
energy sector. Demand for heavy machinery also grew
moderately, spurred by growth for construction, mining,
and agriculture. Specialty metals manufacturers reported
a solid increase in shipments, but also a large increase
in backlogs as they struggled to keep up with demand.

Business Spending
Business spending increased moderately in April and
early May. Retail inventories were uncomfortably low for
many items, and contacts expected challenges to continue through much of 2021. New and used light vehicle
inventory levels fell further—to very low levels for new
vehicles. One dealer reported that their stocks were at
33% of normal and that the manufacturer indicated the
situation wouldn’t improve until August at the earliest.
Many manufacturing contacts said inventories were
below comfortable levels. Contacts noted that supply
chain issues had worsened, particularly for raw materials, microchips, and specialty parts. They expected little
improvement through the end of the year. Demand for
transportation services increased moderately. Many
contacts reported ongoing shipping delays, both from
overseas and within the U.S. Capital expenditures were
up moderately, and contacts expected a moderate increase over the next twelve months. Several contacts
said that long wait times for equipment were holding
back spending. Demand for commercial and industrial
energy consumption was little changed overall.

Banking and Finance
Financial conditions improved slightly over the reporting
period. Participants in the equity and bond markets
reported a small improvement in conditions, though
volatility remained elevated. Lenders continued to report
that businesses and households had large amounts of
cash on hand to finance spending. Business loan volumes were little changed on balance, with contacts
highlighting strength in construction and manufacturing,
but weakness in commercial real estate and leisure and
hospitality. Business loan quality increased slightly
across most segments. Contacts reported stiff competition for loan opportunities and that standards had loosened a bit. In consumer markets, loan demand increased
modestly, led by ongoing growth in residential mortgage
activity. Consumer loan quality increased slightly, while
credit standards were little changed.

Construction and Real Estate

Agriculture

Construction and real estate activity increased slightly
over the reporting period. Residential construction was
little changed from a strong level. Contacts said that
rising costs due to limited lot availability and higher material costs (particularly for lumber) were putting a damper on building. Home remodeling activity was strong and
continued to grow. Residential real estate activity increased moderately despite low inventory levels. Strong
demand pushed home prices up noticeably, with many
selling for well above list price. Residential rents edged
up. Nonresidential construction increased slightly, with
contacts highlighting growth in the industrial and transportation infrastructure sectors. Commercial real estate
activity was little changed overall. Rising demand for
industrial space was offset by falling demand for office
and retail space. That said, a few contacts noted that
retail space that had emptied earlier in the pandemic
was starting to fill again. Commercial real estate prices
increased marginally and rents were unchanged. The
availability of sublease space was up modestly as some
offices trimmed their post-pandemic footprint.

Expectations for farm income in 2021 strengthened
across sectors in April and early May. Drought and dry
weather conditions were an issue across a substantial
portion of the District, though timely rains could still
erase most of the impact. Frosts damaged some plants
and trees, with potentially heavy losses for fruit producers. Corn and soybean planting proceeded ahead of the
normal pace. Corn, soybean, and wheat prices moved
up and were near multi-year highs. Hog, cattle, and milk
prices rose, helped by strong meat and dairy exports.
Egg prices dropped however. Despite higher prices,
livestock producers’ margins were little improved because of higher feed costs. Farmland values increased
once again, because of strong demand and limited inventory. ■

Manufacturing
Manufacturing production increased moderately in April
and early May despite widely reported supply chain
challenges. Most manufacturing contacts said that busi-

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
chicagofed.org/cfsbc

G-2

Summary of Economic Activity

Employment and Wages

-

-

Consumer Spending

—

Prices

H-1

-

-

Manufacturing
-

Banking and Finance

-

-

Nonfinancial Services
-

-

Agriculture and Natural Resources

-

Real Estate and Construction

-

H-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Minneapolis
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Ninth District economic activity grew at a moderate-to-strong pace since early April. Employment grew moderately, with
strong hiring demand outpacing labor availability. Wage pressures were moderate overall, and wholesale price pressures increased briskly while consumer prices increased more moderately. Growth was noted in consumer spending,
construction, real estate, manufacturing, agriculture, and energy. Minority- and women-owned businesses in the region
reported moderate improvements in business activity.

Employment and Wages

Worker Experience

Employment grew moderately since the last report, with
strong hiring demand outpacing labor availability. Job
postings saw strong increases in recent weeks,
particularly in South Dakota and Montana. A Minnesota
staffing firm with multiple offices said every location had
at least 100 job openings. Hiring demand was healthy
across all sectors, but was strongest in manufacturing,
construction, health care, and hospitality. Recent hiring
and near-term hiring expectations improved for firms of
all sizes; however, large firms reported significantly
stronger hiring tendencies. For those hiring, most said
their ability to find and hire staff was moderately or
extremely difficult. Contacts in the Dakotas and Montana
expected some improvement in labor availability with the
early elimination of enhanced federal unemployment
benefits in those states. But the action itself was weeks
away, and competition for new entrants would be high.

Job seekers saw modest improvement in labor market
conditions since the last report. While hiring demand was
robust, job service contacts reported low wages as a
moderate or significant barrier keeping job seekers from
taking available jobs. They also noted increased interest
in telework, but few viable options. A workforce contact
said that displaced high-income earners were actively
seeking jobs to replace lost income, while low-income
earners were more likely to stay on the sidelines if they
were receiving government benefits. Contacts also cited
the challenges of childcare and children’s school
schedules in making employment decisions. Several
contacts pointed to increased inoculations and the
gradual return of activities in travel and hospitality as
positives for frontline workers. A labor contact expressed
that while employment for janitorial workers remains 10
percent below pre-pandemic levels, more janitors were
finding work deep cleaning commercial spaces.

Wage pressures were moderate overall. Wage growth
among the large majority of contacts remained below 3
percent on an annualized basis. Workers at construction,
manufacturing, and hospitality firms saw stronger wage
growth, while many service-related firms saw weaker
growth. Future wage expectations were slightly higher,
but not well aligned with firms’ broader concerns over
labor availability. A manufacturer of construction
products recently increased hourly wages by $3 an hour
and saw job applications jump significantly.

Prices
Wholesale price pressures increased briskly, while
consumer prices increased more moderately, as ongoing
spikes in certain inputs fed through to final prices. Nearly
a quarter of respondents to a business conditions survey
reported nonlabor input price increases of greater than
10 percent relative to pre-pandemic levels. Pressures
were slightly lower for final/retail prices charged to
customers. Respondents to a construction survey noted
increases in materials costs across the board, but

I-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
particularly sharp increases for lumber, steel, and copper
wire. Manufacturing contacts continued to report higher
final prices due to increased costs for raw materials,
packaging, and transportation. However, contacts
offered that growing demand was allowing firms to pass
along a greater share of markups to customers. Retail
fuel prices increased at a moderately strong pace since
the previous report.

elimination of eviction moratoriums remained.
Residential real estate continued to see strong home
sales across the District. In many District markets,
inventories of homes for sale were half—or less—of last
year’s levels; shortages were acute among lower-priced
homes, sparking offers above asking prices.

Manufacturing
District manufacturing activity increased briskly since the
last report despite sharp cost increases. An April index of
regional manufacturing conditions indicated strong
expansion in activity in Minnesota and increased activity
in North Dakota and South Dakota from a month earlier.
More than half of manufacturing contacts reported that
they expect revenues to increase in the second quarter
of 2021 from the previous quarter.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending was slightly higher since the last
report, but remained at elevated levels. Restaurants,
bars, hotels, and recreation firms all reported increased
activity in recent weeks. However, many reported
difficulty hiring and were operating at limited hours and/
or capacity. A Montana contact said tourism firms were
“facing the toughest recruiting season ever.” Auto sales
in the western portion of the District remained strong,
with low inventories remaining the biggest obstacle.
“Most new units are spoken for by the time they arrive at
the dealerships,” said one Montana contact. Similar
demand was reported for recreational and marine
vehicles. Airline passenger levels have hit a seasonal lull
before the summer travel season, but a North Dakota
travel contact said activity was expected to rise “once
families begin summer vacations.” A regional shopping
center in Minnesota said that traffic had been rising;
while still below pre-pandemic levels, growth was
expected to continue due to pent-up demand.

Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources
Agricultural conditions improved sharply since the
previous report. Contacts expected strong farm incomes
heading into planting season, building on recent
commodity price increases and export demand. Crop
progress as of mid-May was generally well ahead of
recent averages in District states. However, extreme
drought conditions spread in portions of the District.
District oil and gas exploration activity increased slightly
since the previous report, but remained well below its pre
-pandemic level.

Minority- and Women-Owned Business Enterprises
Minority- and women-owned business enterprises
(MWBEs) in the region reported moderate improvements
in business activity, according to a May survey.
Customer traffic and revenue is modestly to significantly
higher compared with the same period a year ago, when
restrictions were imposed. A contact working with
minority entrepreneurs warned that barriers faced by
many businesses to access financial assistance during
the pandemic continued to put them behind in the
recovery. They further indicated that while many
businesses have been technologically adapting to the
new environment, some clients lack the knowledge and/
or capacity to do so. A contact in the hospitality industry
expressed difficulty finding employees and highlighted
the inability of small businesses to match current income
from government benefits. Like firms overall, MWBE
manufacturing and construction businesses were faring
well, but also faced labor and material shortages,
respectively. ■

Construction and Real Estate
Commercial construction activity grew slightly overall,
held back by supply chain disruptions and rising costs for
materials. Overall project activity showed signs of
increasing, according to two industry trackers and
contacts across the District. However, many contacts
also noted that supply chain problems and inflated
materials costs were creating significant project delays
and some outright cancellations, and lack of available
labor was further eroding their ability to either take on
work or complete projects. All of these pressures were
having a noticeable effect on profits. Similar difficulties
were evident in residential construction. However,
contacts noted stronger overall demand and outlooks,
and recent residential permitting remained robust across
many of the District’s larger markets.
Commercial real estate improved modestly overall,
though subsectors varied. Industrial property remained
strong, with some speculative building reentering the
market. Vacancy rates rose in office and retail, with
sublease activity also increasing. Apartment vacancy
rates remained low across the District, and rents were
reportedly rising again, but uncertainty related to the

For more information on the Ninth District economy, visit:
minneapolisfed.org/region-and-community

I-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Conditions in the Tenth District economy continued to improve at a moderate pace in April and May, and contacts in most
sectors anticipated additional gains in the months ahead. Consumer spending increased moderately as retail, restaurant,
and tourism sales rose. Sales exceeded pre-pandemic levels for the majority of retail, restaurant, and auto contacts, while
tourism and healthcare sales remained below pre-pandemic levels. Manufacturing activity expanded robustly, and almost
two-thirds of manufacturers reported that new orders were at or above pre-pandemic levels. Contacts also reported sales
gains in the wholesale trade, professional and high-tech, and transportation sectors. Residential real estate activity increased and home prices rose robustly as inventories fell further from already low levels. Commercial real estate activity
increased slightly for the first time since the pandemic started. The energy sector expanded as production, commodity
prices, and capital expenditures moved higher. The farm economy remained strong, but drought conditions continued to
strain producers in the western part of the region. Employment rose at a modest pace, and wages increased moderately.
Input prices increased robustly, while selling prices increased at a moderate pace.

manufacturing and services sectors since the previous
survey, while selling prices increased at a slightly more
moderate pace. The majority of respondents also indicated that selling prices were above pre-pandemic levels.
More than one-third of contacts reported that rising materials prices and supply issues, such as lack of availability or increased delivery times, were having a strong
negative effect on their firm, and an additional one-third
of contacts reported a slight negative impact from these
factors. About 80 percent of contacts expected these
factors to persist for 12 months or less. Contacts in both
sectors expected input prices to continue to rise robustly
over the next six months, while the growth rate of selling
prices was anticipated to accelerate.

Employment and Wages
District employment continued to increase modestly
during the survey period in both the services and manufacturing sectors, with a slight majority of contacts in
both industries indicating that employment levels were
now at or above pre-pandemic levels. Recent employment gains in the services sector were driven by hiring in
the retail and wholesale trade industries, while transportation, auto, and real estate contacts reported slight
declines. Looking ahead, services contacts expected
modest increases in employment in the coming months,
with slightly stronger gains in tourism and wholesale
trade. Manufacturers anticipated both employment levels
and hours to rise moderately in the next few months.

Consumer Spending

The majority of contacts reported labor shortages, with
many contacts noting demand for all positions and several others in need of truck drivers and technicians. More
than three-quarters of contacts reported that the inability
to find workers with the required skills was restraining
hiring plans. Wages rose moderately, and while the
majority of contacts expected wage growth to remain
moderate throughout 2021, more than one-third of manufacturing and services contacts expected to raise wages by 4 percent or more at their firms.

Consumer spending grew moderately over the survey
period, and the majority of contacts noted that sales
were above pre-pandemic levels. The strongest sales
gains in April and May were observed in the retail, restaurant, and tourism sectors. Compared to pre-pandemic
levels, more than 70 percent of retailers and half of
restaurant owners indicated higher sales, while the majority of tourism contacts continued to report lower sales.
Health services and auto sales held fairly steady since
the previous survey, with health services sales still below
pre-pandemic levels and auto sales above. Respondents
across all consumer sectors expected sales gains in the

Prices
The prices of raw materials rose robustly in both the

J-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
coming months, with restaurant and tourism contacts
expecting particularly strong gains.

recent weeks, with anecdotal evidence suggesting the
increase is concentrated in liquid accounts, such as
demand deposit accounts and savings accounts.

Manufacturing and Other Business Activity

Energy
District energy activity expanded in April and May as the
number of active oil and natural gas rigs rose due to the
addition of several oil rigs in Oklahoma. With a larger
number of active rigs compared with a year ago, production levels also increased modestly. Multiple firms indicated capital spending plans aimed at increasing production in 2021 while reducing costs after restructuring over
the past year. Employment in the energy sector inched
up slightly across the District since the last survey period, but the number of jobs remained considerably below
year-ago levels. A slight increase in commodity prices
since the last survey period supported higher revenues
and profits for regional firms. Contacts across the District
expected stable to slightly higher oil prices for the remainder of the year as impacts from the pandemic continue to wane and demand recovers.

Manufacturing activity expanded robustly since the last
survey as production and new orders increased at both
durable and nondurable goods plants, albeit with stronger gains among durable goods producers. Almost twothirds of respondents indicated that new orders were
either at or above pre-pandemic levels. Looking ahead,
both durable and nondurable goods manufacturers expected moderate gains in production, new orders, and
capital expenditures in the coming months.
Outside of manufacturing, sales rose robustly at wholesale trade firms, moderately at transportation firms, and
modestly at professional and high-tech services firms in
May. In addition, capital expenditures increased modestly over the survey period in all three sectors. Transportation and wholesale trade contacts expected moderate-tostrong sales gains over the next six months, while sales
at professional and high-tech services firm were expected to continue to rise moderately.

Agriculture
The Tenth District farm economy remained strong, but
drought continued to strain all types of producers in the
western part of the region. Prices for corn, soybeans,
wheat, cotton, and hogs increased in recent weeks and
remained at multi-year highs through the early part of
May. In contrast, prospects for the cattle industry remained subdued as cattle prices were near prepandemic levels but profit opportunities were limited due
to elevated feed costs. Alongside severe drought in the
western portion of the District, the wheat crop was in
poorer condition in Colorado relative to other states.
Contacts also reported that the impact of drought on
pasture quality and hay production continued to worsen.
■

Real Estate and Construction
Residential real estate activity continued to expand
moderately in April and May, while commercial real
estate activity increased slightly for the first time since
the pandemic started. Home prices sustained robust
growth as sales increased moderately and inventories
continued to decline. Contacts expected these trends to
continue in the coming months. Construction supply
sales rose modestly since the last survey, and similar
gains were expected in the next few months. Commercial real estate contacts noted modest increases in absorption rates, sales, prices, rents, and construction as
well as a slight decrease in vacancy rates. Growth in
commercial sales and construction was expected to pick
up in the coming months, and vacancy rates were expected to fall modestly. However, developers’ access to
credit was expected to become modestly more difficult.
Banking
Loan demand rose slightly since the previous survey,
with gains driven by modest growth in the demand for
consumer installment loans and slight growth in the
demand for commercial real estate loans. Commercial,
industrial, and residential real estate loan demand held
steady, while demand for agricultural loans declined
modestly. Credit standards remained stable across all
lending categories, and bankers reported that overall
loan quality had improved strongly since last year. Additional improvement in loan quality was anticipated over
the next six months. Deposit levels increased robustly in

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.KansasCityFed.org/research/regional-research

J-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

Dallas
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a solid pace during the reporting period. Growth in the manufacturing and nonfinancial services sectors was strong, though activity remained below pre-pandemic levels. Retail sales
were mixed. Home sales and single-family construction remained robust, but activity was being constrained by labor, lot,
and materials shortages. Apartment demand rose, while office leasing stayed weak. Overall loan volume increased
sharply, buoyed by continued strength in real estate lending. Energy activity and agricultural conditions improved. Employment growth was moderate, and upward wage pressures continued as hiring remained a key challenge for many
companies. Ongoing supply chain disruptions intensified price pressures, particularly in the construction and manufacturing sectors. Outlooks improved, though there was widespread apprehension about the sustainability of current demand growth in light of supply constraints, difficulty hiring, and rising costs.

Employment and Wages

metals, and vehicles, as well as rising freight costs.
Some contacts expect costs to remain elevated for some
time due to strong demand and/or supply chain challenges. Selling prices rose at a fast clip in many sectors.
Housing contacts noted difficulty obtaining appraisals
due to rapid escalation in home prices. Compared to
yearend 2020, business contacts have revised upward
their expectations for input and selling price increases in
2021.

Employment expanded at a moderate pace. Lack of
labor availability, particularly for low-skilled positions,
was a growing concern among firms trying to hire or
recall workers, with a majority noting a lack of applicants
and generous unemployment benefits as impediments to
hiring. Many contacts, particularly accommodation and
food service firms, reported sizable numbers of unfilled
positions, and some noted that existing staff have had to
take on responsibilities outside of their normal jobs.
Some firms noted difficulties getting applicants to show
up for interviews, which further hampered hiring.

Manufacturing
Solid expansion continued in the manufacturing sector,
though the pace of growth eased from the prior reporting
period. Several durable goods manufacturers noted
large backorders and a lack of capacity to keep up with
strong demand. Those noting slower activity said supply
chain issues combined with inventory or raw materials
shortages led to slowdowns in production schedules.
Refining operations were recovering from the disruption
caused by the Colonial pipeline outage, and contacts
were increasingly optimistic for strong U.S. fuel demand
in the third quarter. Margins are expected to rise in the
second half of the year to near 2019 levels. Petrochemical production has mostly recovered from Winter Storm
Uri outages, but supply chain disruptions were likely to
persist through yearend 2021. Overall outlooks improved, although some manufacturers voiced concern
about the dampening effect on activity of supply constraints, extended lead times, and proposed tax hikes.

Wages continued to increase, with reports of significant
upward pressure in industries having trouble finding and
retaining workers. There were multiple reports of considerable wage pressures for mechanics, warehouse employees, construction specialty trades, and truck drivers.
A manufacturer said that even with a starting hourly
wage of $14 for non-skilled workers, they were unable fill
20-plus open positions.

Prices
Price pressures intensified further in part due to persistent supply chain issues, and multiple firms noted that
this was affecting business growth. Input costs surged,
with contacts in the construction, manufacturing, and
retail sectors citing the steepest increases. There were
several reports of higher prices of fuel, petrochemicals,
agricultural commodities, building materials, lumber,

K-1

Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Retail Sales

that there is a lot of money chasing multifamily deals and
pricing on assets is quite aggressive. Industrial construction and leasing remained robust. Demand for office
space remained weak and vacancies ticked up further.

Retail sales grew robustly in April but dipped in May,
which contacts attributed to supply chain issues and low
inventories. Auto sales expanded as well during the
reporting period, though new car supplies were limited
by microchip shortages. Outlooks were positive, buoyed
by the reopening of the economy and current pace of
vaccinations, though rising costs and inventory shortages remained a concern.

Financial Services
Loan volumes rose robustly over the past six weeks
supported by continued strength in commercial and
residential real estate activity. Commercial and industrial
loan volumes ticked up, while consumer lending was flat.
Nonperforming loans declined, and credit standards
stayed somewhat tight. Loan pricing remained competitive, and multiple contacts said they were flush with
liquidity and that it was difficult to deploy the excess
capital to generate reasonable returns. Sentiment regarding general business activity improved markedly,
with 68 percent of respondents citing an increase over
the past six weeks. Outlooks were optimistic, with contacts expecting continued declines in non-performing
loans, strong loan demand, and increased general business activity six months from now. Nearly half of respondents also noted that they expect long-term rates to
rise over the next 12 months.

Nonfinancial Services
Nonfinancial services expanded strongly over the reporting period. Demand growth was broad based, led by
increases in leisure and hospitality, transportation, and
professional and business services. Restaurateurs and
hoteliers said leisure activity was largely driving demand
as business travel remained sluggish. Airlines also cited
modest increases in ticket sales, which they attributed to
improvement in COVID statistics and easing restrictions.
Leisure travel continued to dominate airline bookings,
and contacts noted a pickup in reservations a few
months out. Staffing firms reported broad-based increases in demand. In transportation services, air cargo volumes rose sharply due to continued strength in domestic
e-commerce activity. Container shipments coming
through the Port of Houston picked up, and small parcel
shipments increased as well. Outlooks were positive,
although there was apprehension regarding the sustainability of current demand growth along with proposed
changes in tax policies among other regulations.

Energy
Drilling and completion activity rose further during the
reporting period. Oilfield services firms noted modest
hiring to support increased oil field activity. Exploration
and production firms expect the market to support a
West Texas Intermediate price of $60-65, and reiterated
that, at this price, capital spending plans would likely
remain unchanged among large U.S. producers. E&P
firms have slightly revised up their production outlook for
2021 thanks to strong year-to-date results. Sentiment in
the oil and gas industry improved further, though contacts remained cautious about changes in tax policy and
rising fuel, materials, and labor costs.

Construction and Real Estate
Activity in the single-family housing market remained
brisk. Sales continued to be robust, though builders were
struggling to keep up with demand and had to limit sales.
Several builders are shifting away from build-to-suit
construction to only starting inventory homes and selling
them at the framing or drywall stage due to production
challenges and escalating costs. In fact, in some instances, builders were selling lots and/or inventory homes to
the highest bidder. Others who were still doing build-tosuit jobs noted including price escalation clauses in
contracts to cover cost increases incurred during the
construction phase. Lot supply remained very tight as did
existing and finished vacant home inventories. In the
existing-home market, realtors reported bidding wars on
listings and homes getting snapped up quickly. Outlooks
were mixed, with contacts voicing concern about constrained lot supply, appraisal issues, rising costs, and
labor and material shortages.

Agriculture
Recent rainfall eased drought conditions in parts of the
District and improved prospects for row crops. Agricultural commodity prices moved higher across the board,
spurred by tight world supply and robust export demand.
Overall, row crop farmers were optimistic for improved
production and revenues this year. Significantly higher
grain prices, however, have negatively affected the
livestock sector with feed costs double what they were a
year ago. Beef exports were strong, which together with
continued capacity constraints in meat packing plants
have driven up beef prices to well-above-average levels.
■

Apartment demand was solid, pushing up occupancy
and rents. Apartment construction was ramping back up
after a slowdown last year due to COVID. Contacts said

For more information about District economic conditions visit:
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas

K-2

Federal Reserve Bank of

San Francisco
The Beige Book ■ May 2021

Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded significantly during the reporting period of April through mid-May.
Conditions in the agriculture and resources sectors improved notably, while manufacturing activity continued to expand
at a modest rate. Contacts reported ongoing strength in residential real estate markets, but largely unchanged conditions in the commercial real estate sector. Lending activity rose somewhat, with increased competition for new loans
and deals. Employment levels continued to increase modestly, accompanied by moderately higher wages. Price increases stepped up considerably, driven by increased material costs and supply chain disruptions. Retail sales increased a fair bit as vaccinations continued, allowing for further easing of social-distancing restrictions. Activity in the
consumer and business services sectors strengthened somewhat.

Employment and Wages

Prices

Overall employment levels continued to increase as the
labor market tightened in some regions. Employment
accelerated in states that only recently lifted business
restrictions, like California, and slowed modestly in
states where unemployment levels were already low, as
in the Mountain West. Most of the job growth was concentrated in the hospitality, retail, tourism, and food
services sectors, with employers seeking to rehire workers as the economy reopens and demand for these
services strengthens. However, many of these employers also reported facing difficulties hiring and retaining
workers for low-skilled jobs, as did contacts in manufacturing, construction, transportation, and agriculture.
Labor demand also picked up in the technology and
entertainment sectors while holding steady in the financial and other professional services sectors.

Price increases stepped up considerably over the reporting period. Continuing supply chain disruptions, low
inventories, and increasing labor costs have contributed
to upward pricing pressures in recent weeks. These
were most pronounced for users of raw materials, especially fuel and lumber. With burgeoning demand for food
services, prices for many agricultural products have also
risen, which translated into higher prices at grocers and
some restaurants. Additionally, prices for airline tickets,
rental cars, and lodging have started to normalize from
previous lows.

Retail Trade and Services
Retail sales increased a fair bit over the reporting period.
Sales growth was particularly strong in restaurants and
drinking establishments during recent weeks, as the
continued pace of vaccinations allowed for further easing
of social-distancing restrictions. A number of contacts
reported increased foot traffic in retail stores, while ecommerce sales continued to be strong. However, retailers across the District highlighted several supply chain
disruptions, including port issues, container shortages,
and manufacturing delays. As a result, most retailers,
even consignment and thrift stores, reported low inventory stock and raised concerns that the current sales pace
might slow in coming months. Sales of new and used
motor vehicles remained robust, although constrained by
low inventories, as did those of home improvement
goods. Demand for airline reservations was noted to

Wage pressures increased moderately. Employers in the
construction, manufacturing, technology, retail, healthcare, restaurant, and hospitality sectors reported having
to increase wages to retain and attract workers for both
high- and low-skilled jobs. In addition to raising wages,
these employers also mentioned offering other incentives such as sign-on bonuses, reduced or flexible hours,
and the ability to work remotely. Wage increases were
especially high in restaurants and hospitality services
ramping up to reopen, and employers reported difficulties in rehiring workers. Wages in financial services
remained stable.

L-1

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
have picked up for the first time since the onset of the
pandemic.

Real Estate and Construction
Residential construction activity continued to expand at a
brisk pace. Demand for single-family homes remained
strong, although construction still failed to meet high
demand since the previous reporting period. The lack of
available homes was further exacerbated by increasing
labor and transportation costs, as well as widespread
shortages of raw materials, including lumber, asphalt,
cement, steel, and wallboard. The lack of available land
caused some homebuilders to start building smaller
homes or to move further into rural areas. Contacts in
the Pacific Northwest noted that bidding wars are common for newly listed properties, and some homebuilders
are delaying price quotes until completion of new homes
due to overall cost uncertainties. Demand for multifamily
homes also increased, although a few contacts noted
that projects in metropolitan areas had to be put on hold
due to increasing costs. Several contacts in California
mentioned a backlog of permits due to COVID-related
shutdowns in local governments.

Activity in the services sector also strengthened moderately. Following the further unwinding of pandemicrelated restrictions, conditions in the travel, leisure, entertainment, and hospitality industries improved, albeit
slowly. Bookings for hotel rooms slightly increased due
to a pickup in leisure travel. Restaurants reported operating at almost full capacity outdoors, although indoor
dining capacity was still limited. Demand increased for
automotive parts and services, as well as for car rentals.
In health care, elective services and non-COVID-19 lab
testing increased modestly, but preventive services
remained subdued. Demand for transportation and logistical services continued to be strong, while that of legal
and other professional services was largely unchanged.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a modest
rate. New orders growth remained strong, especially for
wood products, chemicals, manufactured metals, computers, electronics, and manufactured food products. Yet
delivery delays and shortages of input materials, such as
semiconductors, continued to hold back production and
decreased inventories in some cases. Wood product
manufacturers in the Pacific Northwest, already operating at full capacity, reported having to delay production
of some orders. A contact in Southern California noted
that capacity utilization rates in manufacturing of renewable energy equipment have normalized, and new orders
are generally growing.

Conditions in the commercial real estate market were
largely unchanged. Demand for new office, retail, and
hospitality space stayed muted with reports of high vacancies and declining lease rates. However, demand for
industrial, warehouse and distribution spaces strengthened especially in the suburbs, and vacancy rates were
noted to be relatively low with lease rates either steady
or rising. One contact in Southern California mentioned
that the continued pace for vaccinations has contributed
to a slight pickup in demand for retail space, as people
return to metropolitan areas in preparation of in-person
work.

Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in the agriculture and resources sectors
notably improved. Loosened capacity restrictions in
restaurants and drinking establishments contributed to
stronger demand for agriculture products, including
wheat, corn, nuts, and fruits. Demand from abroad also
increased, aided by the depreciating dollar in the later
part of the reporting period. As a result, inventories of
fruits and nuts were noted to have decreased to lowerthan-usual levels. However, supply chain disruptions
continued to negatively affect many producers with one
reporting both domestic and international logistical issues that resulted in significant delays in seafood product sales. Growers in California noted that current
drought conditions are expected to negatively impact
annual crops this year, driving up labor and electricity
costs as farmers depend more on wells and water
pumps for irrigation.

Financial Institutions
Lending activity rose somewhat during the reporting
period. Most new growth in loan origination was led by
demand for commercial and multifamily real estate.
Residential mortgage and refinancing activity also continued to be solid, while demand for auto loans and
credit cards held steady. However, contacts across the
District noted increased competition among financial
institutions for new loans and deals, which led a few to
raise concerns over deteriorating loan quality. Overall
though, banks reported low delinquency rates, ample
liquidity, and high asset quality. Mergers and acquisitions
activity continued to increase, although one contact in
Southern California observed a decline in SPACs
(special purpose acquisition companies) origination in
recent weeks. ■

L-2

