September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Conference
September 20, 2023
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone. My colleagues and I remain squarely
focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the
American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain
strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the
responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for
anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong
labor market conditions that benefit all.
Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary
policy. We have raised our policy interest rate by 5-1/4 percentage points and have continued to
reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full
effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Today we decided to leave our policy interest rate
unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we are in a
position to proceed carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be
appropriate. Our decisions will be based on our ongoing assessments of the incoming data and
the evolving outlook and risks. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly
reviewing economic developments.
Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace, and
so far this year, growth in real GDP has come in above expectations. Recent readings on
consumer spending have been particularly robust. Activity in the housing sector has picked up
somewhat, though it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage
rates. Higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. In our
Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, Committee participants revised up their assessments
Page 1 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

of real GDP growth, with the median for this year now at 2.1 percent. Participants expect growth
to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.5 percent next year.
The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into
better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 150 thousand jobs per
month, a strong pace that is nevertheless well below that seen earlier in the year. The
unemployment rate ticked up in August but remains low, at 3.8 percent. The labor force
participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54
years. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined
so far this year. Although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the
supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to
continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the
SEP rises from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent over the next two years.
Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Based on the Consumer
Price Index, or CPI, and other data, we estimate that total PCE prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12
months ending in August; and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE
prices rose 3.9 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, and
longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range
of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial
markets. Nevertheless, the process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long
way to go. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 3.3 percent this year, falls
to 2.5 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026.
The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum
employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware

Page 2 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for
those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We
are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are
strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective.
As I noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by
5-1/4 percentage points. We see the current stance of monetary policy as restrictive, putting
downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. In addition, the economy is
facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In light of how
far we have come in tightening policy, the Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the
target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue the process of
significantly reducing our securities holdings.
We are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is
sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal over time. In our SEP,
FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the
federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going
forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the
appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.1 percent
at the end of 2024, and 3.9 percent at the end of 2025. Compared with our June Summary of
Economic Projections, the median projection is unrevised for the end of this year but has moved
up by 1/2 percentage point at the end of the next two years. These projections, of course, are not
a Committee decision or plan; if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy
will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. We will
continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data

Page 3 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance
of risks.
Given how far we have come, we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the
incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. Real interest rates now are well above
mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate, but we are mindful of the inherent uncertainties
in precisely gauging the stance of policy. We are prepared to raise rates further if appropriate,
and we intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we are confident that inflation is moving
down sustainably toward our objective. In determining the extent of additional policy firming
that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into
account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy
affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments.
We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to
keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require
a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price
stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over
the longer run.
To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses
across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do
everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you,
and I look forward to your questions.
MICHELLE SMITH. Colby.
COLBY SMITH. Thank you. Colby Smith with the Financial Times. What makes the
Committee inclined to think that the fed funds rate at this level is not yet sufficiently restrictive,
Page 4 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

especially when officials are forecasting a slightly more benign inflation outlook for this year?
There's noted uncertainty about policy lags. Headwinds have emerged from the looming
government shutdown, the end of federal childcare funding, resumption of student debt
payments, things of that nature.
CHAIR POWELL. So I guess I would characterize the situation a little bit differently. So
we decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate where it is, at 5.25 percent to
5.5 percent, while continuing to reduce our securities holdings. And we say we're committed to
achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that's sufficiently restrictive to bring down
inflation to 2 percent over time. We said that. But the fact that we decided to maintain the policy
rate at this meeting doesn't mean that we've decided that we have or have not at this time reached
that stance of monetary policy that we're seeking. If you look at the SEP, as you obviously will
have done, you will see that the majority of participants believe that it is more likely than not that
it will be appropriate for us to raise rates one more time in the two remaining meetings this year.
Others believe that we have already reached that. So it's something where we're not making a
decision about that question by deciding to just maintain the rate and await further data.
COLBY SMITH. So right now it's still an open question about sufficiently restrictive.
You're not saying today that we've reached this level?
CHAIR POWELL. No. Clearly what we decided to do is maintain the policy rate and
await further data. We want to see convincing evidence, really, that we have reached the
appropriate level, and we're seeing progress, and we welcome that. But we need to see more
progress before we'll be willing to reach that conclusion.

Page 5 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

COLBY SMITH. And just on the 2024 projections, what's behind that shallower path for
interest rate cuts and the need for real rates to be 50 basis points higher?
CHAIR POWELL. Right. So, I would say it this way. First of all, real interest rates are
positive now. They're meaningfully positive. And that's a good thing. We need policy to be
restrictive so that we can get inflation down to target. Okay. And we're going to need that to
remain to be the case for some time. So I think, you know, remember that, of course, the SEP is
not a plan that is negotiated or discussed, really, as a plan. It's accumulation, really, and what you
see are the medians. It's accumulation of individual forecasts from 19 people, and then what
you're seeing are the medians. So I wouldn't want to bestow upon it the idea that it's really a plan.
But what it reflects, though, is that economic activity has been stronger than we expected,
stronger than I think everyone expected. And so what you're seeing is this is what people believe,
as of now, will be appropriate to achieve what we're looking to achieve, which is progress
toward our inflation goal, as you see in the SEP.
MICHELLE SMITH. Thanks. Let's go to Rachel.
RACHEL SIEGEL. Hi, Chair Powell. Rachel Siegel from The Washington Post. Thanks
for taking our questions. How would you characterize the debate around another hike or holding
steady? Is it discussion around lag times, fear of too much slowing, too little slowing? Could you
walk us through what this disagreement was about at the meeting?
CHAIR POWELL. Yeah, so the proposal at the meeting was to maintain our current
policy stance, and I think there was obviously unanimous support for that. But this, of course, is
an SEP meeting, and so people write down what they think, and you've got some, you saw I
think seven wrote down no hike at this meeting or between now and the end of the year, and I
Page 6 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

think 12 wrote down another single hike in one of the next two meetings that we have between
the end of the year. So, it wasn't like we were arguing over that, people just stating their
positions. And really what people are saying is let's see how the data come in. You know, we
want to see -- you know what we want to see. We want to see that these good inflation readings
that we've been seeing for the last three months, we want to see that it's more than just three
months, right? We want to see, you know -- the labor market report that we received, the last one
that we received was a good example of what we do want to see. It was a combination of, you
know, across a broad range of indicators, continuing rebalancing of the labor market. So those
are the two things, those are our two mandate variables, and that's the progress that we want to
see. But I think people, they want to be convinced, you know, they want to be careful not to
jump to a conclusion really one way or the other, but just be convinced that the data, you know,
support that conclusion. And that's why, given how far we've come and how quickly we've come,
we're actually in a position to be able to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the
evolving outlooks and risks and make these decisions meeting by meeting.
RACHEL SIEGEL. And in your view, what would -- I know nothing has been decided
yet, but what would one more hike at the end of the year do to the economy or to inflation? And
on the other side, what would no hike do, if you could sort of game that out for us?
CHAIR POWELL. So, you know, you can make the argument that one hike one way or
the other won't matter, but for us, we're trying, obviously as a group, it's a pretty tight cluster of
where we think that policy stance might be, but we're always going to be learning from data. You
know, we've learned all through the course of the last year that actually we needed to go further
than we had thought. If you go back a year and what we thought, what we wrote down, it's
actually gotten higher and higher. So we don't really know until, and that's why, again, we're in a
Page 7 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

position to proceed carefully at this point. A year ago, we proceeded pretty quickly to get rates
up. Now we're fairly close, we think, to where we need to get. It's just a question of reaching the
right stance. I wouldn't attribute huge importance to one hike in macroeconomic terms.
Nonetheless, you know, we need to get to a place where we're confident that we have a stance
that will bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. That's what we need to get to, and we've
been moving toward it. As we've gotten closer to it, we've slowed the pace at which we've
moved. I think that was appropriate. And now that we're getting closer, again, we have the ability
to proceed carefully.
MICHELLE SMITH. Let's go to Steve.
STEVE LIESMAN. Steve Leisman, CNBC. Mr. Chairman, I want to return to Colby's
question here. What is it saying about the Committee's view of the inflation dynamic in the
economy that you achieve the same forecast inflation rate for next year but need another half a
point of the funds rate on it? Does it tell us that the Committee believes inflation to be more
persistent, requires more medicine effectively? And I guess a related question is if you're going
to project a funds rate above the longer-run rate for four years in a row, at what point do we start
to think, hey, maybe the longer rate or the neutral rate is actually higher? Thank you.
CHAIR POWELL. So I guess I would point more to -- rather than pointing to a sense of
inflation having become more persistent, we've seen inflation be more persistent over the course
of the past year, but I wouldn't say that's something that's appeared in the recent data. It's more
about stronger economic activity, I would say. So if I had to attribute one thing, again, we're
picking medians here and trying to attribute one explanation, but I think broadly stronger
economic activity means we have to do more with rates, and that's what that meaning is telling
you. In terms of what the neutral rate can be, you know, we know it by its works. We only know
Page 8 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

it by its works, really. We can’t – we can’t - the models that we use, ultimately you only know
when you get there and by the way the economy reacts, and, again, that's another reason why
we're moving carefully now because, you know, there are lags here. So it may, of course, be that
the neutral rate has risen. You do see people, you don't see the median moving, but you do see
people raising their estimates of the neutral rate, and it's certainly plausible that the neutral rate is
higher than the longer-run rate. Remember, what we write down in the SEP is the longer-run
rate. It is certainly possible that, you know, that the neutral rate at this moment is higher than that
and that that's part of the explanation for why the economy has been more resilient than
expected.
MICHELLE SMITH. Let's go to Howard.
HOWARD SCHNEIDER. Howard Schneider with Reuters. Thank you. So you've said
several times that the economy needed a period of below-trend growth to get inflation
consistently back to 2 percent.You kind of get that in 2024, a little bit, 1.5 percent. It's just a
touch below what's the estimate of potential. So the fact that you're getting so much done at so
much less cost, does that represent a change in how you think inflation works, a change in how
you think the economy works, a change in the mix of supply healing versus demand destruction
that's necessary to achieve this?
CHAIR POWELL. Yes, of course. It is a good thing that we've seen now meaningful
rebalancing in the labor market without an increase in unemployment, and that's because we're
seeing that rebalancing in other places. In, for example, job openings and in the jobs worker gap.
You're also seeing supply-side things. So that's happening. I would say, though, I still think, and
I think broadly, people still think that there will have to be some softening in the labor market
that can come through more supply, as we've seen as well. Also, remember the natural rate we
Page 9 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

think is coming down, which is a supply-side thing, so that the gap between any given
unemployment rate that's lower than that and the natural rate comes down, that's a way for the
labor market to achieve a better balance. So, all of those things are happening. You're right. In
the median forecast, we don't see a big increase in unemployment. We do see an increase, but
that really is just playing forward the trends that we've been seeing. That is not guaranteed. There
may come a time when unemployment goes up more than that, but that's really what we've been
seeing is progress without higher unemployment for now.
HOWARD SCHNEIDER. So just to boil that down for a second, you know, we've gone
from a very narrow path to a soft landing to something different. Would you call the soft landing
now a baseline expectation?
CHAIR POWELL. No, no. I would not do that. I would just say -- what would I say
about that? I've always thought that the soft landing was a plausible outcome, that there was a
path, really, to a soft landing. I've thought that and I've said that since we lifted off. It's also
possible that the path is narrowed, and it's widened apparently. Ultimately, this may be decided
by factors that are outside our control at the end of the day. But I do think it's possible. I also
think, you know, this is why we're in a position to move carefully again. We will restore price
stability. We know that we have to do that and we know the public depends on us doing that, and
we know that we have to do it so that we can achieve the kind of labor market that we all want to
achieve, which is an extended period, sustained period of strong labor market conditions that
benefit all. We know that. The fact that we've come this far lets us really proceed carefully, as I
keep saying. So I think, you know, that's the end we're trying to achieve. I wouldn't want to
handicap the likelihood of it, though. It's not up to me to do that.
MICHELLE SMITH. Nick.
Page 10 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

NICK TIMIRAOS. Nick Timiraos, the Wall Street Journal. Chair Powell, both you and
Vice Chair Williams have indicated that sufficiently restrictive will be judged on a real rather
than nominal basis, implying some scope for nominal rate cuts next year provided further
compelling evidence that price pressures will continue to subside. Is the FOMC focused on
targeting a real level of policy restriction? And can you explain what would constitute enough
evidence that will allow the FOMC to normalize the nominal stance of policy while keeping real
policy settings sufficiently restrictive?
CHAIR POWELL. I mean, yes, we understand that it's a real rate that will matter and
that needs to be sufficiently restrictive. And, again, I would say you know sufficiently restrictive
only when you see it. It's not something you can arrive at with confidence in a model or in
various estimates, you know. And so what are we seeing? We're seeing, you know, through a
combination of the unwinding of the pandemic-related demand and supply distortions and
monetary policies work in suppressing demand or alleviating very high demand. The
combination of those two things is actually working. You're seeing, you know, inflation coming
down. It's principally now in goods, also in housing services. You begin to see effects of it in
non-housing services as well. So, I think we think that that is working. And I think, you know, as
we've said, we want to reach that. We want to reach something that we're confident gets us to
that level. And I think confidence comes from seeing, you know, enough data that you feel like,
yes, okay, this feels like we can for now decide that this is the right level and just agree to stay
here. We're not permanently deciding not to go higher, but let's say if we get to that level. And
then the question is, how long do you stay at that level? And that's a whole other set of questions.
For now, the question is trying to find that level where we think we can stay there. And we
haven't gotten to a point of confidence about that yet. That's the stage we're at, though.
Page 11 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

NICK TIMIRAOS. But it looks like, because there was an across-the-board drop in the
core PCE projection, core PCE inflation projection for this year, and even then it seems possible
that core PCE inflation could come in even lower than the median at 3.7 percent. Would you see
a case to raise rates still if it turned out that you were going to achieve the same real rate this year
because the decline in inflation proceeds somewhat better than you currently anticipate?
CHAIR POWELL. The decision that we make, you know, at each meeting and certainly
at the last two meetings this year, it's going to depend on the totality of all the data. So the
inflation data, the labor market data, the growth data, the balance of risks and the other events
that are happening out there. We take all of that into account, so I can't really answer a
hypothetical about one piece of that. It will be trying to reach a judgment over whether we
should move forward with another rate hike overall and whether that would increase our
confidence that, yes, this is an appropriate move, and it will help us be more confident that we've
gotten to the level that we need to get to.
MICHELLE SMITH. Jeanna?
JEANNA SMIALEK. Thanks, Chair Powell. Following up on Nick's question, actually,
John Williams, the New York Fed president, obviously, has said things to the effect of next year
as we see inflation kind of, again, to Nick's point, as we see inflation coming down, we're going
to need to reduce interest rates so that we're not squeezing the economy harder and harder over
time. And I wonder if that's basically the logic that you apply. Is that how you think about it?
And then I also wonder, in the last press conference, you said something to the effect of it's a full
year out, those discussions, and people interpreted that to mean that you didn't see a possibility
of a rate cut in the first half of next year. And I wonder if that was what you meant by that or
how you're thinking about that timing.
Page 12 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

CHAIR POWELL. So when I answer these questions about hypotheticals about cutting,
I'm never intending to send a signal about timing. I'm just answering them as the question is
expressed. So please, I wouldn't want to be taken that way. Sorry, the first question was, is that
how? Yeah, so as we go into next year, the question we'll be asking is, you know, taking into
account lags and everything else we know about the economy and everything we know about
monetary policy, the time will come at some point, and I'm not saying when, that it's appropriate
to cut. Part of that may be that real rates are rising because inflation is coming down. Part of it
just may be that it'll be all the factors that we see in the economy. And, you know, that time will
certainly come at some point. And what you see is us writing down, you know, a year ahead
estimates of what that might be. And, you know, there's so much uncertainty around that. When
we're in the moment, we'll do what we think makes sense. No one will look back at this and say,
hey, we made a plan. It's not like that at all. These are estimates made a year in advance that are
highly uncertain, and that's how it is.
MICHELLE SMITH. Neil.
NEIL IRWIN. Thanks so much, Chair Powell. Neil Irwin with Axios. I wonder, how do
you think about the question of whether the strong GDP growth we've been seeing is driven by
excess demand versus supply-side factors, productivity, labor force growth? And relatedly, if
GDP keeps coming in hot, even in the absence of inflation resurgence, would that on its own be a
reason to consider more tightening?
CHAIR POWELL. So on your first question, I mean, we're looking at GDP very, very
carefully to try to understand really what's the direction of it, what's driving it. And it's a lot of
consumer spending, you know. The consumer's been very robust in spending. So that is, you
know, that's how we're looking at it. Sorry, your second question was?
Page 13 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

NEIL IRWIN. Does GDP stay hot, but without inflation?
CHAIR POWELL. So I think the question will be, GDP is not a mandate, right?
Maximum employment and price stability are the mandates. The question will be, is the heat that
we see in GDP, is it really a threat to our ability to get back to 2 percent inflation? That's going
to be the question. It's not a question about GDP on its own. It's, you know, you're expecting to
see this improvement, you know, continued rebalancing in the labor market and inflation moving
back down to 2 percent in a sustainable way. We have to have confidence in that, and, you know,
we'd be looking at GDP just to the extent that it threatens one or both of those.
MICHELLE SMITH. Victoria.
VICTORIA GUIDA. Hi, Victoria Guido with Politico. There are multiple external
factors that are playing out right now. We see rising oil prices. We see auto workers striking.
There's the looming very real possibility of a government shutdown. And I was just wondering,
for each of those things, could you talk about how you're thinking about how that might affect
the course for the Fed and the economy?
CHAIR POWELL. So there is a long list, and you hit some of them. But, you know, it's
the strike, it's government shutdown, resumption of student loan payments, higher long-term
rates, oil price shock. You know, there are a lot of things that you can look at. And, you know, so
what we try to do is assess all of them and handicap all of them. And ultimately, though, there's
so much uncertainty around these things. I mean, to start with the strike, first of all, we
absolutely don't comment on the strike as we have no view on the strike one way or the other.
But we do have to make an assessment of its economic effects to do our jobs. So, you know, the
thing about it is so uncertain. It will depend. Economic effects, it could affect -- we've looked
Page 14 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

back at history. It could affect economic output, hiring and inflation. But that's really going to
depend on how broad it is and how long it's sustained for. And then it also depends on how
quickly production can make up for lost production. So none of those things are known right
now. It's very, very hard to know. So you just have to leave that uncertain. And we'll be learning,
I think, over the course of the next intermeeting period much more about that. And the same is
true for the others. I don't know if you mentioned shutdown. I think of all of these as being on
the list. We don't comment on that. It hasn't traditionally had much of a macroeconomic effect.
You know, energy prices being higher, that is a significant thing. Energy prices being up can
affect spending. It can affect spending over time. A sustained period of higher energy prices can
affect consumer expectations about inflation. We tend to look through short-term volatility and
look at core inflation. But so the question is how long are higher prices sustained. We have to
take those macroeconomic effects into account as well. Those are some of them. I'm not sure if I
hit them all. But, I mean, ultimately, you know, you're coming into this with an economy that
appears to have significant momentum. And that's what we start with. But we do have this
collection of risks that you mentioned.
MICHELLE SMITH. Craig.
CRAIG TORRES. Craig Torres from Bloomberg News. I was a little surprised, Chair
Powell, to hear you say that a soft landing is not a primary objective. This economy is seeing
added supply in a way that could create long-term inflation stability. We have prime age labor
force participation moving up where people can add skills. Workers want to work. We have a
boom in manufacturing construction. We've had a decent spate of home building. And since
inflation is coming down with strong GDP growth, we may have higher productivity. All are
which good for the Fed's longer run target of low inflation. And if we lose that in a recession,
Page 15 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

aren't we opting for the awful hysteresis that we had in 2010? So ,are you taking this into account
as you pursue policy? Thank you.
CHAIR POWELL. To begin, a soft landing is a primary objective, and I did not say
otherwise. I mean, that's what we've been trying to achieve for all this time. The real point,
though, is the worst thing we can do is to fail to restore price stability, because the record is clear
on that. If you don't restore price stability, inflation comes back, and you can have a long period
where the economy is just very uncertain and it will affect growth, it will affect all kinds of
things. It can be a miserable period to have inflation constantly coming back and the Fed coming
in and having to tighten again and again. So the best thing we can do for everyone, we believe, is
to restore price stability. I think now, today, we actually have the ability to be careful at this
point and move carefully, and that's what we're planning to do. So, we fully appreciate the
benefits of being able to continue what we see already, which is rebalancing in the labor market
and inflation coming down without seeing an important large increase in unemployment, which
has been typical of other tightening cycles.
MICHELLE SMITH. Let's go to Chris.
CHRIS RUGABER. Hi. Thank you. Chris Rugaber, Associated Press. When you look at
the disinflation that has taken place so far, do you see it mostly as a result of what some
economists are calling the low-hanging fruit, such as the unwinding of supply chain snarls and
other pandemic disruptions, or is it more of a broad disinflationary trend that involves most
goods and services across the economy? Thank you.
CHAIR POWELL. If I understood your question, I would say it this way. I think we
knew from the time, from before when we lifted off, but certainly by the time we lifted, we knew
Page 16 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

that bringing inflation back down was going to take, as I call it, the unwinding of these
distortions to both supply and demand that happened because of the pandemic and the response.
So that unwinding was going to be important. In addition, monetary policy was going to help. It
was going to help supply side heal by cooling demand off and just, in general, better aligning
supply with demand. So those two forces were always going to be important. I think it's very
hard to pull them apart. They work together. I do think both of them are at work now, and I think
they're at work in a way that shows you the progress that we are seeing.
MICHELLE SMITH. Mike.
MICHAEL MCKEE. Michael McKee from Bloomberg Television and Radio. In June,
you forecast a 5.6 percent year-end median fed funds rate, and since then you've more than
doubled your growth forecast. You've lowered your unemployment forecast significantly. So
what would justify that last move, because the median forecast is for lower inflation? And given
all the known unknowns that you face, how much confidence do you have, can investors have, or
the American people have in your forecasts?
CHAIR POWELL. Well, forecasts are highly uncertain. Forecasting is very difficult.
Forecasters are a humble lot with much to be humble about. But to get to your question, though,
what's happened is growth has come in stronger, right, stronger than expected, and that's required
higher rates. Unemployment, you know, you also see that the ultimate unemployment rate is not
as high, but that's really because of what we've been seeing in the labor market. We've seen more
and more progress in the labor market without seeing significantly higher unemployment. So
we're continuing that trend. In terms of inflation, you are seeing the last three readings are very
good readings. It's only three readings, you know. We're well aware that we need to see more
than three readings. But if you look at June, July, and August, you're looking at, you know, really
Page 17 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

significant declines in core inflation, largely in the goods sector, also to some extent in housing
services, and just a little in non-housing services. Those are the three buckets. Headline inflation,
of course, has come way down, largely due to lower energy prices, some of which is now
reversing. So I think people should know that economic forecasting is very difficult, and these
are highly uncertain forecasts. But these are our forecasts. You know, we have very high-quality
people working on these forecasts, and I think they stand up well against other forecasters. But
just the nature of the business is the economy is very difficult to forecast.
MICHAEL MCKEE. Given the forecast that you have, what justified not moving today,
and what could justify moving in the future if you think inflation is coming down? In other
words, why did you leave that extra dot in?
CHAIR POWELL. Well, I think we have come very far very fast in the rate increases that
we've made. And I think it was important at the beginning that we move quickly, and we did.
And I think as we get closer to the rate that we think, the stance of monetary policy that we think
is appropriate to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, you know, the risks become more
two-sided. And the risk of over-tightening and the risk of under-tightening becomes more equal.
And I think the natural, common-sense thing to do is as you approach that, you move a little
more slowly as you get closer to it. And that's what we're doing. So we're taking advantage of the
fact that we have moved quickly to move a little more carefully now as we sort of find our way
to the right level of restriction that we need to get inflation back down to 2 percent.
MICHELLE SMITH. Jennifer.
JENNIFER SCHONBERGER. Thank you, Chair Powell. Jennifer Schonberger with
Yahoo Finance. With your focus on year-over-year PCE, isn't it true that base effects are huge
Page 18 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

and that by the time you meet in November that it's more likely that you'll have a low PCE
number that would make you feel more comfortable? And secondly, how would the lack of key
indicators like CPI, the jobs report, impact your approach in upcoming meetings if we were to
have a government shutdown? Thank you.
CHAIR POWELL. I missed the first question. You missed what factors?
JENNIFER SCHONBERGER. The base factors.
CHAIR POWELL. Base factors. Ah. Okay. So on that, we're looking at just monthly
readings and see what the increase was from the prior month. So you're right, when you go back
3, 6, and 12 months, you get base factors. But we can adjust for that. In terms of not getting data,
again, we don't comment on government shutdowns. It's possible. If there is a government
shutdown and it lasts through the next meeting, then it's possible we wouldn't be getting some of
the data that we would ordinarily get and we would just have to deal with that. And I don't know.
It's hard for me to say in advance how that would affect that meeting. It would depend on all
kinds of factors that I don't know about now. But it's certainly a reality that that's a possibility.
JENNIFER SCHONBERGER. Would you feel more comfortable on the base effects that,
as those kind of fall out of the equation for the next couple of readings by November, would you
feel more comfortable at that point?
CHAIR POWELL. You know, yes. I mean, if you're looking, we can tell how much
inflation has gone up in a given month, right? And, you know, that's what we're looking at. And
month by month, what's the reading? And, you know, I think what we're really looking at is
there's a tendency to look at, you know, shorter and shorter maturities, but they're incredibly
volatile and they can be misleading. That's why we look at 12 months. But I think in this
Page 19 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

situation where it looks like we've had a bit of a turn in inflation starting in June, we're also
looking at six months and even three months, but really six months inflation. So you're looking
at it over that period and over longer periods. That's the right way to go. And we don't need to be
in a hurry in getting to a conclusion about what to do. We can let the data evolve.
EDWARD LAWRENCE. Thanks for the question, Chair Powell. Edward Lawrence with
Fox Business. So I want to focus back in on oil prices. We're seeing oil prices, as you mentioned,
move up, and that's pushing the price of gas. So how does that factor into your decision to raise
rates or not? In the last two inflation reports, PCE and CPI, we've seen the overall inflation has
actually risen.
CHAIR POWELL. Right. So, you know, energy prices are very important for the
consumer. This can affect consumer spending. It certainly can affect consumer sentiment. I
mean, gas prices are one of the big things that affects consumer sentiment. It really comes down
to how persistent, how sustained these energy prices are. The reason why we look at core
inflation, which excludes food and energy, is that energy goes up and down like that. And energy
prices mostly don't contain much of a signal about how tight the economy is, and hence don't tell
you much about where inflation is really going. However, we're well aware, though, that, you
know, if energy prices increase and stay high, that will have an effect on spending. And it may
have an effect on consumer expectations of inflation, things like that. That's just things we have
to monitor.
EDWARD LAWRENCE. On the consumer, they're putting more and more of this on
their credit card. The consumer is seeing, you know, record credit spending. How long do you
think the consumer can manage that debt at higher interest rates now? And are you concerned
about a debt bubble related to that?
Page 20 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

CHAIR POWELL. So to finish my prior thought, I was saying that's why we tend to look
through energy moves that we can see as short-term volatility. You know, turning to consumer
credit, you know, of course we watch that carefully. Consumer distress, measures of distress
among consumers were at historic lows quite recently, you know, during and after the pandemic.
They're now moving back up to normal. We're watching that carefully. But at this point, these
readings are not at troublingly high levels. They're just kind of moving back up to what was
typical in the pre-pandemic era.
MICHELLE SMITH. Jean.
JEAN YUNG. Hi, Jean Yung with MNI Market News. Yields along the Treasury curve
have risen to their highest in years. What is the Fed's view about what's been driving that
increase in recent weeks and how much of it can be attributed to macro explanations and how
much to technical factors?
CHAIR POWELL. So you're right. You know, rates have moved up significantly. I think
it's always hard to say precisely, but most people do a common decomposition of the increase,
and the view will be it's not mostly about inflation expectations. It's mostly about other things,
you know, either term premium or real yields, and it's hard to be precise about this. Of course,
everyone's got models that will give you a very precise answer, but they give you different
answers. But essentially, they're moving up. It's not because of inflation. It's because probably it
will probably have something to do with stronger growth, I would say more supply of Treasuries.
You know, the common explanations that you hear in the markets kind of make sense.
MICHELLE SMITH. Kyle.

Page 21 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

KYLE CAMPBELL. Kyle Campbell, American Banker. Thank you for taking the
questions. Just two on housing. You've said slower shelter cost growth is in the pipeline and will
reflect in inflation readings as new leases are signed, but there's also some questions out there
about the way housing costs are measured, particularly the use of rental equivalents, which are
estimates from homeowners about what their homes would rent for if they were in the rental
market. So my question is how much of the effort to tame inflation, both as it's measured and felt
by the broader public, hinges on housing supply? And then as far as a constrained housing
supply being sort of exacerbated by this sort of lock-in effect of mortgages being higher now
than they were at their recent historic lows, how is that going to impact future thinking about
taking interest rates to that lower bound in the future?
CHAIR POWELL. So on the supply point, of course, supply is very important over time
in setting house prices and, for that matter, rents. And so supply is kind of structurally
constrained. But in terms of where inflation is going in the near term, though, as you obviously
know, a lot of it is leases that are running off and then being re-signed or re-leased at a level
that's not as high. It won't be that much higher. A year ago, it would have been much higher than
it was a year before. Now it may be below or at the same level. So as those leases are rolling
over, we're seeing what we expect, which is measured housing services inflation coming down.
Your second question was the lock-ins. How much is that affecting things, really?
KYLE CAMPBELL. Is that going to affect your decisions to potentially bring rates down
to their lower bound in the future, sort of creating that sort of bubble of buying and then a lock-in
that sort of stagnates the housing market?
CHAIR POWELL. I think we look at the -- I would look at the lock-in, the idea being
that people are in very low-rate mortgages, and even if they want to move now, it would be hard
Page 22 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

because the new mortgage would be so expensive. And that's one of the explanations for what's
happening broadly in the labor market. Would that play a role in our future decisions, in a future
loosening cycle about whether we would cut rates? No, I don't think it would. I mean, I think
we'd be looking at, you know, fundamentally, what rates does the economy need? And, you
know, in an emergency like the pandemic or during the global financial crisis, you know, you
have to cut rates to the point that you have to do what you can to support the economy. So I
wouldn't think that that would be a reason for us not to do that. It's not something we're thinking
about at all right now, but down the road, I wouldn't think so.
MICHELLE SMITH. Nancy.
NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER. Hi, Nancy Marshall-Genzer with Marketplace. Chair
Powell, you've mentioned several things that would possibly weigh on consumer confidence,
maybe cut back consumer spending, possible government shutdown, high gas prices. At this
point, would the Fed welcome a decrease in consumer spending? Would that help you get
inflation closer to your 2 percent target?
CHAIR POWELL. I wouldn't say it that way. We're not looking for a decrease in
consumer spending. It's a good thing that the economy is strong. It's a good thing that the
economy has been able to hold up under the tightening that we've done. It's a good thing that the
labor market is strong. The only concern -- it just means this. If the economy comes in stronger
than expected, that just means we'll have to do more in terms of monetary policy to get back to 2
percent, because we will get back to 2 percent. Does that answer your question?
NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER. Yeah, and I guess on the other hand, would you worry
that that could contribute to an economic slowdown or even a recession?
Page 23 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

CHAIR POWELL. Well, that's always a concern. I mean, concern number one is
restoring price stability, because in the long run that's something we have to do so that we can
have the kind of economy we really want, which is one with sustained period of tight labor
market conditions that benefit all, as I've said a couple times. So that said, of course, we also
now, given how far we've come with our rate hikes and how quickly we've come here, we do
have the ability to be careful as we move forward because of that consideration.
MICHELLE SMITH. Simon.
SIMON RABINOVICH. Thank you, Chair Powell. Simon Rabinovich with The
Economist. One of the factors in the economic resilience to date appears to be a lesser degree of
rate sensitivity than in the past. Obviously, we've talked about households with long fixed-rate
mortgages, also companies that refinanced before last year. What is your thinking about the
efficacy of rates and how that's changed? And then related to that, how do you think about the
distributional consequences in the sense that if you're a relatively wealthy household with a long
fixed-rate mortgage, the past year has not been all that tough with rates going up, whereas if
you're relying on your credit card for supporting your consumption, in fact, times are getting a
lot tougher a lot more quickly? Thanks.
CHAIR POWELL. So I guess it's fair to say that the economy has been stronger than
many expected, given what's been happening with interest rates. Why is that? Many candidate
explanations, possibly a number of them make sense. One is just that household balance sheets
and business balance sheets have been stronger than we had understood, and so that spending has
held up and that kind of thing. We're not sure about that. The savings rate for consumers has
come down a lot. The question is whether that's sustainable. It could just mean that the date of
effect is later. It could also be that for other reasons the neutral rate of interest is higher for
Page 24 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

various reasons. We don't know that. It could also just be that policy hasn't been restrictive
enough for long enough. And there are many candidate explanations. We have to, in all this
uncertainty, make policy, and I feel like what we have right now is what's still a very strong
labor market, but that's coming back into balance. We were making progress on inflation.
Growth is strong. But I think by many forecasts, many, many, many forecasts call for growth to
moderate over the course of the next year. So that's where we are, and we have to deal with what
comes. On your second question, which was distributional, can you be a little clearer about that?
SIMON RABINOVICH. Yeah, my point there was that if you're somebody who has a
long fixed-rate mortgage, you've been able to endure the higher rates relatively easily. If you're
somebody who's living month to month off of your credit card, current financing rates are
punitive.
CHAIR POWELL. Yes, and so the point I would make there is that we're trying to get
inflation back down. The people who are most hurt by inflation are the people who are on a fixed
income. If you're a person who spends all of your income, you don't really have any meaningful
savings. You spend all your income on the basics of life, clothing, food, transportation, heating,
the basics, and prices go up by 5 percent, 6 percent, 7 percent, you're in trouble right away,
whereas even middle class people have some savings and some ability to absorb that. So it is for
those people as much as for anybody that we need to restore price stability, and we want to do it
as quickly as possible. Obviously, we would like to do that. We'd like the current trend to
continue, which is that we're making progress without seeing the kind of increase in
unemployment that we've seen in past things. But you're right, though. When we raise rates,
people who are living on credit cards and borrowing are going to feel that more. They are. And,

Page 25 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

of course, people with lots of savings also have a much lower marginal propensity to consume,
and so it's not going to affect them as much.
MICHELLE SMITH. Let's go to Greg Robb for the last question.
GREG ROBB. Thank you, Chair Powell. Greg Robb from MarketWatch. In the Beige
Book recently, you can tell that the Fed has been surveying nonprofits and community groups
about the economic health of low-income Americans, moderate-income Americans. I have two
questions about this. Are you going to use that data to maybe come up with sort of like a
quarterly survey of those groups, like the senior loan officer survey? And also the second
question is from your recent readings of these surveys, how are low- and moderate-Americans
doing? Is there this thing where, like, the GDP is strong because of wealthy Americans kind of
driving things? I just want to get your sense of the health of that sector. Thank you.
CHAIR POWELL. So I don't know about the quarterly survey. That's an idea we can take
away and think about. In terms of how low- and moderate-Americans, you know, they clearly
were suffering from high inflation. I think during the pandemic, the government transfers that
happened were very meaningful. And, you know, if you know the surveys that we take showed
that low- and moderate-income people were actually in very, very strong financial condition. I
think now it's a very hot labor market, and you're seeing high nominal wages, and you're starting
to see real wages are now positive by most measures. So I think overall households are in good
shape. Surveys are a different thing. So surveys are showing dissatisfaction, and I think a lot of
that is just people hate inflation, hate it. And that causes people to say the economy is terrible,
but at the same time they're spending money. Their behavior is not exactly what you would
expect from the surveys. That's kind of a guess at what the answer might be. But I think there's a
lot of good things happening on household balance sheets, and certainly in the labor market and
Page 26 of 27

September 20, 2023

Chair Powell’s Press Conference

PRELIMINARY

with wages. The biggest wage increases having gone to relatively low-wage jobs, and now
inflation coming down, you're seeing real wages, which is a good thing. Thanks very much.

Page 27 of 27

