CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 17, 19TO

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 19
Eighth District - St. Louis page 23
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 26
Tenth District - Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District - Dallas page 32
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 35

Comments on economic conditions in the twelve Federal Reserve
Districts indicate that in most Districts hankers and businessmen find
economic activity has been weakening, and they generally expected the
decline will continue.

In virtually all Districts, unemployment is rising,

and in many, labor markets are easing noticeably.

Retail trade is weaker

almost everywhere, and consumers are "downgrading" and bargain-hunting.
A few Districts report large cuts in capital spending.

In a number of

Districts, special note was made of the profit squeeze that is affecting
many businesses, and in some, concern was expressed about a decline in
corporate liquidity.

Mention was again made in several Districts of the

dangers from wage and price developments, and in four Districts a substantial
number of respondents reportedly favor some sort of incomes policy.
In only one Federal Reserve District, St. Louis, was recent economic
activity regarded as "good"; and in Kansas City it was deemed fair to good.
In most Districts, activity has weakened significantly, and a decline in new
orders was noted in three Districts. Expectations of a further decline are
widespread.

These range, however, from the belief that the bottom will come

in the third or fourth quarter of this year, to the belief of the directors of
the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank that the contraction will be "more prolonged
and deeper than most economists and public policy makers are currently expecting".
A growth in unemployment is noticeable throughout the country, in
some Districts only mildly, but in others strongly.

Until recently, many firms

were reducing their work forces simply by letting "attrition" take its toll, but
now firms are "furloughing" workers, "cutting back" their staffs, and "pushing"
early retirements.

In a few Districts, even "quality" labor has begun to be

available.

An easier market is noted for, among others, "middle management"

and "professional" types and one District remarked upon an "extremely sharp
increase" in unsolicited summaries from applicants with "extensive experience".
Very few exceptions were noted to the general pattern of weakness
in retail sales and of "downgrading" and bargain hunting.

Department stores

seemed to be particularly hard hit by the softening of demand, while discount
stores and "bargain basements" were holding up well. Weakness was particularly
strong in furniture, appliances, television sets, and clothing. Auto buying
was an area where "downgrading" was especially intense

except in Dallas. The

trend was heavily to cheaper models, stripped-down models, "compacts", low-priced
imports, and late-model v.sed cars. Outside the auto field, in the few Districts
where no "downgrading" was apparent, consumers nevertheless had a sharp eye
out for "sales" and "specials".

In the San Francisco District, a "strong"

demand for mobile homes was interpreted as possibly a form of "downgrading".
In two Districts, Richmond and St. Louis, capital spending plans
continue strong, out of ''fear" of inflation or to offset increased labor costs.
However, in the five other Districts that made reference to the subject, many
firms are making substantial cutbacks. Among the comments:

General Motors is

making "huge" cutbacks, a "large retail organization" is cutting back by
50 percent, a "large oil company" is "continuously" reviewing its plans, in
the Philadelphia District there has been a "marked" cutback since April, and
in the New York District some firms are reviewing their plans for the "second
or third time this year".
Inventory holdings were specifically mentioned by half of the Districts.
They were regarded as "excessive" in two of the Districts, and were being
"reduced" in a third.

In two others they were at a "satisfactory" level,

partly because firms were working on a "hand-to-mouth" basis.

In another

District, reference was to merchandising firms, which were being "extremely
cautious" regarding their fall and winter stocks.
The profit squeeze is hitting many businesses very hard in many
parts of the country. The situation is aggravated by a liquidity squeeze.
Slow payment on accounts receivable was mentioned by both Chicago and
New York as one of the reasons for this latter development.

Because of

their uncomfortable situation, many business firms have embarked on costcutting programs (including the reduction of staffs, of inventories, of
advertising, and of capital spending).

In the New York District, it was

reported that many companies may not be able to "meet their maturities" and
that some "substantial" companies would be unable to "meet their payrolls
without refinancing".

The liquidity squeeze is having repercussions in

the commercial paper market.

Some commercial paper dealers have told

corporate customers they can no longer handle their issues. Among financial
concerns that are troubled by their own liquidity situation are some life
insurance companies.

The latter were reported as wishing to increase their

liquidity and therefore not seeking any new long-term investment outlets.
Concern about continuing inflationary pressures, particularly
arising from large wage hikes, was mentioned in several Districts, although
some price declines were noted in Cleveland (machine tool and
industries) and in Richmond (textiles and furniture).

aluminum

Respondents in some

Districts expressed disillusionment with "conventional" stabilization measures
or with the "Administration's economic policies", and a few Districts reported
there was considerable sentiment in favor of some kind of incomes policy.
one District it was reported that some labor leaders noted confidentially
that guidelines would provide them with "an excuse to argue for lower wage
settlements" than their members are currently ready to consider.

In

FIRST DISTRICT — BOSTON
Seven members of our Board of Directors and three well-known
academicians were contacted in the preparation of this report. Because of
non-comparable types of responses as well as wide differences of opinion, no
general summary seems possible. Respondents' viewpoints ranged from serious
concern over the economic outlook to satisfaction that we are about on course.
Their comments, as given below, are separated on the basis of real versus
monetary markets.
Monetary Conditions and Capital Markets:
Professor Otto Eckstein characterized capital markets as currently
being in a "most unusual state", attributing this to (l) the System's switch
to aggregate targets, (2) the continuing high rate of inflation and suspicion
that it will not abate, and (3) uncertainties wrought by Cambodia and
particularly

the stock market. With respect to the Fed's current stance,

Eckstein emphatically pointed out that policy can be judged as having been
easier over the last few months only by a monetarist's standards. Measured
from any starting month previous to February 1970? the widely touted 10 percent
annual growth rate of money stock shrinks to 3 to 5 percent.

On top of this

moderate rate of growth, Eckstein interprets the events of April and May as
having led to a greatly increased liquidity preference on the part of the
public, concluding that endorsement of a 4 percent rate of monetary growth
during the current period is "really somewhat cavalier".
Professor James Tobin concurred with Eckstein on this view of System
policy, additionally pointing out that with a 4 or 5 percent rate of growth,
money supply is shrinking in real terms.

Tobin also voiced fears that the

Fed's excessively tight policy in combination with its shift to aggregate
targets has forced interest rates to a point well above the real rate of
return on capital, a state of affairs he feels will depress real activity
more than we are bargaining for.
At the opposite end of the spectrum was Professor Henry Wallich,
who stated that Fed policy is threatening to become overly easy "no natter
how money stock is measured".
Views varied also on the causes and the implications of the stock
market decline. Wallich feels the principal explanation is the necessary,
but painful, adjustment of equity markets to a 9 percent bond market. Tobin,
on the other hand, feels the decline has been serious, stating that it will
have both wealth and cost of capital effects, and that it is symptomatic of a
general economic malaise. When viewed from the more regional, micro outlook
of our banking directors, money market conditions appeared more optimistic.
Only a month ago all three of our Class A directors were reporting commercial
loan demands at an all-time high at their respective institutions.

Two now

report that this situation has moderated to a degree where their banks can
handle it.

Our directors also report a healthy pickup in deposit inflows over

the last three weeks in all categories, but particularly in consumer-type
deposits. Mr. Kennedy noted that for the first time in 197° > deposit figures
at his institution are now exceeding year ago levels.

Taken together, these

factors represent a substantial shift toward optimism among our banking
directors from a month ago.
GNP and Real Market Aggregates:
Our academicians shifted positions in their discussion of the outlook
in real markets, with Eckstein becoming the most bullish.

He sees the economy

currently hovering between recession and no growth, but remains convinced
that most of the GNP markdcwn will occur in the first half of this year.
While he hasn't made a run on his model for about three weeks now, he sees
total 1970 GNP falling in the $982-$985 billion range, with unemployment at
5.0 to 5-2 percent by the year-end. Eckstein further offered the opinion
that, if we do have a recession (however measured), it will be far and away
the mildest of the postwar period.
Wallich similarly sees 1970 nominal GNP winding up in the $980$985 billion range, with a nominal fourth-quarter gain of about $15 billion.
While he identified unemployment, prices, and interest rates as all behaving
worse than expected, he expressed confidence that the nominal GNP forecasts
made earlier this year will hold up quite well. Noting how successive capital
surveys have shown a consistency, he does not feel that capital expenditure
plans are collapsing, and he sees the possibility of bringing the GNP deflator
down to a level of 4 percent by the year-end.

On the outlook for unemployment

in the third and fourth quarters, he was somewhat more bearish than Eckstein.
Tobin once again provided the most gloomy assessment, predicting
unemployment will rise to at least 5 1./2 percent by the year-end, and very
possibly higher. He did not provide us with GNP projections for the next
two quarters.
Again turning to the micro-oriented views of our directors, the
picture is quite mixed. Mr. Robertson of the Bangor Punta Corp. (aircraft
firearms, recreational equipment, farm products, etc.) reports that sales are
continuing a sharp deterioration in nearly all their lines, with the one major
exception the capital goods produced in their process engineering division.
Their layoffs have been substantial, and capital expenditure plans have been
cut back 30 to 40 percent.

Other directors, however, noted that layoffs seem

to have subsided in their areas. Messrs, Cabot (Cabot Corp.) and Carter
(Nashua Corp.) report their capital expenditure plans are continuing at or
near the levels originally planned, although—apropos of Tobin's point
above Mr. Carter did note that their capital spending is becoming increasingly contingent upon securing reasonably priced financing. Other
queries to our directors produced no shift in sentiment from the views they
expressed a month ago.

SECOND DISTRICT — NEW YORK
Remarks by leading bankers and businessmen in the Second District
suggest a significant further slowdown in economic activity as well as increased financial pressures. The labor market is showing signs of greater
ease; consumers are downgrading their purchases, and retail profits are
being squeezed very hard; capital spending plans are being further reduced;
and a growing number of firms may be unable to repay their credits at
maturity. Although expectations of a real recession have increased, inflation continues to be viewed as a major problem.
As for the labor market, most respondents indicated it was still
difficult to get "quality" labor, even though there are many more applicants
than formerly.

One, however, declared the market had recently undergone a

"sharp change", with "quality" people now available, and another observed
that the rate of turnover amongst his firm's management trainees had declined.
Consumer spending is generally weak, and profits in the retail
industry have suffered considerably from narrowed margins.

Conditions were

described as "very bad" by the head of a nationwide chain of department and
discount stores and a top official in one of the country's largest department
stores characterized late May and early June as "very, very soft". Notably
weak sectors included home furnishings, television sets, large appliances, and
men's wear.

Among reasons given for consumers "holding back" were:

fear of

unemployment, effects of higher prices, high interest rates, the "rather poor"
business situation, and "general uncertainty".
Consumers in general were said to be "downgrading", or to be paying
more attention to "value", to "utility", to "price".

Discount stores were

reportedly doing better than regular department stores.

A "very definite

tendency" toward downgrading was noted in the purchase of clothing. There has
also been a definite downgrading in auto buying, with a shift toward cheaper
models and stripped-down versions without radios, air conditioning, or heaters.
Moreover, people are turning increasingly to used cars. Another sector
affected by either downgrading or value considerations has been education.
Increased tuition,as well as other costs, has resulted in lower enrollments
in private educational institutions, with more students choosing state-supported
schools.

Only a few comments were at odds with the "downgrading" picture: food

dealers reportedly see an opposite trend; and a recently developed camera priced
to sell for less than $10 is eating up company storage space.
Capital spending plans for 1970 are reportedly being reduced further
by many firms.

Some are reviewing their plans for the second or third time

this year; others are reported to have already trimmed plans "significantly".
Apparently, projects that are being stretched out or delayed are most often
those designed to provide additional capacity.

However, firms in the food

industry do not seem to be altering their plans, nor are cutbacks being made
in plans designed to save labor or to reduce pollution.
Many business firms are suffering a liquidity squeeze. Among contributing factors are reduced profits and a relatively rapid rise in accounts
receivable.

The transportation industry has "real liquidity problems", and

petroleum companies are finding liquidity "more of a problem". The head of a
large bank said he was hesitant to discuss the "quite serious" corporate liquidity problem because of "the possible pyramiding effect", but declared that
"many" companies may not be able to meet their maturities and that some "substantial" corporations will be unable to meet their payrolls without refinancing.
The liquidity squeeze is having repercussions on the commercial paper
market.

This market is giving one New York City banker "nightmares". Some

companies that use the market in very large volume are having difficulty
rolling over their paper.

Some commercial paper dealers have told some

corporations they cannot continue to handle their issues. It was estimated
that 60 percent of all commercial paper "issued today" has back-up bank credit
lines; if the commercial paper market were "to collapse", the major money
market banks would not be able "to meet the demand for credit". Moreover,
many of the "smaller banks" around the country are holding "large amounts" of
commercial paper.
The number of bankers and businessmen who expect a further slowdown
in the economy has increased markedly.

(Upstate New York bankers made special

note of the "considerable" decline that has occurred in new orders received by
"many"manufacturers.)

Some, however, still think it "most likely" there will

be a resumption of real growth in the second half.
Regardless of expectations as to real growth, there is continued concern about wage-cost pressures and the dangers of inflation.

Two comments

seemed to suggest a belief that inflation can be ended only by a recession:
the public will believe price stability is assured only if we have "a serious
recession or depression"; and the "risk of a recession" is preferable to continued inflation. Many bankers and businessmen see some sort of incomes policy
as desirable.

One banker expressed opposition to any sort of incomes policy,

declaring it was not needed and could even do harm by producing an anticipatory
rise in prices and wages.

THIRD DISTRICT — PHILADELPHIA
In the Third Federal Reserve District, views on current economic
conditions and the near-term outlook were solicited from the Board of Directors,
a sample polling of large manufacturers (business outlook survey), and selected nonmanufacturers.

In summary, there is considerable agreement that (l) consumers

remain pessimistic, (2) outlays for plant and equipment are being cut back or
deferred, (3) labor markets are easing but wage costs are not, and (4) growth
in the money supply is too fast.
Reports from around the District indicate widespread pessimism on the
part of consumers.

Large department stores in the region report poor sales for

large luxury items all the way down to small inexpensive goods.

One department

store executive quipped that "...only $12-95 shirts on sale for $3-98 are moving—
and even then customers aren't waiting in line". Hence, merchandising firms are
being extremely cautious in stocking for fall and winter.
There is increasing evidence that industrial firms in Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, and Delaware are canceling and postponing outlays for new plant
and equipment. A canvassing of large manufacturers in the Third District shows
that since April there has been a marked cutback in spending plans for the next
six months.

Three out of four firms responding anticipate either no change or

an actual decline in expenditures for plant and equipment for the balance of
1970. Falling profits and a shortage of funds are most responsible for these
cutbacks, say regional executives.
Additional softness in the labor market for the near term also appears
likely. Very few firms plan to increase their payrolls in the coming months,
while most firms plan to freeze employment levels or lay off jobholders. There
has, however, been no let up in wage demands.

One director postulated that the

rate of inflation is more relevant for wage demands than the rate of unemployment.
With cost-push pressures unabated, inflationary expectations remain intact.
Both bankers and businessmen on the Board of Directors are still concerned about a liquidity crisis.

One banker further noted that the move

toward monetary ease apparent in national figures has somehow bypassed the Third
District.

Along with concern about taut liquidity, directors are disturbed by

the accelerated growth in the money supply. Although aware of some of the recent
problems in monetary management, including a possible liquidity crisis, they
believe that, unless growth in the aggregates is slowed, a new round of inflation
may be in prospect.

Also, the directors are•concerned that the large amount of

Treasury financing scheduled for the second half of the year will make modest
growth in the money supply a difficult target to hit.

FOURTH DISTRICT — CLEVELAND
Economic conditions in this District appear to have stabilized at
a depressed level. There is little evidence that a general upturn is in
progress, although most of the strike-related distortion seems to have been
eliminated.

In retail stores consumers appear to have become more price

conscious, but softness of demand is selective rather than general. The
mood of our directors has recently shifted from cautious optimism to deep
pessimism. They now believe that the current economic contraction will be
more prolonged and deeper than most economists and public policy makers are
currently expecting.
Recent terminations of strikes in the trucking and rubber
industries resulted in a peaking in mid-May in the sharp rise in the
District's insured unemployment rate. The rate has subsequently declined
moderately although it remains roughly three times as large as the low
point of last autumn.

Our regular monthly survey of District manufacturers

conducted during the first two weeks of June revealed further distortions
caused by strikes and lockouts. Some of the major metal-producing and
metal-working firms expect to be shipping in June partly from inventories
that they were unable to ship in May. The survey accordingly showed an
anticipated rebound in shipments and in employment during June, coupled
with a sharp decline in inventories.

Other anticipatory data for the

current month do not suggest an immediate general recovery in the District's
manufacturing sector-.
Discussion with an economist from a major department store chain
doing nationwide business revealed that consumers have sharply curtailed
their purchases of high-price luxury items and certain appliances.

On the

other hand, bargain basement business is extremely good for many items such as
ready-made apparel. Confirmation of the fact that sales of big-ticket items
(refrigerators, televisions, and other durable goods) have suffered came from
one of our directors who is on the board of a major department store in Cleveland.
Most of our directors, especially those associated with large industrial firms
and banks, are now extremely pessimistic. They believe that real economic
activity will show little, if any, recovery in the second half of 1970, and
they are deeply concerned by their inability to counter labor's monopoly
position in collective bargaining negotiations. A number of directors expressed reservations about the Administration's economic policies although
most of them endorsed our current monetary policy of moderate growth in money
and bank credit. There was a general feeling that senior executives in a
broad range of industries shared this pessimism and were as a result lowering
their sights for capital spending and employment.
One director who was formerly quite optimistic emphasized concern
about growing weakness in new orders in his industry:

auto and aircraft

components. Another director representing a very large office equipment
manufacturing firm reported that many firms were limiting or reducing expenditures for computers and related equipment and that he expected further cutbacks
over the months immediately ahead.
The following comments were received about the machine tool industry,
which is important in this District. A director who is the president of a
substantial machine tool manufacturing firm mentioned that, although his
competitors are experiencing a slowdown in new orders for machine tools, his
company's business continues to be good. The chairman of a very large machine
tool company headquartered in the District informed this Bank that, in contrast

to poor domestic "business, his company's plants in European countries are
booking some 30 percent more orders than a year ago. An economist from
another large machine tool company said he believed there was definite
evidence that business hat; bottomed out in his firm, although he saw no
signs of an upturn and did not expect one until after Labor Day. The same
economist, who is highly regarded in the profession, volunteered the information that there is "across-the-board weakness" in his firm's prices. For
example, prices of metal cutting machine tools, for which there are no
official Bureau of Labor Statistics price data, are declining. Similar
price reductions not reflected in the BIS data were reported by a director
currently engaged in consulting work in the aluminum industry.
Other comments of interest from the directors included mention
of the fact that the supply situation in the coal industry is so tight
that some utilities are currently importing coal at prices above domestic
rates. A director from a large reserve city bank noted a recent sizable
increase in business loans for current working capital
the bills".

i.e., for "paying

One director, the chairman of a large rubber company, reported

a highly front-loaded labor compensation settlement for his firm. The
contract calls for increases of 12 percent in the first year, 8 percent
the second year, and 4 percent the third year.

FIFTH DISTRICT — RICHMOND
Information obtained in the Fifth District, primarily through
surveys of businessmen and bankers, indicates substantial agreement on the
following points:

(l) a weaker employment situation with some further

increases in unemployment, (2) continued upward wage pressure, with a few
price declines in manufacturing, (3) further weakness in retail trade and
automobile sales, and weakened consumer loan demand, (4) continued severe
slump in construction, but some increase in the demand for mortgage loans,
(5) no diminution in demand for additional capital facilities, (6) continued
weakness in new orders, order backlogs, and shipments in manufacturing, and
(7) excessive levels of business inventories.
Manufacturers in the District continue to experience declines in
shipments, volume of new orders, and backlogs of orders. Both durables and

non-durables manufacturing lines are affected by the current slump which
been in evidence since the beginning of the year. This situation is reported
in such important District industries as textiles, chemicals, non-ferrous
metals, and furniture .
Weakness continues in the retail trade sector, including automobile
sales. Some survey respondents report that, while dollar volumes of retail
sales are not necessarily declining in all cases, physical volumes definitely
are. The consensus in the District is that consumers are also sacrificing
quality, and are reacting to inflation by purchasing goods of lower quality
with cheaper price tags.
Inventories in manufacturing reportedly have declined only slightly
during the preceding month, and no significant change is reported in retail
inventories. Current levels of inventories in both areas, however, are
reported to be higher than desired.

The employment picture in the District is reported to he considerably
weaker overall. Survey respondents in manufacturing also report a further
decline in hours worked per week. The trade and services area seems somewhat
stronger with regard to employment than does manufacturing.
On the unemployment question, persons in trades and services say
that ample supplies of both skilled and unskilled labor are now available, in
contrast to reports of previous months. Respondents in manufacturing, however,
where the employment situation is apparently weaker, report local supplies of
skilled and unskilled labor still to be inadequate. Many respondents, though,
report the quality of available labor to be seriously deficient in both
skilled and unskilled groups.
Wages in the District are reported up sharply across the board,
particularly in the trades and services. Prices have reportedly declined somewhat in the manufacturing sector, while continuing to rise in other areas.
Price reductions are reported by several large textile manufacturers as well as
by some furniture producers.
Residential construction reportedly declined further in the preceding
month and remains severely depressed. Nonresidential construction also is
reported down, a reversal of the report received in May.
Demand for consumer loans apparently weakened somewhat during the
preceding month. Some respondents link this to reduced work weeks and general
uncertainty about the future course of incomes, particularly among manufacturing employees.
and mortgage loans.

Further increases are reported in demands for business loans

Opinions expressed in the Fifth District continue to emphasize the
numerous non economic factors presently contributing to uncertainty, both at
home and abroad. Economic decisions in the District apparently are being
influenced by these factors.
A more detailed survey of capital spending plans in the District
last month indicated continued strength in plant and equipment spending. The
most recent survey indicates no significant change in plans. Manufacturers
generally report capacity to be somewhat in excess, but the proportion of
them desiring to increase investment spending continues to outweigh the proportion that does not plan to do so. In the trade and service fields, the
reported consensus is that facilities are inadequate, and there is evidence
of increases in investment plans.

Fear of continued inflation is apparently

an important factor.
Respondents report inventory levels to be excessive across the
Board. More concern is expressed by manufacturers than by retailers, and
the reports cover a broad spectrum of District industry—textiles, furniture,
metals, and building materials producers.
District bankers express the view that further economic decline is
probable before a general recovery occurs, although a smaller proportion of
respondents hold this view than in previous months.

SIXTH DISTRICT — ATLANTA
Summary of Findings.

Sixth District directors have mixed opinions

about future business conditions.

If any concensus exists, it is that the

economy has not yet bottomed out and that recovery will be less than
spectacular when it comes. According to directors' reports and other sources
of information, further weakening in sales, employment and production is
likely.

Department stores report lower volume and growing resistance to

higher priced merchandise.

Belt tightening by businesses has spread, and

directors report many instances of slowdowns in capital spending. Employment
find production cutbacks are common.
Retail Sales.

Department stores surveyed report no discernible

shift from the "upstairs" to the "bargain basement". However, customer
resistance to higher priced brands has increased, with lower priced
merchandise receiving the benefit. A canvass of merchants by one of our
Branch offices indicated that they expect no improvement in sales within
the near future. Regarding auto sales, distributors contacted report
some shifting from larger cars to the compact sized, loaded with optional
equipment.

Rather than settling for a stripped-down version of a full-

sized car, customers are purchasing lower priced equipment-packed models.
Belt tightening. A profit squeeze is causing many businesses
to trim fat wherever possible.

Reports of capital expenditures being

reduced or stretched out have been coming from several sources. A major
airline reports more executives are flying coach, and some companies are
pushing early retirements. Attrition is being allowed to take its toll,
and the workweek is being reduced in some industrial areas.

Production and employment.

Cutbacks—some sizable—are occurring

in steel, furniture, textiles, and rubber and paper products. A large steel
producer in Alabama and a large aluminum company in Tennessee sire reportedly
cutting employment by as much as 20 percent. A Mississippi furniture
manufacturer is reported to be trimming employment from 2,800 to 1,T00. A
500-man cutback is imminent at another firm, and a District bank is cutting
employment—this one by 10 percent across the board. A regional airline is
cutting its work force by 100, "purely as an economy move". A shorter
workweek has also been used to adjust output: for example, a major rubber
company is going on a four-day week.
A strike involving 5>000 workers at the Atomic Energy Commission's
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, plant is entering its third month. Gulf states
utilities continue to be picketed, and a walkout involving 1,200 has idled
production at a Birmingham plant. The Florida Power and the Miami plumbers'
strikes have been settled. The plumbers will receive about a 25 percent
yearly pay boost over the three-year contract. Employment is stabilizing
at two large military installations contacted.

Recent employment cutbacks

at these two installations have been accomplished by normal attrition.
Capital spending and construction. Major utility construction
is strong and a twenty-story office building will be built in Jackson,
Mississippi.

Despite postponements in capital spending, there have been

some announcements of new plants and plant expansions, including a needle
factory in Alabama, a $70 million expansion of a mining and industrial
chemical complex in Tennessee, and a $15 million expansion of an engine
plant in south Alabama.

Recent contacts with four Atlanta building

supply companies—two in glass and one each in cabinets and plumbing
supplies—indicate reduced volume and price cutting.

Agriculture.

Soaking rains throughout the District have contributed

to an excellent agricultural outlook. Prices of farm land have leveled
recently after a steady rise, perhaps because of uncertainty about farm
legislation and high interest rates.
Loan terms. A recent survey indicates a slight decline in the
average interest rate on bank loans from February 15 to May 15-

Firmer

nonprice terms, however, nullified the effects of the lower interest rate.
Loan demand has weakened slightly.

SEVENTH DISTRICT — CHICAGO
Businessmen and economists in the Seventh District have tended to
lower their expectations on output and sales for the economy and for individual
firms for the remainder of this year.

Increasingly, expectations are that the

"low" for the general economy will be in the third or fourth quarter with no
substantial recovery until 1971.

Labor markets have continued to ease, espe-

cially for marginal workers and middle management and professional types. Although most respondents have not observed a slowing in the rate of price inflation, price increases appear to be fewer in number and harder to sustain.
The general atmosphere is one of uneasiness rather than deep gloom.
The stock market, price inflation, reduced liquidity, slow payments on receivables, lower profit margins, strikes, Cambodia, and civil unrest continue to
be mentioned in anyconversation.Nevertheless, very few informed persons
expect a cumulative decline in the economy. Rather, the prevailing pessimism
reflects the view that a significant improvement is not at hand, and may not
occur until next year.
Consumers are said to be purchasing lower priced Autos, furniture,
appliances, television sets, and clothing, and to be reducing purchases of such
foods as meats and delicatessen items.

The truck strike in the Chicago area

has seriously depleted may retailers' inventories, making it difficult to
discern shifts in consumer purchasing preferences.

But outside Chicago,

department stores report intensive price consciousness in shopping and
reduced sales in most departments except in the "budget or bargain basement".
Discount store sales are reported to be holding up well.
Many businesses are pushing cost-cutting programs through
reductions of staff; lower outlays for advertising, public relations,

entertainment, and other items not directly related to production; inventory
curtailments; and postponements of short lead-time capital expenditures.
The truck strike continues to he a very significant depressing
force on output and retail trade in the Chicago area. The embargo on
truck shipments of components and finished goods to and from the Chicago
area, of course, continues to hamper output in other parts of the country.
The impact of the strike is said to be especially hard on smaller
manufacturers and retailers who are less able to utilize alternative
arrangements for moving goods.
The rise in policy loans at life insurance companies has moderated
in the past month from the extremely high levels noted in the first third
of the year.

Life insurance companies would like to improve their liquidity

and are not seeking new long-term investment outlets.
Loan demand at large commercial banks appears to have eased
somewhat, but this is not a universal view.

Demand on the capital markets

by corporations and municipalities continues to be intense.

Little hope

exists for lower interest rates in the near future, and some experts think
the peak in long-term rates has not yet been reached.
It is becoming increasingly clear that output of nonelectrical
machinery is declining. Manufacturers are ordering less equipment. Farm
machinery sales continue poor.

Construction machinery has been holding

up fairly well at least for large pieces of equipment used in road
building and heavy construction.

Orders for capital goods components

have dropped sharply in recent months.
Inventories of manufacturers generally do not appear to be
excessive.

Emphasis is placed on smaller shipments and rapid deliveries.

In some cases, producers emphasize that distributors and dealers are working
on a "hand-to-mouth" basis.

Inventories of consumer hard goods, other than

automobiles, have been reduced in line with lower sales since the start of
the year.
The steel picture in the Chicago area is clouded by the truck
strike, but output and orders have been holding up fairly well. Increasing
competition in European markets has been associated with lower prices which,
in turn, have reduced the incentive of Chicago area producers to sell in
those markets.

Foreign demand is expected to soften in the second half of

1970.
The rise in unemployment is expected to continue through the year,
with some analysts expecting the national unemployment rate to reach, or
exceed, 6 percent in late 1970 or early 1971-

Some firms that had been

allowing attrition to reduce their labor force rather than laying off
workers have now begun to furlough workers. Many employers comment on
the extremely sharp increase this year in the number of unsolicited
summaries from job applicants with extensive experience.
Domestic airline traffic in May and early June has continued
below last year, despite the end of the controllers' strike. Pilots
have been laid off, training of stewardesses has been reduced, equipment
has been grounded, and profits (or losses) are "near the disaster stage".
Air travel to foreign countries, in contrast, is extremely good, running
about 30 percent above last year.
Sales of passenger cars continue to be disappointing.

Truck

sales have failed to pick up with the settlement of the national truck
strike, as had been expected. A long strike in the motor vehicle industry
is taken as "in the cards" by most observers.

Many people still talk favorably of wage and price guidelines or
controls, perhaps an immediate universal "freeze" but the difficulties
of implementing such programs are widely understood, and most people appear
to be thinking of the "other guy's" price or wages.

EIGHTH DISTRICT — ST. LOUIS
Based on discussions with our Branch and Main Office Boards of
Directors, officials of larger business firms, financial editors, and others,
we conclude that "business in the Eighth Federal Reserve District is generallygood and is expected to remain so. The concensus for the second half of the
year appears to be one of considerable optimism.

It is generally believed

that the period of slackening business will be over soon after midyear and
that the economy will resume its uptrend of recent years. Price increases
are expected to continue little abated and consumer spending is expected to
continue strong. Any cha,nge in the rate of capital spending is likely to be
on the plus side, though demand for labor appears to be slackening somewhat.
Business inventories are at moderate levels.

Pessimism continues to prevail

with respect to business profits, as wage settlements appear to be in excess
of amounts that can be passed on in higher prices for product. Demand for
credit continues to grow at a high rate.
Apart from the fact that food and apparel prices are expected to
hold relatively stable, most businessmen in the Eighth District expect inflation to continue at about the current rate throughout the second half of this
year.

Major forces contributing to these expectations include strong consumer

demand, a high rate of capital spending by business firms, and the large wage
increases received by workers in recent labor negotiations.
Consumer demand, although slowed somewhat in recent months, is
expected to be generally strong in the second half of the year. Considerable
optimism is expressed relative to overall consumer expenditures.

Most of the

recent slowdown is credited to strikes and factors other than a general decline
in total demand. As a minority view, one department store reported that sales

expectations for the remainder of the year have been reduced somewhat and that
consumer purchases were becoming more selective. Customers were reported to
be responding more to good values and as being somewhat less quality conscious
that previously.
The rate of growth in demand for labor has apparently declined
slightly.

There have been a few layoffs, and in several cases workweeks have

been shortened and over time eliminated.

Job offers to June college graduates

are down sharply, according to college placement officials. The salaries offered
continue to creep up from 1969 levels, however, indicating continued growth in
demand for trained personnel.

Little change in overall employment was anti-

cipated by the business community for the second half of the year.
Business investment continues up as budgeted, and no cutbacks are
anticipated in the second half of the year.
uniformly to this optimistic view.

Manufacturing officials held

If any change is apparent in recent weeks

concerning business investment, it is that capital goods spending is gaining
in strength.

More modernization and improvement programs are being undertaken

in an attempt to maintain profit margins in the face of sharply increased labor
costs.

Only one establishment, a discount-type retail facility, indicated a

slight slowdown in investment.
Inventories of Eighth District firms are generally at satisfactory
levels.

No firm surveyed reported any excesses to be worked off as a result

of the recent slowdown.
accounting methods.

One apparel manufacturer reported a lower inventory

A major department store reported that inventories can

be quickly reduced at will through planned sales.

Profits are the one item about which the respondents were uniformly
pessimistic.

High wage settlements are the important problem that is disturbing

all the officials, and little relief is in view.

Some further decline in profits

is anticipated in the second quarter of this year, and little increase from
these depressed profit levels is anticipated in the second half of the year.
Demand for hank credit continues brisk.

Both consumer and business

loan demands continue strong. Usury laws, however, tend to intensify credit
problems in much of the district as market rates are higher than permissible
lending rates to noncorporate borrowers in some states.

NINETH DISTRICT — MINNEAPOLIS
Business and labor leaders in the Ninth Federal Reserve District
are very concerned about the persistence of inflationary pressures and seem
to be willing to try almost anything, including wage-price guidelines, to
control the problem. District investment firms are encountering financial
difficulties and, as a result, have had to alter their operations. Businesses
are continuing to cut back their investment plans, and scattered instances
suggest that consumers may be changing their consumption patterns because of
the -uncertainty regarding the state of the economy.
During the go-around at the last meeting of the Board of Directors
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the directors were asked whether
or not business and union leaders in their local areas would support some
kind of incomes policy or wage-price guidelines.

They felt that people are

becoming increasingly concerned about inflation and are becoming progressively
disenchanted withtraditionalrestrictive monetary and fiscal policies. As
a result, the directors felt that guidelines would probably be publicly
unpopular but in many cases would be privately welcomed.

In general, they

thought that people would prefer to see voluntary controls imposed rather
than new legislation, and that businessmen are more in favor of guidelines
than labor leaders. The directors cited a number of instances where business
leaders have voiced approval of some kind of guidelines.

The directors also

cited cases where labor leaders did not want to be quoted but were concerned
with the large settlements which have been won by unions in recent labor
disputes. Because of these large settlements, rank and file members are
expecting large wage increases and union leaders are afraid to ask for less.
Guidelines would give them an excuse to argue for lower wage settlements.

The financial difficulties being experienced by Wall Street
investment bankers, mutual funds, and securities dealers are apparently
also being encountered by Ninth District investment firms. A telephone
poll of two leading local investment banking firms explored the implications
of these problems in three areas of their operations.

First, operating

staffs of securities brokers have been cut back about 15 to 20 percent in
the last year.

These cutbacks, however, were attributed to the decline in

volume of trading rather than to the current financial crisis. In general,
sales staffs have been reduced, with the declines occurring in some instances
through attrition rather than through layoffs.

Second, a securities brokerage

house is closing one of its suburban offices because of the lack of volume.
In addition, a director was aware of a mutual fund in Billings, Montana, which
has recently closed down. Third, merger activity among securities brokers
appears to be on the upswing. Both investment bankers who were contacted
reported that they had been approached by a number of smaller firms in the
last three months. Although only two mergers have been consummated, these
firms felt that additional mergers could take place in the not-too-distant
future.
Scattered pieces of information continue to show that District
manufacturers are cutting back their capital expenditure plans. Two
directors cited cases where distributors of heavy equipment to agriculture
and construction firms have experienced sharp declines in sales during the
past month or so.

It was also reported that a large retail firm headquartered

in the twin cities has cut back its capital appropriations by about 50 percent.

One other director stated that General Motors has scheduled huge

cutbacks in capital spending, with each division being asked to curtail
capital expenditures.

A number of examples have come to light which suggest that consumers
are changing their consumption patterns. A Minneapolis-based undergarment
manufacturer reports that its sales are 10 to 15 percent below last year's
levels.

They attribute their poor sales performance this year to the slow-

down in department store sales and feel that consumers are taking their
business to lower priced stores. Automobile dealers in the twin cities
report a downturn in auto sales which has been centered, primarily in higher
priced automobiles and that sales of basic models are holding up fairly well.
In addition, repair shops for both automobiles and other durable goods are
experiencing sharp increases in business, which suggest that consumers are
tending to hold, off on major durables purchases. A telephone poll of resorts
around the District reveals that resort owners are experiencing a number of
cancellations, although accommodations at Yellowstone and Glacier National
Parks are still very tight. All the resort owners who were contacted said
that they could accpet reservations for any time this summer.

TENTH DISTRICT — KANSAS CITY
The general pace of activity in the District is moving along on a
plateau.

Local activity is stronger where the economy has been experiencing a

strong growth situation. The agricultural picture also continues to be
favorable. At the same time, construction slowdowns, reduced defense activity,
and labor strikes have slowed the economies of some areas.

The residential

construction industry continues to be plagued with a lack of mortgage financing.
The construction industry also exemplifies the deeply imbedded impact of
inflation, as may be noted by some current wage demands in the industry.
District retail sales, as indicated by selected larger merchants, are
fair and in a few geographical areas good. Retailing for May and early June is
running somewhat ahead of the same period a year ago; however, the dollar gain
is not as large as the increase in prices, so that real volume is down somewhat.
The only merchandise that is selling at lower prices is ladies' ready-to-wear,
which reflects the need to move heavy inventories of styles being obsolete.
There is some evidence that the average unit of sale has increased in
size: there are fewer customers, and they are making larger total purchases.
No evidence was uncovered among major department stores indicating that
customers were downgrading quality in their purchases.

Rather it seems that

customers with higher and more stable income prospects have become relatively
more important and are maintaining quality levels. Persons with reduced
income prospects are limiting purchases to necessities.
Advance reservations at important winter recreation areas are reported
to be slow, indicating that consumers are hesitant to make these longer-term

commitments.

This contrast with a strong upward trend in this consumer

activity during recent years.

Special economic circumstances are having im-

portant effects on sales in some areas. For example, while retail volume in
Kansas City has held up quite well to this point, merchants are increasingly
noting the effect of the construction strike which is now 2 l/2 months old.
The construction industry situation in Kansas City is serious, and
it may have implications well beyond the immediate area. Kansas City last
year lost more man-days from strikes than any other area of the country. This
year the laborers, whose current wage rate is $4.01 per hour, are asking for an
increase of $4.00 per hour now and a total increase of $6.00 over three years.
Construction activity reflects a variety of local situations in the
context on national financial markets and Federal programs.
tion generally is active throughout the District.

Highway construc-

Commercial construction is

strong in some areas where it reflects urban renewal projects as well as other
building, particularly office buildings. Current and anticipated construction
of new factories and plants is weak throughout the District.

Despite strong

demand for housing in many areas, new construction of dwellings is slow
throughout the District because of difficulty in obtaining financing.
The agricultural sector continues to add strength to District economic
activity.

Cash receipts from farm marketings during the first quarter of this

year averaged a fifth higher, compared with the favorable levels of the comparable period of last year. Although this rate of increase is not likely to
be maintained, all indications point toward a substantial improvement over last
year's record-high levels of farm receipts.

In addition to receipts from the

sale of a good wheat crop which is now being harvested, income from livestock

sales remains more favorable than was expected.

It also should be pointed

out that payments under the various Government farm programs will be made
differently this year,

compared with other recent years. Payments on wheat

certificates, feed grain programs, and the cotton program—which are likely
to approach three quarters of a billion dollars—will be made largely during
the next two months. These payments, amounting to about 10 percent of total
cash receipts from farm marketings in the District, will add substantially
to the volume of funds in District banks. These favorable income prospects
for agriculture have been responsible for relatively high levels of
economic activity in rural areas, even though many marginal farmers are
discontinuing operations.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT -- DALLAS
Economic conditions in the Eleventh District resemble those for
the nation as a whole. The slowdown in the pace of economic activity seems
less pronounced in the District, however, than in the nation. Total
employment is still edging upward in the District, and the value of construction contracts awarded during the first four months of 1970 is up
sharply from the same period in 1969. The Texas industrial production index
"aas been trending irregularly downward, primarily owing to a drop in durables
manufacturing. Bank credit and total deposits at the Eleventh District weekly
reporting banks declined in May.
Despite the slowdown in economic activity in the District, inflation
remains the major concern of businessmen and bankers for the rest of 1970.
This point emerged clearly in recent responses to questionnaires from both
Head-Office and Branch-Office Board members. The Branch Board members further
revealed an overall lack of confidence that monetary and fiscal policy would
succeed in bringing inflation under control. They now favor the Federal
Government's setting up some form of wage-price guidelines to be followed
voluntarily by business.
Totalnon-agriculturalemployment in the five states of the District
continued to increase in April, but the slim gain was less than seasonally
expected. Manufacturing employment actually declined slightly in April. While
widespread employment reductions are not evident in the District, job opportunities, in relation to the labor force, are not as plentiful as a year ago.
The unemployment rate has increased, and in Texas, for example, initial
unemployment insurance claims are almost twice as high as a year ago. These
aggregate data tend to confirm the information given by Board members. Most

of the Board members indicated that employment reductions were not anticipated
in their industry, but a comparison of June responses with those received in
May revealed some slight weakening in employment.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index declined
in April from the March level and has generally trended downward in recent
months.
The manufacturing sector, particularly durable goods manufacturing,
has been the source of weakness in the production index. Petroleum mining and
refining, however, remained at unusually high levels during the spring period,
avoiding the usual seasonal decline. Petroleum stocks have built up to
excessive levels recently, and the regulated oil production allowables in the
District are generally lower for June than for May. This is likely to cause
some further weakness in Texas industrial production this summer.
The value of construction contract awards declined in the District
in April from the March level, but on a cumulative basis the January-April 1970
level is nearly one-third higher than in the same four months of 1969• The
value of residential construction contracts so far this year has nearly matched
the 1969 level, while nonresidential building and nonbuilding construction
contracts are sharply higher than in the same four months a year ago. Responses
of District Board members indicate that capital spending plans have not been
curtailed in most of their firms. One Board member in June and one in May did
report a substantial downward revision in plans for the current year. These
capital spending plans are consistent with the view of most Board members that
sales in their industry are either stabilizing or strengthening at the present
time.

Furthermore, nearly all the Board members report that corporate planning

in their firms for 1971 is based on the expectation of a modest increase in
sales and profits. Responses indicate that not a single Board member expects a
decline in sales or profits for 1971-

Aggregate data opinions of Board members and responses of District
retailers all confirm the observation that retail sales have been weak so
far this year and the real volume of goods sold has probably declined. Sales
of department stores in the District were very sluggish during the last two
thirds of May, and in some weeks the current-dollar sales actually trailed
the figure for the corresponding weeks a year ago. Department store sales
improved noticeably, however, during the first week in June. Auto dealers in
this District who were contacted recently indicated that the bottom of their
well-known sales decline may have been reached. Sales results for the first
ten days of June indicated to most that the total monthly volume might equal
or exceed that in June 1919*
The auto dealers contacted generally felt that their sales weakness
was in total volume and that a noticeable shift in demand to lower priced or
lesser equipped cars had not occurred.Non-automotiveretailers are noting
some substitution of lower priced for higher priced merchandise. This
observation was made mostly by department store managers, while more specialized
retail establishments reported less shift toward lower priced merchandise. Of
particular note was increased consumer attention on specials for specific items
or on bargain basement merchandise rather than the regular stock.
Bank credit at District weekly reporting banks declined in May, as
a result of reductions in both loans and securities holdings. Business loans
fell further in May, following declines in each of the previous four months of
1970.

Total deposits at the weekly reporting banks also declined in May,
caused mainly by a drop in demand deposits, much of which represented reduced
holdings by the United States Government. Discount window borrowings and net
purchases of Federal funds by the Eleventh District member banks also declined
in May.

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO
This report is based upon a survey of Head Office and Branch
Directors, supplemented by reports from selected businesses. The general
opinion is that the economy is experiencing a mild slowdown, and there is
no expectation of a complete recovery until the end of the year. At the
same time, there is little optimism that inflation will be brought under
control quickly. Consumer demand continues to be high, although sales are
somewhat slower than last year, and there is continued demand upon banks for
credit.

The adverse effects of the slowdown appear in two principal forms.

Unemployment is seen to be much higher this year, and many firms report
experiencing a profit squeeze. They say that they are unable to offset by
price increases or greater sales volume their higher costs.

In consequence,

they are attempting to cut expenses by reducing staffs, cutting inventories,
and delaying capital projects.
Unemployment has risen in most parts of the District. The highest
levels are in the Pacific Northwest where the principal problems are centered
in the lumber industry and Boeing Aircraft.

Boeing is the principal employer

in the Seattle Tacoma area, and it has cut its employment from over 100,000 in
1968 to 58,000 now, with further layoffs announced for the rest of this year
to reduce the level to 43,000.

Lumber operations have been at a reduced pace

throughout much of Washington and Oregon. Apparently the smaller mills are
bearing the major burden, while the large integrated mills continue to maintain production.

There is some expectation of a recovery, at least in Oregon,

toward the end of the year. The other area with a major unemployment problem
is southern California, where the affected industries art; aerospace and, to a
less extent, housing.

Construction of new residential housing and the opening of new
subdivisions continue to be slow. The decline in demand is heaviest in the
Seattle area because of the layoffs at Boeing. The principal strength is
in commercial construction. This is certainly the case in California where
commercial building remains high.

In many cases there is also a strong

demand for mobile homes. This particular change may be part of a tendency
for consumers to downgrade the quality of their housing demand.
Retail sales remain relatively steady despite the rising unemployment,
and they continue to be a source of strength in most areas. For most kinds
of consumer goods, there is no sign of downgrading in choice of items as a
means of economizing. Consumers are reported to be more careful in watching
for and responding to sales, but there is no pronounced shift to lower grade
goods. When purchases of major appliances are made, the demand is still for
the higher-grade line. Replies from major department stores indicate the
general composition of their business is not changed, although sales are not
rising at last year's pace.
There is one major exception to this picture.

Reports from throughout

the District indicate that consumers are economizing on their automobile purchases. They are shifting away from middle-line models to lower priced and
foreign economy cars, although luxury car demand remains high. As part of
this shift, there appears to be an increased demand for late model used cars.
Therefore, there is evidence of both a reduction of automobile purchases and a
downgrading of quality of purchases.
The recent decline in the stock market has not had any noticeable
impact on consumer purchases, but it does seem to contribute toward creating

more general uncertainty on the part of businessmen.

One specific example of

the effect of lower stock prices reported is those cases where stock had been
used as loan collateral and the borrowers were forced to sell at a loss to
cover the loan.
Many businesses report that their profit margins are being narrowed
by higher costs, especially labor costs and by an inability to raise their
revenue.

Sales are not rising to offset the costs, and general price increases

are not always feasible.
reductions.

In consequence, there is more emphasis upon cost

This takes various forms:

closer controls over inventories, in-

creased layoffs of employees, and in some cases postponement of capital projects.
In fact, one of the clearest responses of individual businesses to this combination of smaller profit margins and continued high interest rates appears in the
reduction of capital spending. One large oil company, for example, describes
its projects as being continuously reviewed, and several other manufacturing
companies report a postponement and reduction of planned expenditures.
Financial pressures are also an element in the slowing of business
capital expenditures.

Several companies reported credit stringency and high

interest costs as factors leading to a revision in their plans.

In one case,

foreign financial conditions caused difficulties for one company; foreign banks
were unable to supply funds normally utilized by this business.

Financial con-

ditions continue to be cited as an important adverse factor influencing the
construction industry. This is in spite of deliberate efforts by banks to
allocate funds to meet this demand.

Banks are continuing to be selected in

the kinds of loans that they make.
In summary, reports of our directors and other businessmen point to
a slowing of the pace of economic activity and a greater reluctance on their
part to undertake major expenditures in the near future.

