CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 20, 1970

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 2
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 19
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 24
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 31
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 34

- 1 -

SUMMARY

This initial report of economic conditions in the 12 Federal
Reserve Districts is based on information gathered from directors of
the Reserve Banks, conversations with local bankers, businessmen and
economists, regular monthly surveys of manufacturing and trade industries
conducted by some of the Reserve Banks, and selected statistical measures
of regional economic activity.
Reports from the Reserve Banks clearly indicate that the current
overriding domestic concern is inflation.

Businessmen contacted generally

expect that prices will continue to increase at a rapid rate during the
remainder of the year.

There appears to be considerable skepticism

regarding the ability of economic stabilization policies to achieve a
significant reduction in the rate of inflation without generating an
intolerable level of unemployment or a full-scale recession.

Similarly,

there is evidence of extensive concern about the persistence of strong
upward wage pressures, despite some easing in labor markets.

The wage-

push problem is particularly acute in the construction industries.

Some

of the other major factors that are contributing to an underlying tone
of pessimism regarding the business situation are prospects for a continued
squeeze on corporate profits, concern about the tight liquidity position
of some firms, the recent decline in the stock market, and domestic
social unrest.
There appears to be no consensus as to whether the economy is
actually in a recession—or when the floor of the current slowdown will
be realized.

Views range from expectations of a further and deeper

deterioration in real economic activity to beliefs that recovery is

already in progress.

The trucking strikes and lockouts have seriously

disrupted business conditions in some areas, particularly in the
Midwest.

Several Districts noted that construction projects have been

impeded because of steel shortages, and also because of widespread
strikes in the building trades unions.

There are also signs that some

firms are postponing or stretching out capital spending projects where
feasible.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Discussions Monday (May 18) and last Friday with First
District Reserve bank directors and other area business leaders
failed to turn up any traces of a crisis mentality in the business
community.

Those participants, including representatives of banking,

retailing, and a wide diversity of manufacturing activities, generally
showed a restrained but marked bullishness.
The primary explanation for this outlook was found in the
common tendency to focus on a two to three year period for planning
purposes, while placing little or no emphasis on the adverse developments which may occur in the next two to three quarters.

In short,

the businessmen are focusing on the far side of the valley, having
already discounted any reasonable downturn which might develop this
year.
In support of this psychology, it may be noted that a common
remark of both merchants and manufacturers was that volume is holding
up well, but profits are off sharply.

Nevertheless, no instances were

found in which this had yet led to a curtailment of capital expenditure
plans for the rest of 1970, and corroborating evidence of this is
found in the observation of three different commercial bankers that
business loan demand had risen to historic highs in the last week or
two at their institutions.

They also uniformly noted that current

interest rate levels are in no way deterring commercial loan demand.
Very little mention of the depressed state of the stock
market was noted among the business leaders contacted, suggesting
that they tend to view it as a separate entity, with few potential

"spillover effects" on the course of real economic activity.

Nor

did the trucking strike elicit much comment as a depressing factor.
Apparently» the wholesale and retail sectors have largely escaped
any severe effects by means of a greatly increased reliance on the
United Parcel Service, and in some instances, parcel post.

Among

manufacturers, serious truck strike effects seem to be highly spotty.
As an example of firms which have been affected, the Cabot Corporation,
large supplier of raw materials to the tire industry, reports increasing
shipments problems.
The machine tool and producers' durable Industries present a
mixed picture.

The Torrington Corporation, large manufacturer of

ball bearings for automotive use, has definitely felt the decline in
auto production, but reports that orders in farm equipment and two-cycle
engines have risen more than enough to offset i t .

Layoffs have been

negligible, and capital expenditure plans revised only slightly.

The

Norton Corporation reports a similar situation in its machine tool
lines, but notes a definite softening of orders in its Industrial
abrasives division.

On the other hand, Mr. Keyser of our board of

directors reports a statewide softening of machine tool activity in
Vermont.
The recreation industry in northern New England has experienced
record levels of revenues all winter and thus far into the spring,
although merchants in these areas as well as on Cape Cod do report
some slack in advance bookings for the coming summer.
On the financial side, commercial banks report their deposit
situation as largely stable, with no prospects for normal growth In

the near future.

Such weakness as was reported seems concentrated

in corporate CDs and individual demand deposits.

Thrift institutions,

on the other hand, are in a worse position, with May deposit losses
already offsetting most of their March-April gains.

One- to

three-family residential housing sales have declined drastically
over the winter in most of the New England urban areas, and apartment construction is also showing signs of letting down.
In summary, neither continued tightness in credit markets
nor prospects for substantial declines in profit levels over the
rest of the year have yet acted to dissuade the business community
from its basic outlook.

A marked letdown in consumer spending

would probably do so, but no signs of one have developed to date.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

In the Second Federal Reserve District, the Boards of Directors
at the head office and at the Buffalo branch were solicited for their
own and others' opinions regarding current economic conditions and
the near-term outlook.

In the summary, the responses showed substantial

agreement concerning (1) a tendency for capital expenditures to be
stretched out, where feasible;

(2) no decline in inflationary expectations;

and (3) an easing of the labor market in certain categories, but
continued strong upward wage pressures.
Some businessmen reportedly are deferring or stretching out
capital spending plans where this is feasible.

Apparently there is a

growing uneasiness about existing capital spending plans.

One machine

tool manufacturer with a fairly large national business has recently
suffered a decline of more than one-third in new orders.

Spending plans

that are being completed as originally contemplated include those where
the firms have "no choice"; namely, programs that are already in process,
particularly if these have long lead times, and programs that are connected with pollution control.

In western New York, for instance,

65-70 percent of the current capital spending by the food processing
industry is government mandated under air and water pollution programs.
Most of the directors expressed the belief that businessmen
were either as concerned about inflation as they had been, or increasingly
so.

One director noted a growing fear and puzzlement over whether

the Federal Reserve System and the Administration "mean business" in
the fight against inflation.

Another director observed that industry

fears wage and price controls and has consequently raised its profit
margins.

As for consumer psychology, several directors indicated that
consumers seemed to expect inflation to continue. There was a
difference of opinion as to whether this worried consumers or whether
it had been accepted as a way of l i f e .

At the same time, almost a l l

of the directors who commented on consumer psychology saw evidences
of conservatism in consumer spending.

One director suggested that

recent stock market developments could be expected to have a
significant psychological effect on such spending.
There was general agreement that businessmen are more concerned
about the expected continuation of inflation than they are about a
recession.

There were varying opinions about when the "floor of the

valley" would be reached, but apparently most directors did not think
the slowdown would be very deep.

A few of the directors noted that

industry's principal concern has to do with the squeeze on profits,
since increasing costs cannot be easily passed on in a sluggish period.
Conditions in the labor market are very uneven, to judge
from the directors' remarks.

Some directors noted that it had become

more difficult for college graduates to find jobs in certain categories;
e . g . , as engineers and physicists.
in easy supply.
tight.

Moreover, unskilled help is apparently

However, qualified skilled labor continues to be

Particular note of this was made with regard to the Buffalo and

Rochester areas.
Some of the directors observed that despite the easing in some
labor markets, there was no detectable easing of upward wage pressures.
Special comment was made regarding the steep demands by the building
trades unions in the Rochester area.

These reportedly stem from the

very generous settlements obtained last year by the same trades in
the Buffalo area.

Note was made of wage increases granted by some

businessmen in their lowest paying job categories.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The business slowdown In the regional economy Is now In its
seventh month, according to a recent poll of business opinion.
Results from the May business outlook survey show that most
manufacturers canvassed in the Third Federal Reserve District are
experiencing either no change or actual declines in sales and new
orders.

Moreover, sales for April did not live up to expectations,

indicating the current slump is somewhat more pronounced than
anticipated earlier.

However, area executives polled see no further

deterioration of business activity in the immediate months ahead.
In addition, optimism remains high for regional activity
over the longer term*

Since January, a majority of manufacturers polled

have held rising expectations for the second half of 1970.

At

latest count, more than two out of three area industrialists see
a pickup in the economy during the fall and winter of 1970.
Underlying this bullish outlook is an expected jump in both
new orders and sales by yearend.

Despite this anticipated acceleration

in business activity, a majority of area manufacturers do not expect
to add to their payrolls over the next six months.

In addition,

only one in four plans an Increase in capital expenditures during the
next half year.
The outlook for prices remains Inflationary.

Better than three

out of five respondents, unchanged from.a year ago, expect the upward
trend for prices to continue for the balance of the year.
The expectations of area economists for the second half of
1970 parallel those of manufacturing executives.

The consensus view

of business and bank economists in the Third District, according
to a recent poll, is that the current downturn in business activity
is bottoming out and that by fall the economy will be expanding once
more.

Prices, say regional economists, will continue their upward

climb, but at a modestly reduced rate as the year progresses.
Comments on the current scene by members of the board of
directors are varied.

Two members, a banker and a utilities

executive, indicate that sentiment among their associates has become
rather gloomy in recent weeks.

The gloom stems from the view that

the current dip in the economy will develop into an all-out recession.
Another cause of this gloom is the feeling that inflation cannot be
stopped without a serious recession.
Two industrialists on the board, however, do not share this
pessimistic sentiment.

One indicated that he saw some further slowing

in the pace of business activity, but believed that a recession would
be avoided largely because of a pickup in consumer spending.

The

other industrialist expected no further declines in the volume of
business.

He indicated, though, that he was less certain about the

economy and more confused now than at anytime in his experience.
Further, this industrialist is skeptical about the ability of current
policy to make much headway against inflation.
All board members expressed concern over declines in the stock
market.

Some pointed to the gloomy psychology it is creating; others

are concerned by the possibility of financial failures; s t i l l others
are concerned that a market decline of current magnitudes might further
undermine consumer spending.

In a related point, one board member

expressed serious concern over Che taut liquidity positions of many
corporations.
Basically, the business opinion in the Third District
reflects the view that the economy has slowed more than expected
several months back, and at best only modest reductions in the rate
of inflation can be expected by the end of 1970.

Also, there is much

concern about developments in the financial sector.

TOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Economic activity in the District has been disrupted during the
past six weeks largely because of trucking strikes and strikes against
several major rubber companies.

Widespread campus disturbances in the

District have forced a number of universities to close and undoubtedly
have had an adverse Impact on business conditions I n local areas.

This

Bank's regular monthly survey of about 70 large manufacturing companies
in the District reflected the softening in nationwide industrial activity
last fall and early winter.

Signs of a bottoming were evidenced in the

survey taken in April, but the Kay survey revealed sharp setbacks during
the month of April in key series such as new orders and shipments and
a marked deterioration in employment and the workweek, presumably
because of work stoppages.

The District's insured unemployment rate,

which had been edging moderately upward (from 1 percent last October
to 2 percent In late March), jumped one percentage point during
April to 3 percent.
At a meeting of about 40 business economists, held at the Bank
on May 15, there were mixed reports concerning recent price behavior.
The majority maintained that wage-cost pressures, in the face of
slack demand, are so great as to make it easy to "pass on" higher
prices.

Some economists, however, reported "under the table"

discounting and price rebates, which presumably are not being recorded
In the official price Indexes.

Specifically, an economist from a

major rubber company said his firm's price index for tires, based on
actual transactions prices and reflecting the mix of consumer
purchases, had risen during the past year only about one-third

as much as the BLS price index for tires.

Economists from the chemical

industries reported recent weakness in chemical prices and noted that
few chemical products were selling at l i s t prices.
Other points of interest emerging from the meeting included a
report by an economist from a large machine tool company in Cleveland
that his firm was living off backlogs, that business booked In April
was only one-quarter of what they would normally receive at this
time of the year, and that they had not yet booked a single new order
in Hay.

Economists from two major auto companies believed the worst

of the cutback in new car sales and production was over and that,
following leveling tendencies in the second and third quarters, sales
would recover later in the year.

Economists from the steel industry

expect the current favorable trade balance in steel to deteriorate
later in the year, with a strong Increase in imports and an easing
in exports.

On the other hand, the steel industry should soon begin

to feel the effects of hedge buying in anticipation of a possible
strike next year.
Among the comments received from this Bank's directors at
a joint board meeting held on May 14, there were reports that markets
for auto components and consumer electronics are becoming softer.

One

director said that one industry in which his firm is a major factor,
flat glass, is—and would remain—in the doldrums until auto production
and construction show Improvement, but he was not optimistic.

Several

directors emphasized that the demand for coal is the greatest since
World War I I ; stockpiles are low and there is difficulty in receiving
supplies.

(This implies continued upward pressure on coal prices,

which have risen considerably during the past year; also "brownouts"
are likely this summer.)

One director, the dean of a graduate school,

reported that this year's graduates are harder to place.

The market

for Ph.Ds, especially mathematicians and statisticians, is suffering,
reflecting the cutback in Government grants and other financial support
for education.

Directors from large banks said they are struggling

to maintain their deposits, while directors from country banks were
experiencing rising time deposits.
Some recent conversations of this Bank's officers within the
District in recent days indicate that businessmen expect corporate
profits to be off sharply in the second quarter because of the
trucking strikes and the slack in business.

Some of the businessmen

contacted expect a minor recovery in profits in the

third

quarter,

but do not look for any major improvement before the final quarter
of 1970.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Production, Sales, and Inventories.

District survey respondents,

except for those in certain trades and services, indicate declines
recently in retail sales—particularly automobiles.

This continues

a slackening trend evident in this District throughout the current
year.

Manufacturers also report declines in shipments, new orders,

and backlogs of orders.

This situation apparently pervades both durable

and nondurable lines and remains typical of the District's
industry,

largest

textiles.

Inventories are reported to be substantially unchanged from
the previous month in manufacturing as well as in retail trade.
Manufacturers, however, report higher levels of Inventories than they
desire, while retailers report inventory levels to be somewhat depleted.
Employment and Unemployment.

Employment is reported to have

declined in the District during the past month, in manufacturing as
well as in trade and services.

The decline continues a generally

weakening employment situation existing since January.

Hours worked

per week have been reduced further, and initial claims for unemployment
insurance apparently continue high.

On the other hand, District

businessmen Indicate that good employees are still scarce in both the
skilled and unskilled categories.
Wages and Prices^.

District manufacturers report increases in

both wages and prices over the past month as they have consistently
done for the past year*

Businessmen in trade and services indicate

an even more pronounced upward tendency.

Scattered indications of

price declines have appeared in the textile and furniture Industries.

Construction.*

Residential contruction activity in the

District remains severely depressed*

Nonresidential construction,

however, is reported to have increased slightly—a reversal of previous
months* reports
Loan Demand.

District bankers report that the demand for

mortgage loans increased significantly during the past month.

A

number of bankers, however, indicate reluctance to accommodate this
demand due to statutory rate ceilings and other factors.

Businesss

loan demand is reported to have increased somewhat over the past month
as well, while consumer loan demand is apparently unchanged.
Outlook.

Uncertainty pervades the economic outlook among

District businessmen and bankers due to both economic and noneconomic
factors, including domestic social unrest and recent developments in
the Vietnam War.
Capital Spending.

Survey respondents in manufacturing,

particularly nondurable goods, indicate plant and equipment capacity
to be in excess.

Respondents in trade and services report their

capacity to be inadequate.

Both groups, however, apparently plan

further increases.
Reserve bank directors confirm this consensus and report that,
even in some instances where current capacity is more than adequate,
spending plans are not being curtailed and are even being increased
in certain cases due to a general feeling that inflationary conditions
will continue.
Inventory Investment.

Manufacturers report current inventory

levels to be excessive, but businessmen in trade and services feel
they are too low.

Reserve bank directors indicate a similar mixture

of opinion*

Adjustments are apparently still going on, and some

respondents indicate that, while the largest share of inventory
reduction has already passed, few significant Increases are being
planned.
General Conditions and Consumer Spending.

There is a consensus

among District bankers that further declines are ahead for general
business activity in the District.

Moreover, Reserve bank directors

indicate that consumer spending plans are being adjusted downward
somewhat, reflecting largely a feeling of uncertainty over the future
course of the national economy.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The mood of our directors varies from pessimism Co optimism.
If any consensus exists, It Is that business activity in the Sixth
District will continue to weaken slighcly.

Many major economic

indices should drift downward or mark time for the next two months
at least.
In the pessimistic vein, a leading department store recently
informed us that their sales are even with a year ago, but only
because of the addition of branches; unit sales, of course, are lower.
The store reported that labor costs were up 8 to 10 percent and
profits were o f f .

They were pessimistic about future department store

sales and did not anticipate a quick economic recovery.

A telephone

survey of department stores indicates this conclusion is shared by
many retailers throughout the Southeast.
According to directors' reports, retail sales in some areas
have been adversely affected because of a diversion of purchasing power
to private schools which have sprung up in response to Integration
orders.

Lumber mills in many areas have not been operating at profitable

levels, and one major mill is planning to close down operations for
three to six weeks to adjust inventories.
is anticipated by the end of the year.

A recovery in this industry

The coal industry in Tennessee

is also stymied at the Mine Safety Act, with which the industry claims
it is impossible to comply,
The temporary closing of oil leasing in the Gulf because of
oil-slick problems continues to cause a slump in the Louisiana Gulf
Coast area.

The outlook for the immediate future is pessimistic.

Difficulty in obtaining insurance will also continue to hold up

construction in the wake of Hurricane Camille.

Also, a strike by

2,600 workers at Gulf States Power is hamstringing new construction
in Baton Rouge and other areas served by this utility.
The employment outlook remains bleak at the large number of
military and aerospace installations in the South.

Financial districts

of major metropolitan areas are expected to continue to experience a
reduction in employment occurring throughout the brokerage business,
and there has been some reduction in employment at a large bank.
A recent canvass of institutional mortgage lenders indicates
pessimistic outlook for single- and multi-family housing starts.
Atlanta and Miami were the only moderately bright spots.
Higher prices of vegetables, peaches, and other agricultural
commodities may be in prospect because of lower crop estimates and
delayed plantings.

Production estimates of citrus f r u i t , however,

remain bullish despite a mild drought.
On the optimistic side of the ledger, many new plant locations
and large-scale construction projects have been reported recently.
For example, central Alabama will be receiving a modular home plant,
a poultry plant, and a foundry for production of parts for automobiles
and other products.

In southern Louisiana, a new chemical plant

has been announced and a large addition to an existing plant is
planned.

In the Birmingham area, a rash of construction projects has

been announced.

In the New Orleans area, plans for a new shopping

center and another large motel have been announced.

Potential public

construction in that area includes a large bridge, an airport, and
a stadium.

One director has reported a sizable increase in new orders
because of a revival of capital projects that had been postponed
last year.
A real bright spot in our District has been the Orlando
area, where construction should continue to boom as Disneyworld
gains momentum.

Construction will soon be commencing on a very

large residential project south of Orlando.
If a tentative wage settlement is ratified by ground
workers of National Airlines this week, it will provide a stimulus
to activity in southeast Florida in the coming weeks.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

In published statements and private conversations a deep mood
of pessimism prevails in the Seventh District.

Developments in Southeast

Asia and the Middle East, racial strife, student unrest, high interest
rates, the decline in the stock market, the squeeze on profits, the
persistence of price Inflation, rising unemployment, "unreasonable"
labor demands, and strikes (especially the truckers' strikes) are
likely to be mentioned in any discussion of recent trends and future
prospects.

Probably some decisions are being delayed pending

clarification of current uncertainties.

Whatever the "facts" may be,

a correspondent writes, "Men's thoughts control their actions."
One of the problems in drawing a consensus by citing individual
views on developments at the present time is that for every assertion
an antithetical view could be offered.

Some advocate price and wage

controls; others regard such controls as anathema.

Some demand that

the Federal Reserve System ease credit, others insist that policy should
have remained highly restrictive.

Some worry over rising unemployment;

others believe a "shakeout" is essential.

Some expect a continuing

decline in real activity through 1970; others are sure that the low
point is past or near at hand.

Some bankers think loan demand remains

as strong as ever; others believe demand has eased.
The truckers' strikes and lockouts had a deep impact in the
Seventh District in April and May, particularly in the Chicago area.
Output of steel, autos, appliances, radio-TV, machinery and equipment,
and many other goods has been slowed—some plants are closed completely.
Some construction projects using structural steel have been virtually
at a standstill.

Some retailers have been unable to obtain certain

goods.

In the Chicago area, it is estimated that 125,000 workers

are out of work currently because of the strikes, in addition
to about 40,000 truck drivers.
Increasing uncertainties have entered the capital goods
picture.

Most statements of construction machinery producers indicate

sales to distributors have been good, but one large producer reports
inventories piling up at the dealer level.
tools have been hard hit by order declines.

Among capital goods, machine
Machine tool output has

not declined as much as orders, but some surplus capacity has developed.
As a result of rainy weather, crop plantings have been delayed and farm
machinery sales continue weak.
Construction declines are largely confined to single-family
homes.

Carpenters have become more readily available, but most building

trades continue in short supply.

Mortgage money is believed to have

eased "dramatically" in the Detroit area.
Orders for major household appliances have improved in recent
months.

Demand for certain consumer residential goods, including

motorcycles, golf carts, and bicycles is excellent—pressing capacity
to the limit in some cases.
Although output schedules for autos indicate a strong revival
in May and June, pessimism in automotive centers has been spreading.
Perhaps this reflects the failure of retail sales to confirm expectations
of improving demand.
Developments in the steel industry are so clouded by the truck
strikes that generalizations on order trends are not possible, but a
short-term increase in output is certain when the strikes are settled.

Job markets have eased in all major areas, but there has been
no significant improvement in the supply of trainable younger workers.
The easing of supply of college graduates has been dramatic.

Summer

jobs for undergraduates are scarcer than at any time in recent years.
Many experienced executives are seeking jobs, partly as a result of
the "fine combing" of white collar staffs.

A student seeking summer

work at a large automotive firm was asked, "Why do we want trainees
when we're firing vice presidents?"
Complaints over "tight money" are widespread.

Increased concern

is expressed over the "liquidity squeeze," especially in small- and
medium-sized businesses.

Payments frequently are delayed, but there

has been no significant rise in outright defaults or bankruptcies.
Comments on the strength of loan demand vary from bank to bank.

This

may reflect varying degrees of emphasis on the means by which potential
customers are discouraged.
A large bank states its "average cost of money" is 8-1/4 percent.
Banks are not now able to raise CD money at ceiling rates.

The common

view of lenders and borrowers is that interest rates will either remain
high or rise somewhat.

However, there are indications that some corporate

bond issues are being postponed and are awaiting more favorable conditions.
District analysts who emphasize the "money supply" expect the
decline in activity to last at least through the third and probably the
fourth quarter.
Of course, there are many who believe the decline in the stock
market presages a much more severe drop In general business than is
yet apparent.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

A select group of knowledgeable persons in the Eighth Federal
Reserve District, including directors at the head office and Louisville
branch of the St. Louis Reserve Bank, officials of larger business
firms and newspaper financial editors, was questioned with respect
to their views concerning the economic outlook.

Their comments point

to some further decline In business activity in the near future, with
an occasional expression of doubt as to the extent of recovery of
business profits in the longer run.
Of greatest concern at the moment for most firms are the
contracts which are being negotiated with labor unions and the
anticipated higher wage settlements.

The business representatives

almost unanimously Indicate that they will be unable to pass on a l l
of the rising labor costs to consumers.

A continuation of the profit

squeeze of the first quarter of this year is therefore expected.
There are no indications of major layoffs of workers by those
interviewed, except in the construction industry.

Some firms are,

however, reducing wage and salary costs by falling to replace workers
who retire.

A slackening in demand for labor is also Indicated by the

slowdown in demand for June college graduates.

One business school

dean reported a slowdown in growth of both Job opportunities and in
starting salaries compared with other recent years.
Excluding stockbrokers, pessimism appears greatest in the
automobile, chemical, construction, and defense industries In the
Eighth District.

Concern for their profit outlook in the immediate

future and to a less extent in the longer run indicates some decline

in demand for investment funds in these Industries.

A number of

smaller industries which are associated with residential construction,
notably furniture and fixtures, likewise view the outlook with little
optimism.

The breweries, food, and feed industries have apparently

been little affected by the current economic slowdown and have made
little diange in their long-run spending plans.

One representative

of these industries remarked that his company was "looking across
the valley" to a recovery later in the year.
Great concern was expressed by a number of people for the
major downward movement in the stock market.

Several accredited

this movement to restrictive monetary policies, which they believe
were necessary to bring the rate of inflation down to a more
moderate level.

In some responses, and especially in the case of

our own board members, a need for continued moderation in the rate
of growth in the stock of money was indicated despite the problems
involved in reducing demand to more sustainable levels.
Farm land prices apparently continue to decline in the
predominantly agricultural areas of the Eighth District.

Estimates

of price declines during the first year run as high as $50 to $100
per acre on land that previously sold for $500 to $1,000 per acre.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Although indications of softening in the Ninth Federal
Reserve District are not as apparent as in the rest of the nation,
various pieces of quantitlve and qualitative evidence suggest
that the rate of District economic growth has at least slowed
down.

At the same time, however, there does not seem to he any

diminution in the inflationary psychology of area residents.
Consumers apparently are cutting back on their level of consumption,
and scattered instances of businessmen either postponing or at
least stretching out some of their capital expenditures are being
noticed.

Currently, a number of construction workers in the

District are on strike and indications are that most of these
strikes will last for awhile.

Information relating to the

Teamsters' strike is very sketchy, but it appears that some firms
are beginning to be affected.
During the go-around at the last meeting of the Board
of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the
directors generally felt that business conditions were softening.
As evidence of these observations, the directors cited such
things as unemployment increasing in their areas, retail sales
becoming sluggish, businessmen hesitating to build up inventories,
and an almost universal observation of slowing in auto sales.

In

addition, one director was aware of a case where a steel company
supplying the auto industry has cut back its orders of iron ore
pellets.

One director, on the other hand, observed that lumber

and wood products manufacturers in western Montana have become

optimistic in their expectations of sales during the latter
half of this year.

These producers were severely affected by

the downturn in housing construction, but not expect their
sales to Increase with the anticipated upturn in housing.
I n spite of the business slowdown, the directors felt
that inflationary psychology has not abated in their local areas,
but that recent events in Indochina have not had a discernible
separate effect on inflationary psychology.

They also felt that

people are concerned not only with the effect of inflation, but
also with all other areas of unrest in this country.

One director

addressed himself to the discriminatory impact of inflation.
Although he was careful to point out that the problem was also
due to other factors, he felt that farmers are feeling the i l l
effects of Inflation while not sharing in the benefits.

For

example, he said that while farmers recently have had to pay
more for input items, the prices of their products have not
Increased accordingly.

As a result, the profits of farm operations

have fallen o f f .
Scattered pieces of information suggest that area businessmen
may be postponing or at least stretching out their capital expenditures.

During the first three months of this year, the valuation

of building permits issued for nonresidential building in the
Ninth District were about 9 percent below the comparable yearearlier period.

After adjusting for cost increases over the past

year, this Implies that nonresidential building activity is about
16 percent below a year ago.

In addition, one director was aware

of a manufacturing firm In his area that has set back the
letting of contracts from 60 to 120 days.

Also, a Minneapolis-

based milling and food related conglomerate reported recently
that they had cut back their capital expenditures.

During the

current fiscal year they expect to spend about $5 million for
fixed capital, an amount down substantially from the $ 8 . 2 million
spent last year.

Two cases were cited at the recent directors

meeting, however, which are expected to lead to increasing capital
expenditures.

In one case, it was stated that a railroad based

in the Ninth District would have to expand its capital expenditures
to take advantage of the economies of scale inherent in a recent
merger of four lines.

In the second case, a copper producer in the

Upper Peninsula of Michigan has undertaken a housing program which,
when completed, will double the size of the town in which the mine
is located.

The ostensible reason for the new program was to

shorten the commuting time of workers, for a number of their
employees are now commuting dally from points 50 to 100 miles
away.
Major construction contract negotiations are underway
in two sections of the District.

In Minnesota about 10,000 to

12,000 workers are currently out on strike and about 15,000 to
20,000 workers are directly affected.

Although some disputes

have already been settled, the majority of union contracts expiring
this spring are s t i l l in the process of negotiation.

I n general,

completed negotiations call for wages to Increase by more than
50 percent over the next two years.

The strikes s t i l l in progress

are expected to continue throughout the next three to four weeks.

I n the highway and heavy construction sectors, the carpenters
and Teamsters have settled, but the operating engineers appear
to be a long from settlement.

According to a recent newspaper

article, operating engineers in Minnesota reportedly turned down
an offer that would increase their wages by 55 percent over the next
two and a half years presumably because of union dissatisfaction
regarding the timing of the increases.

In the building construction

trades, a number of strikes are still in progress and probably
will not be settled for at least three to four weeks.
In South Dakota, contract negotiations are underway in
Sioux Falls and Rapid City, the only unionized areas in the state.
A l l building construction has been shut down in Sioux Falls as a
result of a strike by the operating carpenters are in the process
of negotiating new contracts, but are still working. The unions
are requesting wage increases of about 15 to 20 percent per year
over the next three years as opposed to the 10 percent to 12
percent per year Increase received at the time of the last
settlement three years ago.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Consensus Based on Discussions with-Members of the Board
of Directors.

Perhaps the most pervasive comments revolve about

construction industry wage settlements.

The extremely high national

rate of wage increase is mirrored in the District, but of more
significance, current and emerging wage demands will probably give a
new l i f t to the national spiral.

Construction is at a standstill in

some areas of the District, as new wage bargaining proceeds.

Excessive

increases in construction costs are an important part of the reason for
the reduced volume of new construction awards, which will show up in
reduced construction activity six months or so hence.

Even now, it is

reported, there is a virtual absence of small construction projects of
$750,000 or less.
The magnitude of wage increases in construction, and in other
industries as well, is causing many to doubt the validity of attempting
to bring wage-cost inflation under control by monetary and fiscal
policies.

There is a strong belief that stabilization goals can be

accomplished only if the unbridled power of labor unions is curbed.
In this connection, it was noted that some local memberships in their
push for large gains have effectively overthrown the guidance of national
leaders.

It was interesting, too, to hear that the top construction

company in the United States last year is a nonunion firm.
Retail sales are reported in the range of from firm to down by
varying amounts.

Where sales were reported weak, it was indicated that

the public is deeply concerned about the prospect of recession.
Despite excellent production prospects, producers of farm crops
are discouraged by low prices for many of these crops.

Bankers in the

High Plains report that increasing numbers of farmers, particularly
wheat farmers, are quitting because of low prices and restricted
average allotment programs.

The attrition appears to be substantially

higher than the average for other recent years caused by the changing
structure of the industry.
relatively favorable.

The livestock sector continues to remain

However, the Impact of higher livestock prices

is expected to be offset by Increasing costs, resulting in little
change in net farm income measured in current dollars.

Consequently,

net farm income measured in real terms is likely to be down.
The 8-percent increase in net farm income in 1969, combined
with efforts of farm producers to increase efficiency by going to
larger equipment and other technological improvements, has caused
purchases by farmers to increase.

Farm machinery dealers report sales

of farm equipment to be unusually good.

They are fearful, however,

that to a considerable extent current sales are being made at the
expense of normal future sales.

Conversation with farm purchasers

indicates that they are buying now because they expect equipment
prices to rise substantially as new union contracts are negotiated.
Farm implement people expect Walter Reuther's death to make
bargaining in the farm machinery industry more difficult.
It is apparent that most Board members do not believe that
a recession will be an acceptable route to the goal of price stability.
While they probably would not argue that the economy is in recession,
the course of developments and the sharp April rise in unemployment
tend to strengthen the view that the economy is headed in that
direction.

Banker members of the Board are concerned with the continuing
effort to limit overall credit growth by restricting growth in the
banking system.

They believe that this already has gone too far in

squeezing bank liquidity.

Moreover, they argue, monetary policy is

forcing too much banking outside of banks and this is potentially
dangerous.

The resort to commercial paper financing by business

firms is cited as an obvious example.

The removal of Interest rate

ceilings on large CDs would be a step in rectifying some of the
current difficulties and potential problems in this regard.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Continued inflation is the major concern of Eleventh District
board members surveyed at a mid-May meeting in Dallas.

A recession

is considered possible by a number of the board members, but this
prospect is causing less concern than inflation since there is a
widespread belief among the directors that a recession would be
short and mild.

A liquidity crisis is mentioned as a possibility

by only one-third of the respondents, and the odds attached to this
outcome are relatively low.

With this overall economic outlook, the

board members expected sales to show no Increase or only a small
Increase in 1970, while profits are expected to decline.

One

director thought there might be a fall of more than 5 percent in both
sales and profits.
Every board member reported that employee wages in their firms
were being increased in 1970.

This direct experience with higher

wage costs may be one reason for the almost unanimous concern with
inflation, ahead of other economic problems.

The smallest wage increase

(4 percent) was cited by an academic leader, while the largest (10
percent) was mentioned by a banker.

The nonbanklng businessmen

mentioned 6 percent most often as the wage adjustment they were
making this year.
The respondents were unanimous in their view that the Federal
budget would operate with a deficit this year.

Apparently, the

Administration's forecast of a budget surplus Is not accepted within
the business and financial community, although a few directors thought
the deficit might be small.

Despite some concern about a mild recession, acknowledgment
of higher labor costs, and a generally poor outlook for profits this
year, there were no reports of employment cutbacks by the bankers and
businessmen interviewed and no indication that employment cuts were
currently being considered.

I n fact, plans for very modest expansion

of the labor force were noted by a couple of respondents.

This

reported maintenance of employment levels is consistent with the
aggregate data for the Eleventh District, which show total employment
still edging upward.

The increase in employment, however, has not

been sufficient to absorb all of the new labor force entrants In
the District states.

Thus, there has been an increase in unemployment

in the Eleventh District since the end of 1969, and unemployment
insurance activity is at a considerably higher level.
The respondents to our survey did note some softening in planned
plant and equipment spending.

More than half Indicated that their

January expectations had been revised downward; the estimates of the
magnitude of the downward revision were vague but apparently indicated,
in most cases, trimming around the edges rather than wholesale
slashing.

An executive of one major manufacturing concern did

indicate that planned plant and equipment spending was undergoing a
"substantial" cutback.
The Texas industrial production index edged up in March, but
has generally flattened since the beginning of 1970.

Increased

demand for petroleum and petro-chemlcal products has helped to
strengthen the economy in both Texas and other District states.
O i l production in the Eleventh District has remained near record
levels throughout the spring, usually a period of seasonal slack.

At the same time, drilling activity has been rebounding from a
27-year low.

Construction contract activity in the District showed

renewed strength in the first quarter of 1970, compared with either
the year-earlier period or the fourth quarter of 1969.

Nonbulldlng

construction contracts were up considerably, bouyed by two very
large contracts; nonresidential contracts also showed a sizable
increase.

A seasonal expansion in construction employment has

occurred this spring, although the gain came earlier and was
somewhat less than usual.
Department store sales in the Eleventh District through
early May were up moderately in dollar value, but less than the amount
required to offset inflation.

Sales in early May appeared somewhat

stronger than has been the case for the year as a whole so far.
Agricultural activities throughout most of the Eleventh
District are progressing under generally favorable weather conditions.
Cash receipts from farm marketings in the District states were up
substantially in the first two months of 1970, compared with yearearlier levels.
Loan demand in the Eleventh District remained sluggish in
April, as total loans at weekly reporting commercial banks declined
contraseasonally.

With both time and savings deposits Increasing,

District banks added considerably to their holdings of securities,
particularly municipals.

Time deposits have increased recently due

mainly to the sale of large CDs.

Some tightening in District bank

reserve positions in April is reflected in the increase in weekly
average net Federal funds purchased and in discount window borrowings,
compared with the March levels.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

General.

There Is no consistent pattern of views and anticipa-

tions regarding economic conditions in the Twelfth District.

Moderate

growth in business characterizes the District generally, including both
Washington, one of the hardest hit sections, and Arizona, previously
showing the greatest growth.

Declining output and employment in some

parts of Oregon are continuing and spreading, while both buoyant and
depressed conditions are reflected in various areas of Southern
California.
Random Notes by Industry.

Reports on recent agricultural

conditions vary from "agricultural disaster due to weather" and
"agricultural recession" to "excellent growing conditions and bumper
crop prospects."
Logging and lumber mills continue slow, with outlook favorable
until mid-1971.

The layoff rate has been reduced at one large aerospace

firm, but is becoming manifest in a limited way in some other industries.
In education, wages are "high" despite heavy demand for the scarce new
positions.

Severe gasoline price wars are evident in many locations,

aggravated by the introduction of new types of gasoline.
Housing generally continues in short supply with construction
depressed, while apartment vacancy rates vary from low to very
substantial.
in Utah.

Industrial and commercial construction is "fairly active"

One manufacturer reports a volume market and good prices.

Another reports a profit squeeze; he was "forced to raise prices against
a soft market; the raise was accepted as unavoidable" (except for the
attempted cut In distributors' margins).

Stimmary for Selected Economic Aspects.

Employment - New jobs

are becoming less easy to find, actual cutbacks in total employment
are occurring in an increasing number of firms as a part of costreduction programs.

Significant expiration of unemployment compensation

benefits is expected in June and July in one area.
Strikes - Both current and anticipated labor difficulties were
mentioned.
Wages - Wage conditions vary from constant to rising.

There is

even wider anticipation—except in strictly agricultural communities—of
future wage boosts.
Other Costs - Increasing costs of purchased goods were mentioned,
but one respondent writes that " d e a l e r s . . . a r e selling equipment at
below cost to reduce inventories."
Prices - Prices on the respondents' own products vary from
"recently strengthened markedly" to "started declining about 30 days
ago."

Higher posted prices and competitive price-cutting left one

industry's average retail price higher on balance; expectations are
for hardening prices.
price trend was noted.

Despite a slowdown in one area, a strong upward
In another, upward pressures are expected to

continue with the rates of increase "diminished from those of recent
experience."
Profits - In one industry expecting both wage increases and
employment cutbacks, "a number of companies have announced that they
expect slow Improvements in net earnings as 1970 proceeds."
Market Psychology - I n one sensitive-commodity industry,
"the psychology of buyers and sellers has changed recently" (In a

deflating direction): "the tendency of buyers is to go increasingly
to a hand-to-mouth b a s i s . "
Sales - Sales reports vary from "curtailed" through "constant"
to " u p . "

Higher new orders and lengthening delivery time were

noted in one community.

In the Portland zone retail sales "have

reflected a definite improvement within the last 30 days," in contrast
to the more general expectation in that zone of even more softening
in retail sales.
Inventories - Both higher and lower Inventories are reported.
Plant and Equipment Investment - Both high and low levels of
capital spending, as well as "no change," are reported, with cutbacks
more frequently mentioned.
Credit - According to the banker respondents, "ample" to
"adequate" credit is available.

Users of credit vary in their judgments

on this score from "a little easier to obtain," through "very difficult,
but not substantially more so than a year ago," to "very tight for
agricultural loans from commercial bank sources."
Bank liquidity short of distress was noted.,

Expansion of

several retirement communities is currently being held up for lack
of funds.

A continuing increase in overdue or delinquent receivables

was reported, partly attributable to strike-induced delays.

A large

international conglomerate indicated that accounts receivable have
slowed from 70 to 80 days; the very substantial costs involved could
not be passed on.
Policy - In one community the impotence of monetary policy
and the need for wage and price controls had become the subject of

common discussion on the street*

Elsewhere the lack of needed wage-

price guidelines was noted, with the "unconscionable increase in
inflationary conditions in services" emphasized.

