CONFIDENTIAL (YE)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 11, 1970

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 19
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 25
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 31
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 34

SUMMARY

Current comment "by businessmen and bankers, as reported by the
twelve Reserve Banks, is decidedly more pessimistic than that of a month
ago.

The pervasive dampening effect of the General Motors strike is evident

in most parts of the country.

Employment continues to weaken, or at best,

to show sluggish growth, in most Districts, while unemployment is reportedly
rising further in several areas.

On balance, reports emphasize continued

weakness in consumer spending, and some further cutbacks or stretchouts of
capital spending plans.

Reports are mixed on the behavior of prices, but

strong upward wage pressures continue to restrain any widespread belief that
inflation will soon be under control.

Residential construction activity is

improving somewhat in parts of the country, but reports vary widely as to
the degree of the recovery.

Inflows of savings to financial institutions

continue to grow, and somewhat easier mortgage terms seem to be available.
Loan demand by consumers, potential home builders, and businesses is reported
to be weak on balance, and is aggravated by problems in specific areas and
industries.
In the past month, there has been some widening of the impact of
the General Motors strike upon the economy.

The two Districts in which

the effect is most direct are Chicago and Cleveland, although the Chicago
report indicates that after adjusting for the strike, economic activity in
that District is level to slightly up.

Seven out of the ten major metropolitan

areas in the Cleveland District, however, are adversely affected, and other
Districts—New York, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Dallas—trace either direct or
indirect dampening effects to the strike.

The Philadelphia report contains

the suggestion that the underlying economic trend is weaker than generally
acknowledged, and perhaps too much blame is placed upon the strike.

Numerous other strikes have had widespread effects as well—
construction workers in Kansas City; carpenters, household appliances,
construction machinery, and other autos in the Chicago District; and airlines
in the Minneapolis District.
Weakness in the employment picture is traceable to strikes as well
as to cutbacks in government spending affecting the aerospace and aircraft
industries in the Atlanta and San Francisco Districts.

Also blamed for layoffs

are cutbacks in business capital spending affecting the machine tool industry
in the Boston and Cleveland Districts, and the computer industry in the
Cleveland and Minneapolis Districts.

Slackening steel production is a source

of weakness in the Cleveland District, and the textile industry has accounted
for some sluggishness in the Richmond and Atlanta Districts.

A less-than-

seasonal buildup of employment by retailers is also mentioned.
District reports describe consumer spending variously from satisfactory to very bad.

The consensus is clearly less than satisfactory,

particularly for "big ticket" items.

Only the Chicago District describes the

outlook for consumer durable purchases as optimistic.

Retailers' inventories

are generally being held down, and holiday season buildups are apparently
lower than usual.
Residential construction is reported to be improved in the St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City Districts.

In the latter case, the improvement

follows a prolonged strike in several of the building trades.

Residential

building continues weak, however, in the Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, and
San Francisco Districts.
While the liquidity positions of financial institutions are reported
to have improved, the consensus of the reports is that loan demand remains
weak.

In some Districts this is reported to have led to greater investment

in municipal securities by banks, and there is some speculation about the
possibility of an imminent cut in the prime rate.
Some moderation in the growth of prices is mentioned in the Richmond,
Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco reports.

In some areas, consumers are

continuing to shift to lower-to-medium priced goods, and price shading of
consumer items is reported.

Concern continues to be voiced, however, about

the problem of controlling inflation in view of recent labor settlements which
have resulted in large wage increases, for example, in the St. Louis and
Kansas City Districts.

Increases in gas and electric utility rates and in

prices of public services are of concern in the Atlanta District.

The potential

need for incomes policies in order to control inflation in the face of rising
unemployment and continued upward pressure on wages is mentioned by respondents
to surveys in the Boston and Philadelphia Districts.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

This month's discussions uncovered a further deterioration of the
quiet confidence which had prevailed among District One Redbook respondents
until early autumn.

This shift—sensed more than heard in last month's talks—

was made explicit in varying degrees by "both our directors and our academic
consultants,.

The members of the latter group in particular seem to have

converged to a point where there is substantive agreement among them on
policy issues.
District One commercial banks continue to report results commensurate with the national experience:

deposit flows are entirely satisfactory,

and loan demand is flat to weak in all categories.

One of our Class A

Directors states that his institution has been investing large (for them)
amounts in Federal funds for several months now, and is about to begin
acquiring municipal obligations.

Another Class A Director reports deposit

increases of $80 million over a year ago.

Of this amount only $10 million

has been put into new loans while $70 million has been used to reduce debt.
Loan-deposit ratios at this institution have dropped from 89 percent last
summer to a current 76 percent.
Area thrift institutions, too, have greatly improved their liquidity
positions since mid-year, and many are once again building mortgage loan
commitment levels.

In line with this general picture mortgage rate reductions

are finally beginning to appear in several communities scattered across the
New England region.

One banker did express concern, however, that an

unusually high proportion of the pickup in mortgage activity is on existing
structures, and that construction activity will be slow to benefit from
easier mortgage market conditions.

More generally, area "business conditions continue mixed.

Recre-

ational activity in the northern New England states is very good, and a
great many of the region's manufacturers of industrial equipment and capital
goods still have felt no slowdowns.

There are perhaps more notable exceptions

to this trend than there were a month ago; however, New England's precision
tool and machine tool industries continue in a state of severe slack.

New

rounds of four- and eight-week layoffs—unforeseen as recently as a month ago—
are now being planned for December and January at some firms.
Professor Otto Eckstein, characteristically our most ebullient
academic respondent over the summer months, seems to have shifted in recent
weeks to a more moderate stance.

Describing the U. S. economy as "sick, and

getting sicker," Eckstein suggested that a fourth quarter nominal GNP gain of
$7 to $8 billion now seems likely.

While he still sees a strong spurt of GNP

growth over the first half of 1971 as likely to arise from the effects of
steel hoarding and auto production catch-ups, Eckstein expects a third quarter
1971 decline in real GNP.
As for the housing outlook, Eckstein sees a relatively moderate
resurgence as likely.

His current projections have housing starts at a 1.75

million annual rate by the end of 1971, edging up to 1.8 million and above in
1972.

Eckstein emphasized that the nagging questions now lie more on the

demand side of things, due to wealth effects, white collar unemployment, and
consumer uncertainty.

In money markets, Eckstein sees long rates (on AAA

industrial bonds) as declining very slowly—perhaps 30 or U0 points by the
end of 1971.
On policy, Eckstein suggested three measures as appropriate now.
First, he endorses a discount rate cut, solely for its announcement effects.
Second, he now suggests a six to seven percent growth in the aggregates should

be our target over the period from now to third quarter 1971.

Finally, he

strongly feels that the time is now overdue for an incomes policy.

Specifi-

cally, this would take the form of the President himself calling together
business and labor leaders for a closed session White House meeting.

The

crux of the Presidential message should be, first, that the Administration
means business in its fight against inflation and, second, that the penalties
for ignoring him will be continued high rates of unemployment, generally poor
business conditions, public censure of specific groups, etc.
When Professor Wallich was queried on the use of incomes policy
he replied, "Such policies are like prayer.
works you should use it."

If you know a good one that

His approach would be one of a selective interim

freeze on certain wages and prices.

He stressed, however, that such an

approach should be very temporary (six months or so), and removed before
distortions and inequities begin to arise.

On reducing the discount rate,

Wallich would endorse such a move at the present time only if the mechanics
of monetary policy are such that the System cannot otherwise achieve its
aggregate and rate targets.

As for specific aggregate targets, Wallich stated

that the current growth path appears very low when viewed in real terms, and
that seven percent would now seem warranted.

This number represents a

substantial shift toward stimulus on his part.
Professor Tobin remains the most bearish of our academicians.

He

too would endorse an immediate discount rate cut, and additionally counsels
us to keep pushing on the aggregates with a view to continued easing in rate
levels.

Nine to ten percent growth in Ml strikes him a appropriate to

accommodate a closing of the GNP gap.
Tobin sees no real source of strength anywhere in the private sector,
noting that any probable housing resurgence will come nowhere near offsetting

the weakness in business investment that is developing.

He further points

out that we have experienced no great inventory decumulation and thus can
expect no potential stimulus from that area.

Tobin concluded by warning us

to discount the argument that recent high savings rates will soon lead to
consumers breaking out in a splurge.

He points out that this ignores the

wealth effects stemming from 1;he stock market decline which are now very
much in evidence in consumer behavior, and will continue to dominate it.
Professor Samuelson was unavailable to comment this month.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

A somewhat more pessimistic picture of the current and prospective
economic outlook than had been painted a month ago emerged from the opinions
expressed recently by Federal Reserve Bank Directors and other business
leaders.

Most feel that, in part as a result of the General Motors strike,

a revival of economic activity will be delayed longer than had previously
been expected.

In their view, prospects were for further trimming of planned

capital outlays, continued restrained consumer demand over the next few
months, sustained upward pressures on wages and prices, a further squeeze
on profits, and little, if any, progress toward curbing inflation.
The chairman of the board of a large New York City bank thus commented that overall economic activity had slowed, and emphasized the significant actual and prospective adverse effects on the economy of the General
Motors strike.

The president of a Rochester department store pointed to the

unusually high rate of unemployment in his area, to the temporary closing
down of eight or ten companies dependent on the auto industry, and felt very
concerned and pessimistic over the current outlook.

The president of a

large life insurance company believed 1971 would witness only a "slow ascent,"
while a partner in a large brokerage firm offering a wide variety of financial services did not see any significant upswing in the next year and if
there is, a recurrence of the inflation problem.

The president of a large

chemical firm reported that he had been quite sanguine over his firm's prospects prior to the General Motors strike, but was now more pessimistic.

The

former chairman of the board of a major oil company foresaw a stagnant first
half of 1971, but some real improvement for the full year.
With respect to planned capital outlays, the chairman of the large
New York City bank expressed the view that these plans are being revised

downward.

A director reported some "holding back" in capital expenditures

in the industries with which he is familiar—aerospace, electronic, glass
and communications.

The president of the Rochester department store saw evi-

dence of cutbacks in his area, while the president of the large chemical corporation reported that his firm was trying to hold down such outlays; he
estimated that his firm's capital outlays will be about the same in 1971 as
in 1970, which will "be a bit less tTian in 1969.

The president of a large life

insurance company and one of the partners in a large brokerage house both felt
that corporations with whom their organizations had contacts were reducing
original capital spending plans.

The editor-in-chief of a large publishing

and communication corporation felt there might be "a substantial, decline from
this year's level" and the president of a manufacturing firm reported cuts
in his firm's plans, estimating its 1971 capital outlays as not in excess of,
and perhaps even below, those of 1970.
Regarding consumer demand, Rochester retail business was reported
as "terrible."

The president of a large chain of diversified department

stores saw "no real bounce" as yet in retail sales, but felt a "faint heartbeat."

There has been some improvement lately in ready-to-wear women's

clothes as the indecision regarding the fashion styles is being resolved.
However, men's suits were meeting a great deal of price resistance at the
$100 level.

Home furnishing, television sets and other "big ticket" items

were moving slowly.

He did expect Christmas sales to be at about last year's

level, and does not anticipate any real pickup in sales before the second
quarter of 1971.

The General Motors strike so far has had little adverse

effect on this firm's Second District stores, but has had an impact on its
stores in the middle west and the east coast of Florida.
Most of the directors and business leaders expressed concern over
the large wage increases already granted, and looked for no lessening of wage

demands by union and non-union workers.

With respect to the latter, the

feeling was summed up by the president of an upstate bank who pointed out
that non-union labor reads about raises granted union workers and they do
not want to be behind.

Against this background, most directors and business

leaders did not think that the outlook for ultimate success in controlling
inflation had improved.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Information from directors, bankers, manufacturers and retailers
suggests that corporate liquidity will remain a major problem in 1971,
especially for lower quality borrowers.
bearish.

Overall business expectations remain

More unemployment is anticipated.

Finally, some directors believe

that an incomes policy will be necessary if inflation is to be controlled without a significantly higher rate of unemployment.
A poll of top financial officers of the nation's largest firms
indicates that corporate liquidity is still a big problem for a majority of
firms.

Nearly UO percent of the firms say they plan to reduce short-term

liabilities in 1971 in an attempt to upgrade their liquidity positions.

About

one-half of the firms planning to reduce short-term liabilities are counting
on an increase in profits as a source of funds.

Another 30 percent are

counting on the sale of long-term bonds, with the remainder using equity
sales and bank borrowings for refinancing long.
Although most firms are optimistic about improving their liquidity
positions, there is more optimism on the part of lower quality borrowers than
among those with top credit ratings.

At the same time, talks with bankers and

others in the financial community in recent weeks suggest that credit worthiness is likely to remain a major concern of lenders.
Although banks remain concerned about their own liquidity positions,
they are backing away a bit from the severe lending restrictions they have imposed up to now.

One Philadelphia bank, for example, is making an intensive

analysis of its loan portfolio to determine how much more accommodative it can
be to corporations that do not have access to long-term capital markets, but
are anxious to refinance long some of their short-term liabilities.

As of now,

large commercial banks in Philadelphia do report some lengthening of their
portfolios;

however, they are quite reluctant to go out beyond a year or two.

Overall economic activity will remain soggy for at least several
months, according to Third District manufacturers and retailers.

Manufacturers

report that new orders, shipments and unfilled orders are likely to remain soft
in the coming months.

One director, who is also the head of a large manu-

facturing firm, believes that the underlying trend in the economy is weaker
than is generally acknowledged.

He says too much sluggishness is blamed on

the General Motors strike.
Large department stores in the Philadelphia area also report that
business is slow.

Sales volume is weak across the board from clothing to

cosmetics to household goods.
seem to attract buyers.

Only items with substantial markdowns in price

One retailer noted that because of excess capacity

among clothing manufacturers, substantial price shading is occurring at the
wholesale level.

He pointed to suits, coats, and lingerie as examples.

The hiring plans of both retailers and manufacturers in the Third
District suggest further rises in the unemployment rate.

Overwhelmingly,

manufacturers plan either to cut back or hold the line on hiring during
November and December.

Retailers plan less than seasonal build ups in their

staffs as well.
Considerable concern is expressed by some directors about the impact
of the automobile settlement on inflation.

One director, whose company is a

supplier to the automobile industry, reports that from what he hears a very
substantial settlement is in the works.

Elsewhere in the District business

community, inflationary expectations remain very much alive as well.

Several

directors believe that an incomes policy will be necessary in the coming months.
They do not believe that monetary and fiscal policies alone can combat rising
unemployment without losing ground against inflation.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The level of economic activity in the Fourth District declined in
October, largely as a result of the auto strike and partly from cutbacks by
some of the area's major capital goods producers.

Manufacturing activity

fell in September, and our most recent survey of District manufacturers indicates an acceleration of the decline in October.

Steel production dropped

9 percent in October to a level nearly 17 percent below a year ago.

Secondary

effects of the General Motors strike were also reflected in the continued
increase in insured unemployment in the District.

(The insured unemployment

rate in the Fourth District rose from 2.3 percent in August to 3.3 percent
in October.)
Extended discussions were held with representatives of two important
capital goods producers, two large consumer oriented firms, and four leading
banks in the District in an attempt to provide some additional insight into
the underlying trends in the economy beyond the obviously dominant effects of
the auto strike.

(General Motors has large plants in seven of the District's

ten major metropolitan areas.)

One director, associated with a large computer

and office equipment manufacturer, reported that his firm is continuing to
experience considerable resistance to capital spending by regular customers,
with uncertainty about future business developments mentioned frequently as the
reason for the delay.

Computer sales have been particularly affected;

the

firm's new order pattern is far below projections made at the beginning of
1970.

The director also reported that his own firm is keeping tight control

on inventory, and all deferable capital projects have been halted.
The second capital goods producer contacted is the largest machine
tool producer in the U. S. with annual sales of approximately $300 million.
The firm's financial representative reported a definite softening trend in
new orders for machine tools throughout 1970.

The auto strike, in their view,

is simply an added factor contributing to an otherwise sluggish business
situation.

The firm's internal projections call for gradual recovery in

machine tool orders in 1971.

One major precondition for a return to a full

employment growth path, in this company's view, is a change in tax laws to
promote capital goods expenditures.
At the consumer level, an economist for a large chain of department
stores with the corporate head office in the Fourth District reported that
the firm's sales have been sluggish since the beginning of the third quarter.
Sales of all types of goods have been slow, and durables have been particularly
weak.

The auto strike has, of course, had pronounced effects on retail sales

in certain areas where large General Motors production facilities are located,
although sales have held up better in other areas.
sales have been level through October.

In Columbus, for example,

The firm has reduced employment by

6.5 percent since the beginning of 1970, in response to the sluggish sales,
but labor costs are still rising.

The firm's forecast calls for some increase

in sales when the auto strike is settled and as expected steel inventory buildup begins;

after that, a nearly flat trend is expected through the remainder

of 1971.
An economist for a second consumer-oriented manufacturer of household
food and nonfood products reported that their business has been unaffected by
the auto strike.

For example, sales in the third quarter of 1970 were 9 percent

above the year-earlier level, and third-quarter earnings were up 13 percent from
the 1969 level.

The economist indicated that inventory levels are being watched

carefully, but capital spending plans are being changed drastically:

investment

plans are geared to longer-term considerations.
The firm's internal forecast includes a little less strength in the
consumer sector than the "conventional" outlook.

Their view is that a real

consumer buying spree—especially in the area of durable goods—will not
materialize until there is more concrete evidence that inflation is under control.

On the financial side, most District hanks contacted indicated that
they are using CD funds to repay Eurodollar borrowings because of the rate
differential.

Two of the largest banks reported that loan demand is weak,

while one reported it is still strong.

As a result of the weak business

loan situation, one of the banks has recently reconsidered its municipal
bond investment policy and is on the verge of a sizeable build-up in municipal
holdings.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Surveys of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District indicate
general agreement on the following points:

(l) recent declines in manu-

facturers' shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders; (2) declines in
retail sales, especially automobiles; (3) higher levels of inventories of
finished goods than desired in both manufacturing and retail trade; (U)
decreased employment accompanied by some increase in the available labor
supply; (5) some tapering of price increases in manufacturing, but continued
strong upward wage pressure; (6) continued slump in residential building and
some improvement in nonresidential construction; (7) tapering off of business
loan demand at District banks but some strength remaining in consumer and
mortgage loan demand; and (8) a generally optimistic though cautious outlook
for future business conditions.
District manufacturers report declines in shipments as well as in
new orders and backlogs of orders during the past four weeks.

Although

reports are mixed, few manufacturing firms indicate strength in orders and
shipments.

Declines are reported in such industries as textiles, hosiery,

chemicals, furniture, metals, and electrical equipment.
Certain large chain stores, transportation companies, and electric
utilities report increased sales recently.

However, District bankers report

retail sales to be down in their respective areas, and automobile sales to
be off significantly.
Manufacturers and retailers in the District report further increases
in inventories, and both groups continue to feel that current inventory
levels are higher than desired.
District manufacturers report further declines on balance in
employment.

Declines are reported in textiles and nonferrous metals, while

some increases are reported in chemicals and electrical equipment.

The

length of the work week is reported down somewhat further by most District
manufacturing respondents.

Retailers and service establishments also report

declines in employment and hours worked.
District bankers report declines in employment and significant
increases in the available labor supplies in their respective areas.
Manufacturers in search of skilled labor, however, continue to report a
short supply of workers of the quality that they desire.
Manufacturers report no significant changes in prices during the
past four-week period.

Reports of increases in steel, electrical equipment,

and textiles are about evenly matched by reports of price declines in nonferrous metals, hosiery, and synthetic fibers.

Continued price increases

are reported, however, by businesses in retail trade and services.

Wage

pressures are reportedly continuing strong across the board.
Residential construction continues weak in all District states.
Some District bankers report expectations of improvement in residential
building, but so far, reports of increased activity are few.

Nonresidential

building, however, is reported to have increased somewhat last month.
Business loan demand at District banks is reported down on balance
during the past four weeks, in contrast to reports of moderate increases
over the last several months.

Mortgage loan demand and consumer loan demand

continue to increase, however, according to District bankers.
The number of respondents in the Fifth District reporting expectations of improvement in general economic conditions continues to be a
significant majority.

The tone of comments received from reporters, however,

indicates that while a generally favorable outlook exists, many businessmen
remain very cautious in evaluating prospects in their respective industries.

Numerous manufacturers continue to report excessive plant and
equipment capacity—in textiles, hosiery, furniture, and electrical equipment.
Most manufacturers apparently feel that their present expansion plans are
about right, though many have made substantial cutbacks in plans in recent
months.
The preponderance of reporters in industries such as textiles and
furniture continue to feel that their inventories of finished goods are too
high in relation to current sales prospects.

With the exception of a few

large chain stores, District retailers also report higher inventory levels
than they desire.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Our directors report a weakening, on balance, in the Sixth District
economy.

Layoffs, both related and unrelated to the General Motors strike,

continue.

Department store sales remain sluggish, and plant and equipment

expenditures are off.

Some large price increases have been proposed by gas

utilities and by those providing such other public services as trash collection and water and sewer service.

A cross-section of small Georgia banks

report reduced demand for consumer loans.
Fresh layoffs have been reported in a variety of industries, with
the Tennessee portion of the District apparently hardest hit.

Aside from

recent layoffs in aluminum, rubber, and textile plants, workers in Tennessee
have been idled in plants producing aircraft parts, electric motors, and
.v

clothing outerwear.
Elsewhere in the District, layoffs have occurred at plants producing
asbestos pipe, boats, lighting fixtures, ammunition boxes, and mobile homes.
The mobile homes industry is reported to be suffering from overcapacity, and
one producer commented that the industry is undergoing a shift in production
in favor of modular homes.
A manufacturer in the Mobile, Alabama area has cut production and
employment by Uo percent because he has been informed that his natural gas
supply will be reduced 25 percent if there is normal winter weather this
year.
The General Motors strike is responsible for continuing layoffs in
the aluminum industry and for a sharp drop in shipments of coke from Birmingham
to midwest steel mills.

The strike was also mentioned by some small Georgia

bankers as a reason for weak consumer loan demand.
There have also been reports of reduced investment in plant and
equipment.

Expenditures on industrial projects in Tennessee are reportedly

off 80 percent from last year.

A steel company has postponed plans to

construct a plant in southwest Mississippi to produce electric motors
because of the slowdown nationally.

In addition, the inability to obtain

a long-run contract for natural gas was given as a reason for a steelmaker
canceling an option to purchase a large tract of land near New Orleans.
A survey of department stores throughout the District indicates
year-to-year sales gains of only one to three percent.

Most of these re-

tailers are anticipating a slow Christmas season and are accordingly
planning modest inventories.

Also, they do not foresee an upswing in

sales during the first quarter of next year.
A slump in air traffic is a further indication of economic
sluggishness.

So far this year, Birmingham has realized only about a

four percent increase in air passenger volume, compared with a 17 percent
increase a year ago.

The slump in air traffic has set back airline earnings

at a time when Birmingham is negotiating contracts with airlines for municipal
airport facilities.

This may retard the city's airport expansion program.

Construction activity is mixed.

In the Nashville area, new

construction is off more than 20 percent so far this year, with no upturn
in sight.

Residential construction is slow in south Florida, where the

volume of new and used home sales is down around 20 percent from last year
and softness in luxury apartment rentals is also reported.

However, commer-

cial construction in south Florida is reported up about 50 percent this year.
Housing construction is at a complete standstill in south central Louisiana
and commercial construction is slow.

Residential construction in north

Alabama is reported vigorous, with mortgage demand strong for homes in the
$1*0,000 to $70,000 bracket and modest in the $25,000 range.

Mortgage money

for homes below $15,000 is reported to be nearly nonexistent.

In the Mobile

area, residential construction is reported very active in the extremes of the
market—i.e., disadvantaged/elderly and luxury type.

There is some more disquieting news on the inflation front.
Utilities in Tennessee have requested higher gas rates, which come on
top of the 23 percent average increase in TVA electric rates last month.
An aldermanic committee in Atlanta recently approved a water-and sewer-rate
increase averaging 135 percent, largely because of water pollution control
efforts.

In addition, it has been recommended that rates for garbage and

trash collection be increased 91 percent in Atlanta.

The price of citrus

pulp, an ingredient in livestock feed, has jumped to $50.00 a ton from
$27.50 a year earlier because of the corn leaf blight.
On the optimistic side, the cast iron pipe industry reports improved profit margins, the economy of central Florida continues to be
vigorous, and the paper industry is reported to be undertaking projects
shelved earlier this year.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Abstracting from the General Motors strike, a most difficult
undertaking, business activity in the Seventh District appears to be moving
in a level, or slightly upward, direction.

Increases in output of some

consumer goods and building materials about balance declines in capital
equipment and defense-related activities.

Job markets have eased further.

Upward price pressures have moderated somewhat.
available.

Most businessmen

Credit has become more

and bankers anticipate no marked change in

the general economy in the near future.
Rumors persist that progress is being made in the G.M.-U.A.W.
negotiations.

Developments such as the news blackout, effective October

30, and the 17-hour bargaining session that ended at 2 a.m. this morning
have preceded important agreements in the past.
Local agreements at individual plants are being concluded daily,
not only at General Motors plants, but also at plants of other motor vehicle
producers.

As of today half of 162 local agreements have been reached at

General Motors plants.

Except for the Detroit Diesel Plant in Detroit,

however, it is our understanding that returns to work await agreement at
the "big table."
Negotiations in many nonautomotive industries are marking time
pending a final agreement at General Motors.
It is said that a return to work must occur in the next few days
if General Motors plants are to return to full production in December.
Holidays and vacations in that month will hamper operations.
The hardship on General Motors strikers, who get a maximum of
$1+0 weekly in strike benefits, has been eased by the provision of food
stamps and by the forebearance of understanding creditors.

Production and sales in this region currently are affected
adversely by strikes or slowdowns in a variety of firms and industries
that have not been affected by the General Motors strike.

Among these are

household appliances, construction machinery, autos (American Motors), and
building activity.

A carpenters' strike in Will County in the Chicago area

has halted most work there, including some major projects.

Also, as part

of the General Motors strike, the EI® plant in a Chicago suburb, which employs
7,500 workers making railroad locomotives, is shut down.
Layoffs related to the General Motors strike are mounting steadily
at plants producing steel, tires, and other components, in dealerships, and
at auto transport companies.

Other car producers are benefitting from the

shortage of General Motors cars.
October.

Chrysler sales set an all-time high in

Sales of Ford and AMC also are above the year-ago level.

Never-

theless, most General Motors customers appear to be waiting.
Sluggish order trends for bearings, gears, fluid drives, and
tool and die work indicate further declines in output of producer equipment.
Meanwhile, orders for furniture and color TV have improved recently and
appliance producers are doing well.

Producers of most consumer durables

report inventories in good shape at all levels, and appear to be relatively
optimistic about future sales.
Steel inventory building for strike-hedge purposes will begin
soon.

Export business has dropped sharply.

Inventories of steel have

increased sharply at the mills, while steels users continue to cut back.
The frequency of price increases continues to diminish, while
price concessions are more numerous.

But the general uptrend in prices

of finished goods and services appears not to have slowed significantly.
Increases in worker compensation agreed to recently, or likely to be
agreed to in the months ahead, are of such a magnitude that business

managers consider additional price increases to be inevitable.
Programs to cut costs and improve productivity are being pushed
vigorously.

There are reports of smaller, marginal, plants being closed,

especially in cases where operations can be consolidated.
Farm machinery sales improved in the third quarter.

Increased

supplies of pork and poultry are tending to depress prices of these
commodities substantially.
precisely.

Corn blight damage still cannot be assessed

A recent survey of Seventh District bankers, however, revealed

that 80 percent thought the blight would have little or no effect on loan
repayments by farmers.

Ten percent expected an adverse effect on loan re-

payment capacity, but an equal proportion expected an improvement because
of higher corn prices.
Loan demand at banks is markedly less vigorous than a few months
ago.

This drop in business loan demand clearly is related to heavy sales

of securities.
rates.

Large banks report CD funds in ample supply, even at reduced

The prime rate appears vulnerable.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

According to a sample of businessmen in the Eighth District, economic
activity continues at the reduced levels of recent months.

These businessmen

see no clearly dominant force to move the economy in either direction.
of the pessimism arises from the automobile strike.

Part

In addition to the wage

losses by striking automobile workers, there is a iizable impact on the suppliers
of automobile parts and materials.

Most District firms report no change in em-

ployment, but new budgets are being tightened, and capital investment plans are
being lengthened.
upturn.

These firms apparently see little indication of an early

Residential construction has picked up somewhat, offsetting a decline

in industrial construction.
most business managers.

The size of wage settlements continues to disturb

Retail sales continue at generally satisfactory levels,

while inventories are being held at a minimum.
The automobile strike is having both direct and secondary impacts on
economic activity in the Eighth District.

In St. Louis where General Motors

has some major factories, the direct impact has been substantial.
losses are estimated at $1.5 million per week.

Direct wage

In addition there has been a

substantial reduction in demand for plastics and other supplies purchased by
automobile manufacturers.
Plans for further belt-tightening are expressed by a number of large
manufacturing firms.

Most respondents indicate their own work force is stable,

but some emphasize that there will be no net hiring of employees.

Bearishness

as to outlook in the next few months and hard-nosed budget planning are typical
expressions of current business psychology.
Capital investment plans are being generally lengthened.

Part of the

change is the result of strikes or failure to obtain supplies on schedule, but
part is the result of rising pessimism as to prospective demand for output.

Most firms indicate, however, that capital expansion plans are continuing high
relative to past years.
Although nonresidential construction is down, reports indicate some
gains in residential construction.

The housing demand has been strengthened by

slightly lower interest rates on home mortgages and the allocation of additional
funds for rural home purchasing by the Farmers Home Administration.
Wage settlements and union wage demands continue to be a major worry
of most business managers.

Some express doubt as to the ability of stabilization

policies to have an appreciable effect in view of high wage demands.

Other

managers believe that unions will be willing to settle for more moderate wage
claims.
Retail sales remain at generally unchanged levels, except in the
specific localities where the effects of the automobile strike have had a
major impact on total employment and income.

Department stores report that

goods can be moved readily at promotional sale prices.

Inventories, however,

are being held at below normal levels with a "look and see" attitude in preparation for the normal pre-Christmas buildup.
Unfavorable weather has hampered agricultural operations in the cotton
producing areas and lowered the quality of the crop.

Corn production is down

as a result of the southern corn leaf blight, but the crop is believed to be
somewhat above expectations of a month ago.

Farm incomes are expected to be

somewhat higher this year than a year ago, because the crop declines will
likely be more than offset by higher average prices.
Farm outlook specialists in the area believe that livestock product
prices are at or near a low point in view of the outlook for feed, particularly
corn, and that we can expect an uptrend in these prices for the next year or
two.

Since livestock products account for a sizable percent of food expenditures,

these increases indicate substantial upward pressure on food prices in
the coming year.
Commercial banks report that both deposits and loan requests are
growing.

They indicate, however, that loan requests are given greater

scrutiny as a result of the unfavorable profit outlook for many firms.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Observations of bank directors and officers indicate that consumer
uncertainty in the Ninth District is still very prevalent; this uncertainty
is being reflected in consumer spending decisions.

The one bright spot on

the horizon is the upswing in residential building activity, although the
outlook for other construction sectors is mixed.

The General Motors strike

is having a minimal direct effect on Ninth District economic activity, but
the Northwest Airlines strike is causing considerable difficulties in some
areas of the District.
Because of uncertain future economic conditions, consumers in the
Ninth District are still watching their purse strings very closely, and,
based on savings flows to local savings and loans and banks, consumers are
still saving near record proportions of their incomes.

Although retail sales

in scattered eastern portions of the District seem to be rising above yearearlier levels, there was a general consensus among directors of the bank that
consumer spending is still very weak, especially for "big ticket" items.

One

director could only describe Minnesota retail sales as being "bad;" and,
recent reports of additional layoffs certainly have not stimulated consumer
optimism in the twin cities.

Honeywell has announced a layoff of 600 workers

in early November, and employees expect further cutbacks.
of its Federal Systems Division will affect U00 workers.

Univac's closing
The Dayton-Hudson

Corporation, anticipating that consumer buying will not pick up until next
year, has announced that it will build only three new stores next year instead
of the six it had originally planned.
The results of recent bond elections suggest that voters are as wary
of state and local government capital spending as they are of their own private
expenditures.

A bond dealer guessed that about 50 percent of recent bond

referendum in the District have been defeated.

He also stated that many of

those that have passed were only successful after two or three attempts, and
only after substantial paring of original requests.

Because of voter re-

luctance to pass new issues, many boards and local government units are not even
putting bond issues on the ballot but instead are waiting for a change in
voters' attitudes.
States and municipalities, with the exception of Montana which has
a six percent statutory ceiling, have been able to float bond issues because
of the easing in market interest rates, and dealers have had little trouble
in moving their inventories.
low levels.

As a result, dealer inventories are at very

A few directors commented, though, that some municipalities

which have been authorized to float issues are holding back in hopes of
further declines in interest rates.
Residential construction has strengthened considerably in the District
over the past few months because of easier mortgage market conditions and increased emphasis on "235 Programs."
the twin cities.

Mortgage rates sure continuing to slip in

Some savings and loans will now make government insured

mortgages for as low as one discount point, and one savings and loan

is now

making eight percent conventional mortgage loans with a 25 percent down payment.
Conditions and expectations in other construction sectors, however,
are mixed.

Nonresidential building construction generally has slackened and

a number of contractors are running into financial difficulties even after reducing expenses as much as possible.

For the most part, directors of the bank

felt that construction volumes would be even lower them usual this winter but
hesitated to guess what would happen next spring when the building season begins
in the upper midwest.
A director who is active in the construction industry felt that District
highway construction next year will probably be at about the same level as it was

this year.

He also felt that bids will turn out to be substantially higher

than currently expected because of rising construction costs.
For the most part, the General Motors strike is having only a limited
impact on the District, and its effect is restricted primarily to General Motors
dealers.

Dealers have been selling out inventories but are now "getting down

to showroom models."

One director felt that the recent reduction in copper

prices was partially due to the General Motors strike, and another mentioned
that heavy equipment inventories are at very low levels.
The Northwest Airlines strike is having a very noticeable effect
the twin cities, North Dakota, and Montana:

in

numerous cases have been cited

where landing and other fees have dropped significantly;

firms servicing the

airline and airline passengers have experienced substantial losses of income;
banks have increased their loans to and are carrying past due loans of Northwest
employees;

and a number of Northwest Airlines employees have taken jobs at

considerably less pay and prestige.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

The economy of the Tenth District is showing signs of sluggish growth
following its decline earlier in the year.

Attitudes and expectations remain

cautious, however, as a result of several factors, such as strikes;
sharp declines in farm prices;
high unemployment;

recent

the existence of some pockets of especially

and a continuing sense of concern and uneasiness about the

state of the national economy.
continued to ease moderately.

Business loan demand at large District banks has
However, since some of the large banks have been

repurchasing loans from their parent holding companies, the moderate weakness
reported in business loan figures may not fully reflect the extent of the
softening in demand.
Although employment in the Tenth District has been adversely affected
by current economic conditions, the impact has not been as severe as in other
areas of the country.

Expanding tourism and increased interest in the region's

power resources (uranium, coal, and oil) have helped to moderate unemployment
in the District's mountain states and in Oklahoma.

Employment in the more in-

dustrialized states of Missouri and Kansas has been harder hit by the economic
slump.

However, the earlier decline in total District manufacturing employment

has tapered off, and was reversed in August.

The employment outlook for the

remainder of 1970 (and into 1971) appears hopeful, as reports indicate few, if
any, further layoffs are anticipated.

Optimism concerning the overall employment

picture is tempered somewhat by the continuing cautious attitude displayed by both
consumers and businessmen, and by the continuation of the automobile strike.
The total value of residential construction contract awards in the
District has shown a sharp pick-up recently.

Yet, savings and loan associations

in some areas report that their supply of funds is now growing faster than the
demand for them.

Despite settlement of the construction strike in the Kansas

City area, there is little evidence of a resurgence of demand for funds to
finance hamebuilding.

There is apparently much confusion about the contract

settlements, with many potential home buyers not realizing that the large wage
increases will come over a period of 2 1/2 years.
The Kansas City construction strike, which finally came to an end
after 201 days, serves as a good illustration of the cost-push pressures that
prevail in the economy.

Three laborers' unions ratified settlements on

August 31 that increased their hourly compensation from $4.01 to about $8.16
an hour, to be attained by April 1, 1973.

The bricklayers settled on

September 11 for an increase of about $4.50 an hour over their previous rate
of about $5-62 an hour, for a total of about $10.12 an hour.

On October 13,

the cement masons settled for a $4.57 increase which will result in an hourly
compensation of $9.64 by the April 1, 1973, date;

and the lathers ratified

an agreement on October 18 calling for an increase of $5.02 an hour to a final
figure of $9.55 an hour.

The one bright spot is that all the settlements led

to contracts with a common expiration date of April 1, 1974—an important
element in the strategy for future labor peace in the area's construction
industry.
Personal income growth in the District has been slow because of
declines in the manufacturing and construction industries, and because of
weakness in farm proprietors' income—which the recent sharp declines in farm
prices are likely to extend through the rest of the year.

As a result of all

these factors, retail sales are showing very little strength.
The relatively slow growth in the District's economy appears to
be reflected in the moderate weakening in business loan demand at large
District banks.

District banks so far have had very few loans repaid by

firms that have sold bonds in the market.

More repayments are expected in

the future, though, particularly if conditions in the bond market improve

and. permit regional businesses to acquire long-term funds.

Most of the large

banks do not look for an improvement in business loan demand in the near future;
on the other hand, very few foresee a sharp decline.
Among other loan categories, the demand for single-family residential
mortgages is fairly weak.

Consumer loan demand also is somewhat weak.

In

particular, one bank reports that it has been unable to build up the amount
of outstanding loans under its credit card program.

In contrast, the demand

for construction loans and commercial mortgages is strong at a number of the
large banks.
At the smaller District banks there are also indications that loan
demand is weak.

One large Oklahoma City bank reports that it has no par-

ticipation loans from its correspondents.

A large Denver bank reports that

a surprisingly large amount of Federal funds have been available from its
correspondents.
There is a general consensus among the large District banks, based
partly on their own conditions and partly on their assessments of the positions
of money market banks, that the prime rate will be reduced in the near future—
probably before yearend.

In view of the high cost of obtaining funds, some

bankers indicate that they may not extend a prime rate reduction to as many
borrowers as in the past.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The data for this report were gathered in a survey of twenty-four
of the larger retail stores in the Eleventh District.

The retailers sur-

veyed reported (l) most stores had experienced a downtrend in sales earlier
in 1970 but have noticed a pickup in buying and store traffic in the last
two months; (2) about half of those surveyed noted that the prices on goods
they purchase are still increasing—some at a slightly lower rate; (3) over
half of the retailers mentioned that prices on the goods they sell are still
rising—but, again, at a somewhat slower pace in recent days; (1+) the majority
noticed a trend toward stable or rising sales volume in suburban stores,
while most central city stores had experienced a downtrend in sales, especially during the past year; (5) there appears to be increasing price awareness on the part of the consumers and many stores noted a shift toward low
to medium priced goods; (6) the relationship between discount stores and
department stores does not appear to have changed significantly, although
the number of discount houses appears to be rising; and (7) over half of the
stores expect sales during the upcoming holiday season to be heavier than
during the same period in 1969.
Despite sluggish sales recorded earlier in the year, thirteen of
the stores reported substantially heavier buying and store traffic during
the past two months.

Although consumers appear somewhat more cautious in

buying, people seem to be responding well to promotional price appeal ads,
and buying volume has increased.

One store noted that despite some slack

in sales earlier in the year, this would be their best year in history.
Another retailer noted that last September (1969) was the beginning of a
downtrend in sales, but now October (1970) the opposite feeling seems to
prevail.

With regard to price changes, the picture is not quite so optimistic.
Twelve out of the twenty-four retailers surveyed reported that prices on goods
purchased are continuing to rise.

Some felt that prices are not accelerating

as fast as earlier this year—but, there was still concern over rising prices.
However, price rises are more spotty and across-the-board increases sure not
as widespread.

Prices of goods sold also seem to be rising—although many

are rising at a slower rate.

A few stores noted, however, that prices seem

still to be escalating in some lines.

A few of the retailers contended that

price increases were necessary in order to cover cost, since profit margins
have already been reduced.

One retailer did report that his store was

attempting to reduce prices on a few of their most highly competitive lines.
With a general softness in sales during most of 1970, central city
stores have fared worse than most suburban outlets.

Most of the retailers

reported stable or rising sales volume at suburban stores, while downtown
stores struggle to hold their own.

However, a number of the retailers noted

that as sales have increased recently, some downtown stores are improving
their sales volume.

Only one retailer reported a substantially larger sales

volume at their central city store.
A number of the retailers mentioned an "increasing price awareness"
on the part of consumers.

Consumers are concerned with prices, but also tend

to demand quality for the price paid.

There has been a recent trend away from

the really expensive items—and toward the medium-to-low priced goods.
consumers seem to relate prices to quality for all price ranges.

However,

One store

noted that the better buyer of former years has suffered losses in the stock
market and is not buying up to normal capacity.

Many of those surveyed felt

that quality is more important when consumers are being selective.

However,

the trend seems to be reversing and a few retailers felt consumers would become
somewhat less price conscious in future months.

With the recent increase in discount store outlets, many retailers
felt that competition has become keener.

Although Sunday closing laws have

taken some edge away from discount stores, one retailer noted that the increase in "square footage" alone has probably shifted the balance toward the
discount outlets.

Many of the items offered by moderate and higher priced

stores are not available at the discount centers; however, for lower priced
items, the forcefulness of large discount operations makes competition quite
keen as a number of retailers noted—customers are very aware of price competition at this time.
In comparison with the 1969 holiday season, the majority of retailers
reported that they expect a heavier volume of sales this year.

Three of the

retailers expected a substantially heavier volume, eleven expected a slightly
heavier volume, seven expected sales to be about the same as in the 19^9
season, while only three felt sales might be slightly lighter this year.
In the way of general comments, one retailer noted that consumer
sentiment

was low due to the economic situation but expected relief during

the fourth quarter and early in 1971.

One noted that if the General Motors

strike continued, plus the massive layoffs at Texas Instruments, Ling-TemcoVought, General Dynamics and Ford, that holiday sales could be softer than
are now anticipated.

One retailer indicated he was taking a "lean bull"

position and expected October through April to be very strong for retail
sales.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The general view expressed by Twelfth District businessmen and
bankers is that economic conditions have not changed to any extent and that
there will be no marked increase in the pace of economic activity during
the next six months.

At the same time, there is no expectation that general

conditions will worsen.

Certain weaknesses remain, particularly in those

industries dependent upon housing and aerospace.

Overall, there remains suf-

ficient strength to produce a moderate growth in the economy, but not enough
to result in any immediate decrease in unemployment.
The weakness in aerospace continues to be felt in the Seattle area
and to a lesser extent in southern California.
its announced workforce reductions.

Boeing has carried through

The President of Lockheed Aircraft pre-

dicted further employment reduction in southern California with no reversal
of this trend until 1972.

Firms in the forest industries are also cutting

back, both in employment and planned capital expenditures.

Additional mills

have closed in the Pacific northwest and in northern California.

At the

moment, the General Motors strike has not had any pronounced impact in this
District (except, of course, for retail car sales).
Other industries and other areas are having fewer problems, but
the slowing of the economy has resulted in greater efforts to reduce costs
and, in particular, to cut unnecessary staff.

The tendency has been to rely

upon attrition to work a gradual reduction in the numbers of employed and
upon shortened workweeks to cut current labor costs.

It appears that the

usual hiring of temporary retail help for the coming holiday season will be
under tighter rein.

There is still a good demand for certain skills and so

there is continued but selective hiring.

Nonetheless, the overall trend of

business policy is to emphasize cost reduction and the prospect is for continued restraints on hiring in the immediate future.

The demand for housing and new construction remains weak.

In-

creases in vacancies of industrial and commercial property are reported
in Southern California and residential real estate sales continue to fall
below 1969 levels.

Industries supplying the housing industry are finding

that their sales are much below expectations.

A hardware manufacturing firm,

for example, reports that the value of shipments is below that of last year
despite higher prices, and there is some price cutting for large orders.
Retail spending remains a source of support.

In some areas, such

as Salt Lake City, sales records are being set, but this is the exception.
The normal pattern has been steady demand or perhaps slightly below normal.
This is true even in areas with heavy employment; in Seattle, sales so far
this year are down only one percent from 19&9.

There are some signs of prob-

lems for consumers; some banks report that there has been some increase in
collection problems for their consumer loans.
The picture of agriculture is favorable as prices have held up
well, and good crops have been reported in grain growing areas.
pal exception is in certain non-citrus fruits.

The princi-

Fruit growers in Washington

expect lower returns because of a combination of a smaller crop and heavy
discounting on small sizes which made up a higher percentage of the crop
than usual.
The banks report that they are in a somewhat better liquidity
position and are, as a result, reducing the rates they are paying on large
CD's.

At the same time, they are not experiencing any significant change

in the demand for loans, and they do not foresee any important increase in
business loans during the next six months.

The banks generally are maintaining

policies of being selective in their lending policies.

There are some ex-

ceptions where a bank is attempting to expand its loan business as part of
a long-run expansion program.

In summary, business behavior is based upon expectations of a
moderate slowdown in the economy, at least through the end of the year.
Local businessmen and bankers do not expect any marked improvements in the
unemployment situation.

In some cases they are pessimistic about prospects

for controlling inflation, although there is now less comment upon inflationary trends in contrast to earlier in the summer when it was of much
greater concern.

