CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 14,

1970

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 15
Seventh District - Chicago page 18
Eighth District - St. Louis page 21
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 23
Tenth District - Kansas City page 26
Eleventh District - Dallas page 29
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 32

SUMMARY

The predominant view of businessmen and bankers in the twelve
Federal Reserve Districts is that the economy has not yet returned to
a faster rate of expansion.

There are both elements of support

further expansion and of weakness.

for

For example, consumer spending is

being maintained in most areas, yet the rate of increase is below that
achieved last year and expected sales targets are not being

achieved.

Construction activity also remains at its current levels with a
mixed picture of good demand in some areas and poor in others.

The

situation in capital goods seems to have stabilized with few cases of
further reductions being mentioned, although there is little evidence
of a general recovery *in capital expenditures.

It appears that business-

men are waiting for stronger evidence that the economy has begun its
recovery.
A major source of uncertainty concerns the future course of
the General Motors strike.

The immediate impact is currently greatest

in the Chicago and Cleveland Districts, where unemployment is rising as
a direct consequence of the strike.

Industries supplying the automobile

industry are also beginning to be affected; glass, tire, and steel
production is being cut back.

In the other Districts, there have been

some increases in unemployment in areas with GM assembly plants and
some reports of reduced auto sales, but the repercussions for the moment
have been small.
Other labor disputes are creating problems: in Kansas City with
a drawn-out construction strike and in Minneapolis with the Northwest
Airlines strike.

Businessmen and bankers in other Districts

remain

concerned about continued wage increases, especially in the construction
industry,and, according to a report from the Chicago District, the

"huge number and variety of demands by the unions."

On the other hand,

there are signs of a moderation in union demands noted in the Boston
District.
Unemployment continues to rise both as a consequence of the GM
strike and layoffs in other industries.

Among the other industries

reported as having further reduced their work forces are machine tools
(Cleveland, Boston), furniture (Richmond, Atlanta), textiles
Atlanta), and metals

(Richmond, Chicago).

(Richmond,

Aerospace employment continues

to be low and to be the major depressing influence in such cities as
Seattle.

There are offsetting forces in other industries which are

expanding.

In particular, companies in coal mining, railroad-car and

large truck parts report growing sales.
Capital expenditures show little sign of recovery in prospect.
Most Districts report that few large projects are being planned
there is a stronger recovery.
stretched out or delayed.
scrutiny.

until

Current capital expenditures are being

Similarly, other costs are subject to close

Inventory reductions have not quite ended.

There are

reports from the Richmond, Chicago, and Philadelphia Districts
indicate there is little sign of a shift toward

that

a building-up of

inventories.
The construction industry is still maintaining its overall
volume but with considerable variation in the pace and type of local
activity.

In general, nonresidential construction remains strong.

The major weakness in most areas is in residential, particularly
family homes.

There has been a slight increase in the availability of

mortgage funds in some areas, but not in others.
or no reduction

single-

in mortgage rates.

There has been little

Consumer spending has been maintained but it seems to be below
retailers' expectations in most areas.

There are some

exceptions—

for example, one major New York City department store reports a steady
improvement and tourist expenditures are heavy in the Boston District.
The net impression is that in most Districts

retail activity is only

at a moderate rate.
Agricultural trends suggest the possibility of higher food prices.
The effect of heavy rains and the spread of corn blight point toward a
reduction in some crops, which will tend to push up prices.

The corn

blight has seriously reduced the corn crop in the Kansas City District
but apparently has caused only a minor reduction in the crop in the
St. Louis District.

Nonetheless, the expectation is that the reduced

supply of cattle feed will tend to push up meat prices in the future.
The Dallas District reports that a survey of thirty-one city
and county finance offices indicates a continued increase in local
government expenditures and borrowing in the coming year.
The financial situation has moved toward greater ease.
banks have experienced an inflow of deposits.

The banks in some Districts

are making somewhat more business loans but without any
change in their lending requirements.
the funds to rebuild their liquidity.

Most

substantial

In other cases, the banks used

This month's calls turned up virtually no new regional business
or financial developments.

Perhaps the one summary impression most

worth noting is a somewhat diminished conviction among our respondents
that we have actually embarked upon a clearcut course of recovery

from

the first half of this year.
Deposit flows continue to hold up quite well at New England
financial institutions with time accounts of all types showing particular strength.

Moreover, the non-financial business community now

seems to be showing an increased awareness that monetary
have loosened appreciably.

conditions

Loan demand continues flat in most cate-

gories at our commercial banks.
The consumer picture appears quite mixed.

While many signs of

continuing consumer caution are apparent, other selected
would seem to indicate a greater willingness to spend.

indicators
Autumn tourism,

for example, appears headed for record levels and advance sales of
winter recreational equipment are running ahead of expectations.
In regional industry, one of our directors noted that we are
finally seeing some moderation of wage demands in current union negotiations.

The machine tool industry continues at a severely

level, with even more layoffs developing over the last month.

depressed
Many

other lines of industrial equipment and basic industrial inputs still
have not felt any appreciable slowdown, however, and they do not now
expect any to develop.

No upturn in construction levels are yet apparent,

nor have mortgage rates started to ease.

Some institutions, however, have now

begun to rebuild their mortgage commitments.
Our academic consultants once again provided a range of views.

Professor Henry Wallich expressed no surprise at the 5 % percent unemployment figure, suggesting that the statistics are just now catching
up to what's been happening.

Wallich pointed out that while this figure

may be unfortunate on other grounds, it does bode well for a pickup in
productivity and hence for progress against

inflation.

Wallich expressed optimism that we will be back to a full
potential real rate of growth by early next year, and suggested that
real quarterly GNP growth over 1971 might behave along the following
lines: 3% percent, 4^ percent, 5 percent, 6 percent.
based on several factors, including

This outlook was

the good prospects for a housing

recovery, state and local expenditure levels, the Edie survey on
plant and equipment expenditures, and the conviction that the consumer
will respond to current conditions with a lag.

Professor James Tobin

took nearly the opposite tack on all of these points.

He sees no strong

lifting force in the economy right now, and feels none is likely to
develop.

He concurs with Walter Heller on his prediction of a 5 percent

GNP gap by the end of the year, and feels that both fiscal and monetary
policies for stimulus are needed.
Professor Paul Samuelson expressed a feeling that the economy
"has a little less zip now than a month ago", although he is not alarmed
at the 5h percent unemployment figure.

Both he and Wallich voiced a

concern that the current "endogenous" deficit w i l l produce no real
economic stimulus, but that it may very well interfere with
markets enough to threaten the housing recovery.

capital

Referring to the

arguments of Sprinkel and other monetarists that the Fed may be creating
a large dormant money supply which will activate itself at some later
date, Samuelson made a strong plea for the System to maintain its
current rate of monetary expansion.

He did acknowledge the fact that

the current growth of aggregates cannot be maintained for too long,
but that, while the time for slowing them down may be very near, it
is not yet here.
Professor Eckstein was unavailable for comment this month.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The overall impression gained from opinions expressed by Federal
Reserve Bank directors and business leaders was one of a somewhat sluggish economic recovery, with an upward drift in unemployment.

The

assessment was: further cutbacks, on balance, in planned capital outlays;
with one notable exception, indications that consumer spending was still
restrained; and, continued relatively strong upward pressures on prices.
The directors felt current System policy to be about right and felt
that further easing would be inappropriate.
Most of the directors felt that the tendency to cut back on
plant and equipment spending is persisting.

The vice-president of the

largest corporation in Rochester indicated that his company's spending
program was influenced by a large project already underway, and little
could be done to cut back that project.

However, he reported hearing

of instances where planned spending was being deferred or cut back.
Another director stated that while he had not seen any evidence of
cutbacks in general, he believed they were occurring in certain special
cases, notably the aerospace industry.
Responses were mixed among top officials of nationwide
corporations regarding their plant and equipment plans.

The president

of one of the nation's largest steel companies expected his firm's 1971
outlays would be about the same as this year's, as against an originally
planned increase of 25 percent, with the reduction to be implemented
by deferments and "stretching out" rather than through

cancellations.

A diversified manufacturing corporation has budgeted a small increase
in capital outlays for the next year, following "severe" cuts last year.
Conversely, a large corporation in the financial services, aerospace
and insurance fields has planned a sizable cut in such expenditures

for

the coming year after "abnormally high" outlays in the past two years.
Several business leaders stressed the increasing importance of environmental control in their capital spending plans, and its adverse effect
on productivity gains.
The chairman of a Rochester department store
retail business in his area as "not too good."

characterized

Consumers are not

spending freely, partly as a result of higher unemployment.

The president

of a Buffalo bank noted that instalment loans at his bank were at a
somewhat lower level than last year.

On the other hand, the president

of an upstate bank reported a rise in such loans, particularly
paper.

The chairman of a large medium-sized

automobile

retail chain specializing

in software was somewhat less optimistic than last month, when he had
felt that consumer confidence had improved significantly and would
be translated into increased retail sales.
these hopes have not yet materialized.

soon

In the case of his firm,

He still believed that "the

corner had been turned", but that the recovery will b e at a slower pace
than he feels is generally expected.

Among the factors he mentioned

as currently inhibiting his own sales were the p e r s i s t i n g — i n d e e d

inten-

s i f i e d — c o n f u s i o n over fashion styles, and the warm weather for this
time of the year.

He also felt that the "ripples" of the General Motors

strike were beginning to adversely affect s a l e s — p a r t i c u l a r l y in those
areas where plants that were on strike, or laying off workers as a
result of the strike, loomed large in the local economy.

The one notable

exception in this generally gloomy retail sales picture was provided by
the president of a large New York City department store with several
suburban branches.

He reported that September had been a very good month

for his firm and that business was "steadily improving on a broad

front."

The sale of hard goods, notably television sets, had picked up smartly,

while in his view the confusion over fashion styles was being
clarified, with a concomitant improvement in apparel sales.

rapidly
He expected

sales during the coming Christmas season to reach a record high.
Most of the directors indicated that the somewhat less rapid
rise in prices in recent months should probably be regarded as temporary.
The chairman of the nationwide manufacturing concern noted that there
were still some big price increases to come, for example, in the automobile industry.

The president of an upstate bank observed that "if

wages go up 8-10 percent per annum, how can higher prices be avoided?"
Several other directors as well as other business leaders also commented
on the continued upward pressures generated by higher labor costs.
The Federal Reserve Bank directors, both at the head office and at the
Buffalo branch, generally regarded current monetary policy as correct
and felt that further easing at this time would be inappropriate.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from businessmen in the Third District suggest: (1)
Consumer spending is likely to remain a passive element in the business
outlook into 1971; (2) Capital expenditures will b e a major drag on
economic recovery; and (3) The unemployment rate is likely to move
up still further.
The performance of consumers remains lackluster in the Philadelphia
area.

For three of the last four months, sales volume in large depart-

ment stores has been below a year ago.

Only substantial markdowns in

prices, as occurred in September, for example, seem to stimulate buyers,
according to area retailers.

Most of the large retailers indicate they

would be happy just to repeat last year's Christmas volume.

Many admit

they would not be surprised, however, to see sales fall below last year's
pace during the closing months of 1970.

Looking ahead to 1971, few

retailers expect a rejuvenated consumer before spring.
A large majority of regional manufacturers polled in early
October indicate they will either cut back or not increase capital spending
during the next six months.

New orders have been disappointing

order backlogs are still headed downward.

and

Although most manufacturers

do expect a pick up in the overall economy in the months ahead, they
intend, for the most part, to keep a lid on capital outlays until the
outlook is more optimistic for their own firms.

In the same cautious

vein, few manufacturers plan to increase inventories during the coming
months.

On the employment front, nine out of ten manufacturers plan no

increase in the number of employees through November.

At the retail

level, area department stores say the beginning of the normal seasonal
buildup of Christmas employees will be delayed about a week.

Further,

total seasonal increases will be somewhat under a year ago.

All in all,

particularly with an expanding labor force, the rate of unemployment
will probably continue to rise in the Third District.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The direct and indirect effects of the auto strike, coupled
with weakness in the capital goods sector, are dampening
activity in the Fourth District.

economic

On the other hand, shortages of

freight cars and coal are providing support to some manufacturing and
mining sections of the District.

Barring a prolonged auto strike,

the members of the Fourth District business economists round table
expect continued real economic growth in the current quarter and
throughout 1971.
At a joint Board meeting held in Erie, Pennsylvania on October 8,
several of our directors commented on repercussions of the auto strike
on their companies or in their areas, and also on the continued weakness
in capital goods.

One director representing a large paint, glass and

chemical concern reported recent strength in residential

construction

materials and industrial chemicals, although production of glass and
coating materials used for autos has been adversely affected by the G M
strike.

Another director, representing a medium-sized packaging

firm,

also noted a recent upturn in activity in glassware and other packaging products, but suggested that part of the improvement may be
artificial since buyers are anticipating a possible strike in that
industry.

A third director, from a large capital goods producing

firm,

reported that demand for most of his firm's industrial goods is sluggish,
with the exception of production of parts for large trucks and railroad cars, where demand remains strong.

Finally a director from a small

bank in eastern Kentucky noted that the low-sulphur coal shortage has
helped to restore near-boom conditions in that area.

Mines that were

idle for many years have been reopened and employment and income have
been bolstered.

However, coal supplies are beginning

to catch up with

demand, and as a result, coal prices declined in early October.
About 40 business economists attended the regular meeting of
the Fourth District round table held at the Cleveland bank on October 2.
Most of the economists submitting forecasts assumed that the auto strike
would last approximately six weeks and accordingly predicted a continued
improvement in the real growth rate during the current quarter.

The

median forecast of the group also projected a 3.0 percent gain in real
GNP and a 3.7 percent increase in the price deflator for 1971.

Assistant

Secretary of Commerce, Harold Passer, who attended the meeting, noted
that fourth quarter current dollar GNP could b e expected to remain
unchanged from the third quarter level if the auto strike were
prolonged and lasted for the entire fourth quarter.
One economist, representing an auto and truck parts company,
discussed his projections that linked the recovery in output and sales
of new cars to the length of the strike.

The results indicated that

the adverse income effect on new car sales in 1971 will depend to a
considerable extent on the length of time that the auto workers are
on strike as well as on the length of time of secondary unemployment
of other workers.
Another economist, associated with a machine tool company,
reported that new orders for machine tools recently have been at the
lowest level since 1962, and that recovery in the industry is not
expected to begin over the foreseeable future.

This economist's analysis

indicates that the manufacturing sector is at least 12 to 18 months ahead
of its need for installations of new capacity.

The consensus of the business economists was that, with the
capital goods sector weakening, the strength of business activity in
1971 would depend largely on a continuation of the current uptrend
in residential construction, and stronger gains in consumer and government spending, especially at the state and local levels.

Inventory

building during the first half of 1971, particularly by steel users
in anticipation of a possible steel strike next year, was also expected
to provide some thrust to the recovery (and also to obscure underlying
trends in the economy).

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Surveys of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District

indi-

cate general agreement on the following points: (1) An increase in
manufacturers' shipments but some decline in backlogs of orders; (2)
Some improvement in retail sales except for a sharp decline in automobile sales; (3) Increased inventories in manufacturing and retail
trade and higher levels of inventories than desired in both areas;
(4) Continued declines in employment and a further increase in available labor supply; (5) Continued price increases in important

industries

and further upward pressure on wages; (6) Further decline in residential
building, but increased nonresidential construction; (7) Increased
demand at District banks; and
business

(8) Improved sentiment regarding

loan

future

conditions.
District manufacturers report some increase in shipments in

October for the first time in six months.

Improvement is reported in

such industries as building materials, lumber, furniture, and electrical
equipment.

Several major textile producers continue to report declining

shipments.

Backlogs of orders in October are reported to have receded

slightly since the September report, and new orders remain about unchanged.
Businessmen in trade and services report retail sales to be
improved slightly during the past month, but automobile sales are reported
to be off substantially, reflecting the effect of work stoppages in that
industry.
District manufacturers report that inventories have increased
slightly, and the majority of them continue to regard inventory levels
to be higher than desired.

Similarly, retailers report

increased

inventories and higher levels than desired.
District manufacturers report continued employment declines

affecting such industries as furniture, textile, electrical machinery,
metals, and paper.

Employment in the textile industry in the District

has fallen considerably under seasonal expectations.

No significant

change is reported by manufacturers in hours worked per week.

Respondents

in trade and services, however, report no change in employment but a
significant decline in hours worked.
District bankers report considerable declines in employment in
most areas of the District, accompanied by an increase in the available
labor supply.

Numerous manufacturers, however, continue to report that

skilled l a b o r — p a r t i c u l a r l y of the quality which they

desire—remains

in short supply.
Reports of price increases continue in manufacturing and in
trade and services.
coal and apparel.

Increases are reported in machinery and equipment,
Some declines are reported in nonferrous metals and

hosiery, but reports of declines continue to be infrequent.

Wage

pressures are continuing strong in manufacturing according to respondents,
and especially strong in the retail trade and services

categories.

Residential construction in the District reportedly
further in the past month and remains in a slump.

declined

Nonresidential

building, however, has tended to remain relatively strong

throughout

the District in recent months and is reported to have increased

further

last month.
Increases in loan demand are reported by District bankers.
recent increase in the demand for business loans is reported

The

strongest,

while consumer loan demand rose less last month than in August.

Mort-

gage loan demand, which was reported off in August is now reported to
have recovered significantly in September.

The number of District respondents indicating that they expect
further improvement in general economic conditions increased

sharply

in the October survey, following a similar rise in optimism last month.
The proportion of District manufacturers reporting

excessive

plant and equipment capacity has gradually declined, and most

respondents

indicate that they do not feel further cutbacks in capital spending
plans are necessary.

Some respondents in the coal, chemical, fabricated

metal products, and apparel industries report a desire to enlarge capital
spending plans.
Manufacturers in a number of the District's important
furniture, textiles, paper, and m e t a l s — r e p o r t

industries—

that excessive inventories

of finished goods continue to present a problem.

The same is true of

numerous retailers who report that efforts to reduce inventories have
been less than successful.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

A midsummer business recovery in the Sixth District has suffered
a setback, yet confidence has not been shaken and our directors

remain

more concerned with inflation than with the business slowdown.

The GM

strike has idled workers at two assembly plants in Atlanta.

Some of

the substantial layoffs occurring in the rubber industry are also tied
to the strike.

Quite aside from the strike, however, layoffs have

occurred in the aluminum, textile, and furniture industries, and employment in the aerospace industry continues to shrivel.
The direct effects of the GM strike on the District have not
been large or widespread, since the only GM assembly plants are located
in Atlanta, where about 9,000 workers have been affected.

However, about

2,200 employees have been laid off by the rubber industry in recent w e e k s —
1,000 at a plant that shut down completely.

Although the strike was

mentioned as a reason for the plant closing, it is suspected that labor
difficulties at the plant and a poor production record also entered into
the decision.

Another tire plant, which had been on a 7-day week prior

to the strike, is down to a 4-day week.

Still another tire plant has

laid off 600 workers for 9 days, and a chemical plant supplying
industry has idled 600.

the tire

The GM strike is also mentioned by some car

dealers as a depressant on sales, as prospective buyers wait out the
strike before buying.
Cutbacks in aluminum production in Louisiana, Alabama, and
Tennessee have resulted in about 350 workers being laid off, and Alcoa
is reportedly "stretching out" its construction schedules.

The

23-percent

increase in TVA rates, which amounts to a $5-million increase for one
company, is hitting the aluminum industry hard.

Conversely, the cutbacks

in aluminum production may ease pressure on TVA coal supplies, which
have been reported as low as a 10-day supply at full burn.
In the textile industry, carpet mills have experienced

lower

orders in August and September, after an increase in July, yet one
carpet mill is raising prices.

Hosiery manufacturers are having

the

worst year in 10 to 15 years and the sewing of women's wear is slow,
partly because of a rejection of new styles.

Businesses are reportedly

switching to the sewing of pantsuits.
In Florida, Brevard County has become eligible for federal aid
because of rising unemployment associated with layoffs at the Kennedy
Space Center, and Dade County

(Miami) has applied for federal aid, also

because of increases in unemployment.

The tourist business in Florida

is sluggish, with receipts only about equal with last year.
A major layoff has occurred at a furniture manufacturer in
Jackson, Mississippi.

Retail sales in that area, and in many other

parts of the District, have been adversely affected, as consumers have
diverted funds to private school tuition.
In Jackson, enrollment is up sharply at 17 private schools and
off 10,000, or 25 percent, at public schools.

Still on the pessimistic

side, directors report reduced profit margins and a slowdown in the
collection of accounts receivable.

Gains in telephone revenues in

Alabama and in south Florida continue to lag behind those of recent
years, and feedlots in north Florida are taking in few calves because
the corn blight has raised doubts about obtaining

feed.

On the bright side, several directors report home building
on the rise, although one mentions that most of the homes being built
are "stripped down" versions.

A n oil and gas find in a Tennessee county

is generating considerable drilling interest.

On the "price shading"

front, a firm reports that a machine it considered purchasing at $100,000,
with a six-month delivery, has recently been offered at a price of
$78,000, with a five-week delivery.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The continuance of the General Motors strike into its fourth
week with no evidence of agreement in the rear future, has had a somber
effect 011 attitudes of businessmen and bankers in the Seventh District.
In part, this pessimism is related to fears of difficult negotiations
in other industries, especially farm and construction machinery.
Secondary layoffs by producers of parts and materials for motor vehicles,
including steel, continue to mount.

Steel companies had suggested

earlier that they vould continue production for the auto industry for
two weeks.

This peiiod has passed and they have cut back.

The announcement that one large construction machinery producer
has agreed to an unlimited cost of living adjustment (no "cap") means
only that an immediate strike was avoided.

Demands for a large first

year pay increase, and the demand for a $500 monthly pension after
30 years remain unresolved.
Job markets continue to ease throughout the District, more than
can be accounted for by the GM strikes.

Orders continue weak for

capital goods producers, although many believe new business is merely
postponed, and will pick up as soon as the general economic outlook is
clarified.
Management negotiators in labor disputes are perplexed by the
huge number and variety of demands by the unions.

At GM these are

supposed to number 32,000, including permutations and combinations at
the local level.

At one medium-sized plant in another industry, more

than 300 demands have been made.

Moreover, the international unions

are yieldi.ng more autonomy to locals as to when strikes can be called
regarding grievances.

Aside from large demands for increases in com.pe.n--

sation, business managers are greatly concerned about pressures for more
union control over work standards, work assignments, and other operational
matters over which they believe management must retain control to achieve
maximum efficiency.
Virtually all business firms continue to follow very cautious
policies on new hirings and nonessential expenditures.

For example,

expense accounts and travel budgets are under very close scrutiny.
Price increases continue to be widespread and substantial, but
not so numerous as last year or earlier this year.

Most important of

the recent increases have been in vehicles, business equipment, electrical
apparatus, consumer durables, chemicals, and containers.
now is showing in steel as well as in non-ferrous metals.

Price weakness
Price cuts

have been indirect in some cases, involving reclassifications of products
and other methods.
(6 percent

On the other hand, some substantial price increases

for an important class of equipment) are being

effected

"quietly."
Credit continues to become more available, but mortgages

for

single-family homes are still difficult to obtain in this region.

Also,

a number of banks and finance companies have reduced or eliminated
purchases of automobile paper from dealers because of reduced profit
margins and increased delinquencies and

repossessions.

A committee of business and financial economists from the
Indianapolis area (with representation also from Indiana University),
that has routinely prepared economic projections to aid the state in
making revenue estimates, recently has prepared a GNP forecast for the
period through mid-1973, that closely parallels the Board staff projection
for the current and next two quarters: 1970 - fourth quarter $998 billion;
1971 - first quarter $1,016 billion; 1971 - second quarter $1,035 billion.

For the period after mid-10 71, the Indiana committee projects quarterly
increments in current dollar GNP (SAMl) climbing from $20 billion
(1971-3) to $25 billion (1972-3).

Underlying the committee estimates is

a slightly higher projected unemployment rate and slightly higher price
deflator than those in the Board projections.
Purchasing agents in the Chicago area report an improvement in
delivery schedules from suppliers in recent months.

Price increases

are not quite so numerous as earliei in the year, but the proportion
reporting paying higher prices is still almost 70 percent, while lower
prices arc reported by only 1 percent.

The number of firms reportirg

reductions in output, employment and new orders continue to be more
common than those reporting increases, but the margin has narrowed.
The number of firms cutting inventories has declined, but reductions
continue to be more numerous than increases.
Larger commercial banks in the District report that loan demand
is rather sluggish or at least not "robust."

Reins have been loosened

on loan officers but loans after adjustment for sales are not going up.
Corporations continue to express concern with their illiquid positions
and are reported to be willing to "pay the price" tc fund debt.

However,

with compensating balances, the prime rate, is still above market rates.
The receivables position of some corporations has apparently improved
and payments are not; on time.

Banks have, no problem in getting funds.

Several continue to pull rates down and still get all that they need.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

"Guarded optimism" describes most views of businessmen
to current economic activity in the Eighth District.

relative

Except for the

automobile strike, which is beginning to have an impact throughout

the

District, the major employment changes are seasonal in nature.

Although

home construction is still below levels of a year ago, industry

repre-

sentatives are not so pessimistic as in recent months.
ment plans generally remain unchanged.

Capital invest-

Because of recent adverse

weather and the southern corn blight, agricultural production is below
earlier expectations but is still generally good.

Loans and deposits

at commercial banks continue to increase.
A major employment disturbance in the District is the automobile
strike, which has directly affected more than 9,000 workers in St. Louis.
A number of automobile parts suppliers in St. Louis and other District
cities have recently announced temporary layoffs.

For the first time

in several months, attrition and layoffs were not mentioned by District
industries as a method of reducing production cost.
In Little Rock and Louisville, residential housing
is singled out as being especially slow.
cost housing

construction

In St. Louis, however, low-

(under $16,900) is strong, and a general improvement is

expected within the next six months.

Potential homebuyer traffic has

increased, and borrowing rates are creeping down.
Consumer buying is still restrained, but most businessmen expect
substantial improvement after the automobile strike is settled. Total
retail sales are still trailing levels of a year earlier, despite somewhat stronger promotional efforts.

One major St. Louis retailer, how-

ever, reports some pickup in sales in recent weeks.

Durable goods are

moving slowly, and a number of automobile dealerships are changing hands

in some areas.

The chemical industry throughout

the District

reports

sales below expectations, but a large St. Louis-based firm is planning
for a moderate expansion of output in the near future.
Capital expansion plans generally remain unchanged, but some
of the firms contacted indicated that internal cash flows for investment
purposes were less than expected when the current investment plans were
made.
The agricultural situation is mixed.

Recent rains had some

deleterious effects on the soybean crop in western Tennessee, but the
overall yield for the District is expected to be high.

The cotton crop

in Arkansas and northern Mississippi is of lower grade than the average
of recent years due to boll rot and overgrowth brought on by the rains.
The corn blight is reducing the corn crop as much as 50 percent in some
local areas.

Overall, however, the crop will be only a email percent

less than a year earlier in the District.

The reduced corn crop nation-

wide has already had a major impact on average crop prices.

To date,

there has been little impact on livestock prices, but the higher feed
grain cost is expected to have an impact on meat and other

livestock

prices in the year ahead.
Commercial bank loans and deposits have increased in the Eighth
District.

Savings and loan associations are reported to be liquid and

are seeking to increase their loans.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The downturn in Ninth District business activity appears to have
leveled off, but there are no indications of a significant
over the next few months.

recovery

So far, the General Motors strike has had only

a minimal impact here, but the Northwest Airlines strike is having a
considerable influence on scattered areas of the District.

Loan demand

is still very strong according to directors and officers of this bank,
in contrast to reports from other sections of the country.

Agriculture

income in the District is expected to fall below last year's level because
of lower crop yields and declining livestock prices.
The directors and officers of this bank feel that the General
Motors strike is having only a minimal effect on the District
For the most part, GM dealers entered the strike with heavy

economy.

inventories,

especially of the 1970 models and have actually increased their sales
in recent weeks.

According to the car dealers, people seem more than

willing to buy 1970 models because of their lower prices and longer
warranty periods.

At the same time, auto sales of other makes have

been brisk, and these dealers feel a part of the increase is due to the
GM strike.
An officer of the Minnesota AFL-CIO feels that the GM strike
will continue longer than the 1967 Ford strike and could very well
extend for at least three to four months.

He based this expectation

primarily on the fact that about 40 percent of GM's production workers
are under 25 years old, and these workers tend to be more militant
than the older workers.

If his expectation is borne out, GM dealers

in the District w i l l probably run short of parts and new autos, as
inventory shortages are already becoming

apparent.

The Northwest Airlines strike is also having scattered effects
throughout the District.

A few firms servicing Northwest Airlines

have furloughed employees, and a number of retail establishments have
experienced noticeable sales reductions.

In addition, Northwest Air-

lines has cut their flight schedules because of the strike, and as a
result landing fees to a number of airports in the District have been
drastically reduced.

These landing fees are important

contributions

to airport sinking funds, and in at least one case so far, these reductions
have become especially

troublesome.

Ninth District bankers are still experiencing strong demands
for loanable funds, according

to information gathered during go-around

sessions with both directors and officers of this bank.

The continued

strong loan demand seems to be general throughout the District as no
one cited a case where loan demand had diminished.

On the contrary,

numerous instances were cited where demand had actually

strengthened

and non-financial businesses had taken further steps to economize on
the use of funds.

One reason frequently cited for the continued

strength in loan demand was that inventories seemed to be moving
planned or desired levels.

above

One director stated that he knew that one

of the top 50 firms in the nation and two mining companies have begun
pushing off their accounts payable to the latest date possible.
The power shortages that have plagued the East Coast have not
yet been felt in the Ninth District, but such occurrences in the next
few months would not be surprising.

Moreover, indications are that

over the longer horizon the problem could become critical.

Anticipating

possible shortages during the coming winter, the Minneapolis Gas Company,
which buys gas primarily from the Northern Natural Gas Company, recently
notified its interruptable gas customers to check their emergency back-up

equipment because of potential shortages in the coming months.

In addition,

fuel oil suppliers are reluctant to make firm price bids for fuel oil
to be delivered at a later date because of possible future shortages
and further price increases.

The price of "heavy" oil to industrial

users in the Twin Cities has already risen to 10 cents per gallon from
the seven cents per gallon last year.
Farm income is down from a year ago, according to the results
of the latest agricultural credit conditions survey.

The survey

reflects

conditions on October 1 according to the responses of 142 agricultural
bankers.

There were two major reasons cited by respondents for lower

income: (1) lower crop yields, which were not entirely offset by higher
grain prices, and (2) declining livestock prices, especially for hogs.
Lower farm receipts have caused both a drop in farmer and rancher
spending and a slower rate of debt repayment.

Bankers are anticipating

an increase in the demand for farm debt refinancing as a result of the
lower income.

The current survey indicated that farm credit conditions

had eased slightly in the last three months, but still remained tight
compared with conditions in previous years.

The rise in interest

rates

at agricultural banks appears to have slowed down and fewer bankers
report reducing or refusing a loan due to a shortage of funds.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

There is evidence that future growth in large CD's at Tenth
District banks will be less.

There are indications also that business

loan demand may be easing slightly.

The labor situation in the Kansas

City area has worsened as the construction s t r i k e — n o w in its seventh
m o n t h — c o n t i n u e s and the General Motors strike prevails at several
large GM assembly plants.

The reduction in output of feed grains and

high feed —grain prices is likely to have an impact on the WPI and CPI
within several months.

Instead of providing a downward pressure on

these indices which occurred from March to August, farm prices may
again exert upward pressure later this year or early next year.
Those large District banks which have actively sought

large

CD's (many have not) have continued to attract substantial amounts of
funds.

Growth rates of outstanding CD's have been comparable to those

at large banks in New York City and Chicago.

One peculiarity in the

Tenth District has been that a significant amount of CD funds have
come from state and local governmental u n i t s — a b o u t one-third of the
total growth in CD's.

This source of funds would seem to be limited,

so that future growth of CD's may slow.
Despite the rapid growth of CD's, most of the District banks
so far have retained bank-affiliate commercial paper as a source of
funds.

One large Tulsa bank, however, is actively substituting

for its commercial paper.

CD's

Most of the CD funds have been utilized by

the banks to restore liquidity.

Only a limited amount of the funds

have gone into loan expansion.

As a result, some banks are beginning

to feel much more comfortable.

One larger Denver bank this week reduced

its CD rates below those in New York City to slow down the inflow of
funds.

This bank had been aggressively seeking CD's by offering

rates

above those in New York and had more than doubled Its outstanding CD's
over the past three months.
Business loan demand in the District is showing some signs of
easing.

In particular, business loans have not reflected any of the

growth of CD's in those cities that had been squeezed for funds.
that some loans have been transferred from parent holding

Except

companies

back to the banks, there has been no noticeable pile up in loan requests
following the reduction in the prime rate.
There is little indication that the Tenth District economy is
deviating significantly from national trends.

There are a few signs

of recovery but areas with significant problems remain.

Aircraft

production is low and the airline industry has substantial overcapacity
because of a sharp slackening in the rate of growth.

Airlines with

large District installations are cooperating with other trunk carriers
in an effort to get CAB approval to reduce flights on some highly competitive routes.
Construction activity is reported to be moving upward at a
rapid pace in Denver and some other District cities.

In Kansas City,

however, long construction strikes this year and last virtually halted
construction activity and are resulting in highly inflationary wage
settlements which hurt future prospects.
construction worker

Four of the seven striking

locals signed contracts with the building con-

tractors in late August.

These agreements provided for the increases

of about 100 percent over four years.

One of the three remaining

locals

on strike, the Cement Masons, has recently rejected a four-year increase
of 90 percent.

This is explained by the fact that many of the Cement

Masons are presently being employed by the heavy construction contractors
at the wage levels determined a year ago which exceed the rejected offer

made by the builders.

Consequently, there is no strong incentive for

them to settle the strike that started on April 1.
The effects of the General Motors strike are adding to Kansas
City's problems.

It has added 8,000 idle workers to the 12,000 still

out due to the construction strike.

Kansas City led the nation last

year in man days lost to strikes with 2.7 million and is leading again
this year with 3.3 million lost due to the construction strike alone.
Damage to the corn crop from blight and unfavorable weather
conditions apparently is severe.

Consequently, grain prices are likely

to retain most of the gains of the past few months and may go higher.
The reduction in output of feed grains and high grain prices will discourage the rapid expansion that has been occurring in meat production.
This set of conditions may have a temporarily depressing effect on
livestock prices, as fewer animals are withheld for breeding and perhaps
some breeding stock liquidated.

However, as the rate of expansion and

slaughter weights decline, livestock prices are likely to increase,
perhaps sharply.
The net effect of the anticipated changes suggests a bottomingout of the decline in the index of prices received by farmers that has
been occurring since March.

It is probable that the index could again

start rising late this year or early next year.

To the extent

that

this evaluation is correct, farm prices may soon start exerting upward
pressure on the WPI and CPI instead of being a retarding influence such
as has been the case since February.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

For this report, thirty-one city and county finance officers
in the Eleventh District were surveyed concerning current and anticipated
levels of government expenditures and the means of financing
expenditures.

these

The officers surveyed reported: (1) Most governmental

units had a substantial increase in 1970 expenditures over those in 1969,
and anticipated additional increases in 1971; (2) Nearly

three-fourths

of the units had awarded a wage increase to their employees in 1970;
(3) Only a few units had postponed capital issues in 1 9 7 0 — d u e to
either legal interest rate ceilings or other reasons; (4) About half
of the governmental units planned new capital issues to be sold within
the next nine months; and (5) Over 70 percent of the units had participated in some type of federally-funded project requiring matching
or local funding responsibility in 1970.
With regard to 1970 expenditure levels (including both current
and capital spending), the majority of officers reported a substantial
increase (9 to 12 percent) in spending over the 1969 level, with about
one-fifth reporting a spending increase in the neighborhood of 20 percent.
A few of the smaller units reported no change with one city showing a
substantial decline in expenditures due to the completion of a major
capital spending program during 1969.

Although many officers did not

yet have preliminary expenditure estimates available for 1971, of those
who did,

the majority again foresaw an increase in spending of from

9 to 12 percent.

Moreover, about one-fifth of those surveyed

anticipated

expenditures in 1971 to exceed 1970 levels by 20 percent or more.
of the city officers noted that they expected over a 50-percent

Two

increase

in expenditures in 1971 due to large capital spending programs planned
for next year.

Nearly three-fourths of the officers surveyed reported that
their units had awarded a wage increase sometime during 1970.

Increases

made ranged from 3 to 15 percent, most being about 5 percent.

Several

of the city officers mentioned that fire and police personnel were
awarded wage increases from 2 to 4 percent higher than those for other
employees.

Some units had made across-the-board wage increases from

$25 to $43 a month which resulted in a 5 percent or more
depending on individual pay levels.

increase—

In addition, many officers

reported

that their units had improved fringe benefits substantially during
year.

the

A few officers noted that their wage increase was not considered

a "cost-of-living" increase, but was extended in order to remain competitive with other employers in their area.

Finally, a number of the

officers mentioned that they expected additional wage increases early
next year.
Only five of the thirty-one officers reported having postponed
any new capital issues during 1970.

Of these five, two had postponed

bond issues because voters had approved the issues with interest rate
ceilings (4.5-5 percent) that were not competitive in 1970 markets.

The

other three officers mentioned that they had no legal rate ceilings,
but had postponed the issues until a later date because of what they
considered to be excessive interest rates prevailing in capital markets
during the past year.
About half of the officers surveyed indicated that their governmental unit planned to sell new capital issues sometime in the coming
nine m o n t h s — m a n y before the end of the year.

A number of the other

officers noted that some proposed bond issues had not yet been approved
by the voters, but could possibly receive the necessary approval and be
issued sometime before mid-1971.

Over 70 percent of the governmental units had participated in
at least one federally-funded project requiring some local funding
responsibility during 1970.

There was some difficulty in estimating

funds expended on annual basis since there is some overlapping of fiscal
and calendar years, and many of the projects are ongoing, requiring
a number of years for completion.

The majority of the projects involved

matching funds (50-50) between federal and local governments; however,
there were several projects that involved 60 to 70 percent federal money.
A few of the officers surveyed mentioned that their units had made
proposals for projects involving federal f u n d s — w i t h approval
in the near future.

anticipated

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Businessmen and bankers in the Twelfth District appear to
take a restrained view of current economic conditions.

Although there

is now no expectation of a marked decline in the economy, there is
also no expectation of an early return to a vigorous expansion.

The

consensus is that the economy is at a plateau and businessmen are
consequently making plans in line with that expectation.

This opinion

is supported by reports from bankers that despite the recent

reduction

in the prime rate there has been little basic change in either deposit
flows or in their lending

policies.

Construction trends mirror the economic trends.

The demand for

single-family homes remains weak in most areas with buyer resistance
to high prices and hesitancy because of expectations of lower interest
rates.

Apartment construction shows strength in some areas but not

in others, and there is considerable variation from area to area in
commercial construction.

The principal weak spot is still in Seattle

where aerospace employment has been cut back.

Seattle

construction

activity has fallen off sharply with the lack of demand.

Vacancies

are high in Seattle (in some suburban areas near 25-30%) and rents are
being shaded.

A rise in foreclosures is reported.

Elsewhere in the

District, vacancies are not at such high levels and there are still a
few areas where vacancies are quite low.

Rents have tended to remain

steady or be increased by nominal amounts in areas other than Seattle.
The principal weakness remains in the demand for higher-priced
family homes.

single-

For the District as a whole, construction activity is

proceeding at a moderate pace.

On the financing side, there have been small increases in the
availability of funds, and one respondent reported the return of a
few insurance companies to the residential mortgage market.

Despite

this somewhat greater availability, mortgage rates have not declined
to any extent.

They remain either unchanged or are down only H percent.

The only significant change is a reduction in the interim-financing
rate from 14 percent to 12 percent in southern California.
The prime rate reduction is described by local banks as a
competitive response and not one that is justified by either improved
liquidity or reduced loan demand.

Most banks have been gaining both

demand and time deposits and are in a slightly better liquidity position,
but the improvement is not felt to be of sufficient magnitude to
justify the prime rate reduction.

Loan demand remains high or at

worst only slightly lower, and most banks have not changed their basic
policy of continuing

to be restrictive in their lending.

There are a

few banks which reported a slightly more aggressive policy of seeking
new loan accounts, but only those of good quality and at an appropriate
rate.

There are other banks which have gained funds and have treated

them as transitory, using the funds for investments of similar maturity
and not for expanding loans.

Overall, the prime rate reduction to the

contrary, banks have not experienced any major change in financial
conditions.
Retail sales continue to hold up well even though they may be
rising at the rates below those achieved in recent years.

One national

food manufacturer reported that, despite increases, the sales of food
products generally were not quite up to expectations.

It was felt

that one reason for this slower pace was inventory restrictions by whole-

salers who are trying to maintain their cash positions by lowering
inventories.

This same firm also reported problems in making

deliveries

because of a shortage of rail cars and it has resorted to leasing

cars

on a yearly basis to insure deliveries.
Retail food prices are holding steady in most areas, and in some
lines they are falling because of special allowances to m e e t intensive
competitive activities.

Several large supermarket chains have recently

shifted to a discount basis and are stressing lower prices in their
advertising.
Building costs continue to rise and to have a dampening
on new projects.

effect

Construction wages are higher in all areas (even in

Seattle where the volume of housing construction has fallen off) and,
except for a few isolated instances where competition has forced some
price reductions, the cost of building materials is also higher.

One

banker felt that the high cost of new housing forces more buyers out
of the market than the scarcity and high rates of mortgage

finance.

In conclusion, businessmen and bankers in the Twelfth District
expect that economic conditions will hold for the moment at the current
slower pace and that there has been no basic change in either the
business or financial situation.

