CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 9, 1970

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 2
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 15
Seventh District - Chicago page 18
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 24
Tenth District - Kansas City page 27
Eleventh District - Dallas page 30
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 33

SUMMARY

The reports In this Redbook are more optimistic than in earlier
months.

The consensus of directors, businessmen* bankers, and economists

is that the economy will experience below potential growth in real
output in the second half of 1970 and early 1971. There is general
agreement that wage demands are not diminishing, despite an easing
in labor markets and prospects for further Increases in unemployment.
Concern about inflation remains widespread, and the directors at one
Reserve bank explicitly express the hope that the FOMC would permit
only moderate growth in the money and credit aggregates over the
near term.
Housing and consumer durables, especially household goods, are
evidently recovering, but the capital goods sector is sluggish.
Indications are that the metalworking machinery industry has not yet
seen the bottom of its recent decline.

Districts in which machine

tool producers are concentrated (Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago)
specifically mention depressed conditions in that industry.
Six Reserve banks referred to the impact of cutbacks in defense and
aerospace industries.
There are reports of selective price cutting at both the
retail and the wholesale level and indications that price increases
are becoming less prevalent.

Cleveland reports price reductions in

metal cutting machine tools and appliances; Minneapolis cites large
price discounts to dealers by farm machinery producers; and Atlanta
notes price weakening in some types of textile machinery.

Philadelphia

expresses concern about the likely effect of the corn blight on agricultural

prices, but Chicago reports that the damage caused by the blight may
have been exaggerated.
Four Reserve banks specifically mention the improved liquidity
positions of commercial banks in recent weeks.

There are also reports

of improved loan to deposit ratios and deposit flows, some limited
softening in the demand for business loans, and scattered reports
that borrowers are expecting lower interest, rates in the months ahead.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Commercial banking conditions in the First District continue
to strengthen, and a marked improvement in general confidence seems to
have established itself throughout the financial sector of New England.
Retail and industrial sales activity can almost uniformly be
character!zed as mediocre, with prospects for more of the same over the
next several months now widely accepted.

One trend of interest:

housing-related products seem to be picking up after several months
of depressed sales.
Deposit flows into commercial banks are developing along very
satisfactory lines. One of our Class A. directors reports that his
institution has had too much out in Federal funds and short-term
municipals for several weeks now and would prefer to put these funds
into business or consumer loans if the demand were there.

Another

of our Class A directors reports all time record percentage rates of
dividend retention on passbook savings for two successive quarters
now. Loan deposit ratios have fallen substantially at some commercial
banks and most seem to be experiencing an improvement in liability
composition.

Commercial loan demand appears to be holding quite steady

and in some instances falling off.
Regional industry, as noted above, is experiencing generally
slow, but not depressed levels of activity.

The impression is gained

that small companies in particular are encountering difficulty in
keeping more than three to six months of orders on their books.
Exceptions may be noted, however.

The heavy concentration of jewelry

manufacturers in southern Massachusetts and northern Rhode Island

report that 1970 sales levels to date are brisk. The textile industry,
concentrated in the same area, has experienced a dramatic increase in
demand for products associated with home sewing, reflecting the
heightened consumer cost consciousness noted elsewhere this year. The
New England machine tool industry, on the other hand, continues in a
severely depressed situation with no letup in sight.
Several regional producers of chemical and mineral inputs into
housing associated products (e.g., paints, carpets, linoleum, etc.)
now discern a turnaround in demand as having occurred four to eight
weeks ago.

Regional labor markets, as noted in earlier reports, are

softer than they have been for some years.

This easing apparently

extends into both blue- and white-collar groups.
The views of our academic consultants have perhaps converged
some since earlier in the summer.

Professor Paul Samuelson feels

certain that the economic turnaround is behind us, and that the slowdown
has been sufficiently mild that it will escape official NBER designation
as a- "recession."

As a weak contraction tends to be followed by a

sluggish expansion, Samuelson expressed concern that the existent
real GNP gap will widen further over the next four quarters.

Since a

growth in real output of about 4 percent is necessary to avoid this,
he concludes that authorities should permit a monetary expansion
great enough to accommodate such growth.

Noting that income velocity

is likely to decline as short rates fall and as liquidity positions
are replenished, Samuelson suggested that a 7 to 8 percent rate of
monetary expansion is necessary to encourage any real output growth.
He concluded by asserting that a continuation of the current mildly
restrictive policy would buy very little extra in the way of inflation

control and, therefore, is a poor trade-off against growth and
employment needs.
Professor Tobin is in large part in agreement with Samuelson
and suggested that the Fed should, for the time being, Ignore any
growth rate for targets for money stock, concentrating instead on
promoting a reserve base expansion large enough to bring interest
rates down.

On the prospects for unemployment over the next year,

Tobin is more bearish than Samuelson, suggesting they might well
pass the 6 percent level.
Professor Wallich, too, sees growth in real output as
sluggish well into 1971 , but views this prospect with somewhat less
alarm, suggesting that it is the most desirable course to pursue.
On monetary policy, he defines a 4 to 6 percent growth of money
supply as currently appropriate, and expressed hopes that short rates
will continue to ease. He feels that the System can currently
exert no control over long rates and that to try to bring them down
with strong monetary medicine would place us in serious danger of
repeating our 1967 mistake.
Otto Eckstein Is, in many ways, currently the most sanguine
of our academicians.

He still projects an unemployment rate of no more

than 5.1 percent through the end of 1971. He agrees, however, that a
declining utilization of our real GNP potential should be avoided and
appears to endorse a somewhat less restrictive monetary stance than
we now have. His DRI model currently forecasts declines in investment
over 1971 of a small enough magnitude (3 percent nominal, 8 percent
real) that the expected rebound in housing can easily offset them.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Opinions were mixed among Federal Reserve bank directors
and business leaders regarding current and prospective capital
outlays, consumer spending, and the labor situation.

In general,

the assessment was: no recent cuts in, but careful watching of,
capital spending; unchanged or Improved consumer attitudes; and a
rise in the availability of labor but no curtailment in union wage
demands.
The president of an upstate bank saw no evidence of a slowdown
in capital spending in his area; he referred to the difficulty recently
experienced by his bank in finding a.contractor for the construction
of a new branch.

A Rochester businessman stated that he had not

heard of any plant construction programs being cancelled in his
locality.

He did note, however, that the largest corporation in the

city had stopped building vigorously.in the area because of labor
market conditions and has shifted parts of its operations to Denver,
Colorado.

A group of business leaders generally indicated that a very

careful watch on capital spending was being maintained in their
industries and that their efforts were concentrated on modernization,
replacement, and pollution control rather than on expansion.
Sentiment with respect to consumer spending was particularly
mixed, with some interesting expressions of optimism.

One upstate

businessman reported that retail merchants in his area were gearing
their inventories to expectations of lower volume and did not
anticipate a general improvement until the yearend holiday season.
The president of an upstate bank felt that while sales
continued to be good, a good deal of the rise in the dollar amount

was due to price Increases.

He noted that lower priced cars

were apparently moving well, but that the sale of more expensive
cars, as well as luxury items in general, have suffered.
The chairman of a large medium-priced retail chain also
felt that the continued rise in dollar volume was largely accounted
for by price increases, as well as the opening of new stores.
He also indicated that the weakest spots remained in the bigger
ticket and higher priced items. However, while he could not point
to a change in consumers' buying habits on the basis of currently
available " h a r d " figures, his "gut reaction" was that consumer
confidence had improved significantly over the past month as
uncertainties over Cambodia, the stock market, and the liquidity
situation abated.

He expressed a "subjective" inclination to

see this change translated into an Improved sales picture in the
near future.
The president of a large New York City department store
was even more optimistic.

On the basis of very recent developments,

he felt that there had been a "definite turn for the better," and
that he looked with confidence for further pick-up in the coming
months. He reported a particularly marked increase in the sale of
household goods, which he attributed.to a combination of pent-up
demand and Improved consumer confidence.
With respect to the labor market conditions, both the
Rochester businessman and the upstate banker noted an increase in the
availability of labor in their area. Notwithstanding the increased
availability of labor, the Rochester businessman stated that there
had been "no easing whatsoever" in union demands.

The chairman

of the large retail chain remarked that increased labor costs had
made price reductions very difficult.
One director concentrated on the aerospace industry.

He

noted that 500,000 workers were laid off in that Industry in the
past year and that another 500,000 might also be laid off by next
July. He attributed these difficulties to the tough Government
attitude toward defense spending.

He said that if Penn Central

could go into bankruptcy, it was possible that Lockheed and other
aerospace firms might be forced into a similar situation.

In his

view, the airline industry may be unable to pick up present
commitments for new aircraft unless the Government permitted some
mergers.

He said that airlines needed a high utilization rate to be

profitable and that, in some cases, this was only possible through
merger.

He commented on the tremendous amount of excess capital

in the aerospace industry.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Confusion is the most prevalent mood in the Third District. On
the one hand, bankers, businessmen, and directors hear optimistic
pronouncements from economists and Government officials that the economy
is poised for an upturn and that inflation is waning.

On the other hand,

from their own vantage point, they foresee a sluggish consumer, further
cutbacks in plant and equipment outlays, rising unemployment, and
wage demands that are intensifying rather than abating.
Large merchants in the Philadelphia area remain pessimistic
about sales.

Despite talk from economists that a resurgence in consumer

spending is near, regional retailers remain unconvinced.

They plan

further cutbacks in inventories and are holding new orders to a
minimum.

Retailers expect Christmas sales to be off considerably.

One

large department store has hired no one for several months, eliminating
all overtime, and plans much smaller payrolls than usual for the
holiday season.
Reports from manufacturers are bearish as well.

Demand in the

paper industry is at a low for the year, according to one director.
Earlier forecasts of an autumn recovery have been delayed until 1971.
The same is true for the clothing industry in the District.

Elsewhere

in manufacturing, the general feeling is that demand will remain soft.
There is near unanimity in the view that capital expenditure plans will
be trimmed further and that outlays for 1971 will show no increase
from 1970.
Despite prospects of rising unemployment, businessmen believe
that large wage settlements will continue to push prices up.

In addition,

there is concern that the c o m blight eliminates the hope of sustained
relief from rising food prices.

So there is very little acceptance of

the view that the fight against inflation is about to be won or that
it is even going particularly well.
In a more general vein, several directors expressed the opinion
that there is too much "grasping at straws" In the optimistic
interpretation of recent economic data by Government spokesmen.

Demand

statistics are not as bullish and price data are not as encouraging
as portrayed, say some board members.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Signs of recovery in the District's economy are becoming more
numerous, although there is still weakness in the capital goods area,
especially machine tools. Our directors remain concerned about
inflation and hope that the Fed will permit only moderate growth in
the money and credit aggregates over the near term.
Nonfarm payroll employment in the District rose in July,
following declines in the three preceding months.

The regional index

of manufacturing output, which began to recover in June, rose sharply
in July, largely due to gains in rubber, machinery, and primary and
fabricated metals.

Steel production, although stronger in the District

than in the nation, appears to have risen less than seasonally in August.
During the latter half of August, the District's insured unemployment
rate, on a seasonally adjusted basis, was down significantly (by 0.4
percent) from the July average.

Both residential and nonresidential

construction contracts seem to be in recovery phases.
At a meeting of our Cincinnati branch directors on September 8,
a director associated with a large electrical firm reported improvements
in the firm's consumer-related products, but continued sluggishness in
sales to heavy industry.

The appliance industry is picking up slowly, but

there has been considerable price cutting to reduce excessive inventories
at both the manufacturing and retail levels.

Bank directors report a

considerable improvement in liquidity in recent weeks.
The directors of our Pittsburgh branch, at a meeting held in
late August, expressed strong feelings that controlling inflation
should have top priority for the Federal Reserve System in determining

the proper course of monetary policy. One director, a professional
economist, views the economy as being in "an underemployment
equilibrium " - a situation that he views as desirable to correct
inflation.

An industrialist director placed great importance on

improving productivity in both the manufacturing and services industries.
He is concerned that the growing Importance of services in the economy
may build inefficiencies into the system unless strenuous efforts
are made to improve productivity in that area. Another director
expressed a strongly held view that Treasury projections of receipts
from income taxes in fiscal 1971 are unrealistic, particularly
corporate taxes, which he believes are grossly overestimated by not
taking account of large increases in pre-tax costs in recent years.
Last month, a major machine tool company in Cleveland sparked
a wave of price reductions in the metal cutting section of the machine
tool industry.

The price reductions took the form of substantial

increases in official discounts by manufacturers to their distributors,
through whom most of the industry's products are sold. The spokesman
for the company stated that the metalworking machinery industry will
continue for many months to feel the impact of cutbacks in defense
industries, particularly aircraft, which is an important user of machine
tools.

Commercial aircraft production, which is also weakening, will

have a similar effect. These and other weaknesses in the demand for
metalworking machinery stemming from capital goods producers are not
expected to be offset in the near term by the expected recovery in
the consumer durable goods sector.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Surveys of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District
Indicate general agreement on the following points: (1) increased
shipments, volume of new orders, and backlogs of orders in
manufacturing; (2) considerable improvement in retail sales, except
for automobiles; (3) increased inventories in manufacturing, trade,
and services, and excessive levels of inventories in manufacturing;
(4) continued weakness in employment; (5) increased upward pressure
on wages; (6) some improvement in the demand for business and consumer
loans but weakened demand for mortgage loans; and (7) definite
improvement in the optimism of respondents regarding future business
prospects.
District manufacturers report shipments still slightly down
on balance, but considerably improved from the last several months.
An improvement noted last month in volume of new orders and backlogs
of orders continued with the September report.

Reports of improvement

have come from manufacturers in building materials, electrical
equipment, coal, fabricated metal products, and synthetic fibers.
Numerous important producers in cotton textiles and furniture, however,
report continued slow activity.
Retail sales are reported substantially improved for the first
time in several months by businessmen in trade and services and by
bankers.

Automobile sales apparently have remained about unchanged

from last month's report, which was one of considerable improvement.
Manufacturers report inventories have increased during the
past month, and most of them continue to feel that inventory levels
are higher than they prefer.

Retailers' inventories are reported

to have increased also, but retailers apparently do not feel that
current levels are too high.
Employment declines continue to be reported by manufacturers
in electrical equipment, metals, and furniture.

The length of the

workweek in manufacturing Is also reported down.

Retailers report

some Increase in employment and hours worked, but on balance the
District employment situation remains weak.

Reports of increasing

unemployment continue, although District bankers report some decline
in the supplies of available labor compared to reports of the past
four months.
Price increases are reported by some manufacturers in
fabricated metal items, electrical equipment, and coal.
are reported by one manufacturer of cotton textiles.

Price declines

Reports of price

increases by businessmen in retail trade and services are fewer than
in recent months.

Upward pressure on wages continues, however, in

furniture and metals as well as in textiles, where annual wage increases
are currently being awarded. Wage increases in retailing and freight
transportation are also reported.
Last month's modest improvement in residential construction
activity apparently has subsided.

The only area of the District where

respondents report Increased residential building is Baltimore.
Nonresidential building remains on the increase, however, following
the pickup reported in August.

Some respondents expressed the view

that further improvement in both categories of construction is ahead.
Slight improvement is reported in the demand for loans by
businesses and consumers.

Demand for mortgage loans in the District,

however, has tapered considerably from the improved levels of May
through July.

The number of respondents reporting that they expect
improvement in general economic activity increased sharply in the
September survey, and a tone of optimism is present among respondents
for the first time during the current year.

Some respondents

cautioned, however, that they believe recovery will be slow.
Manufacturers in the District continued to feel that their
plant and equipment capacity is in excess of current needs.

Reluctance

to cut back planned capital expansions, however, has been typical
of District businessmen*

Some intentions to cut back were voiced

last month, but apparently most manufacturers now feel that further
reductions are not necessary.
Manufacturers in synthetic fibers, hosiery, cotton textiles,
furniture, and fabricated metals continue to report inventories
higher than desired, particularly in finished goods.

This condition

has been typical of District manufacturers for several months, and
efforts to cut back inventories apparently are still being made.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The consensus of directors, bankers, and businessmen
contacted is that the moderate economic slowdown in the Southeast
has run its course but that inflationary expectations are deeply
Imbedded and that recovery of spending and production will be
sluggish.

High unemployment areas were also surveyed—those

experiencing a gradual increase in economic activity but suffering
from persistent structural unemployment and those affected by
factors such as aerospace layoffs.

Areas experiencing structural

unemployment foresee no early end to their difficulties.
Reports about the textile industry indicate that, with some
exceptions, employment and production may be stabilizing after a
decline.

One industry executive described the industry as "trying

to bounce off the bottom."

The same official reported that some

types of textile machines have been offered at very attractive prices,
while the demand for other types of machines, such as those used to
make double knits and texturing, remains strong.

Carpet manufacturing

is also anticipated to expand in the near future.
The mobile home industry provides another example of an
industry where employment and production seem to have bottomed out,
attributed by one banker to a relaxation of tight money.

In addition,

a large auto assembly plant in the Atlanta area has added 500 workers
to its lines.

Appliance and furniture manufacturers in east Tennessee

are encouraged by recent increases in orders.
However, there are indications that business is still lagging
and that recovery will be slow.

Directors and bankers from central

and east Tennessee are pessimistic about significant improvement
in business activity and expect unemployment to increase in the
coming months.

In two other states, telephone revenues have been

rising less rapidly this year and the company continues austerity
programs.

Auto sales in the Atlanta area have slumped again after

strengthening in June and July.

A distributor of prestige men's

clothing for the Southeast reported that some stores have eliminated
a fall line of sport clothes, moving immediately into their normal
winter lines.

A rug producer stated that, while he expected an Increase

in sales, he was counting on an increase in productivity rather than
an expansion of his labor force. Aluminum producers do not anticipate
recalls of laid-off workers in coming months.
There has been only a slight dampening of inflationary
expectations.

Businessmen are nearly universal in their fears of

steep wage Increases.

Unacceptable high wage demands are prolonging

strikes that stymie major construction in Atlanta and Knoxville.

In

the past month, several District newspapers have carried editorials
bemoaning the inflation problem.

An average 23-percent increase in

TVA electricity rates will be adding to cost pressures in the
northwest sections of the District.
A telephone survey of areas experiencing high unemployment
indicates they fall in two categories: rural, agricultural areas
experiencing a gradual improvement in their industrial bases but
suffering chronic unemployment and those affected by factors such
as layoffs in the aerospace industry.

Those in the first category

see no early end to their persistent unemployment, yet nearly all
described their economies as progressing normally.

Negroes make up

a relatively large portion of population in these areas. Among

those areas affected by aerospace layoffs, Huntsvllle, Alabama, and
Marietta, Georgia, are experiencing little difficulty adjusting, while
the Cape Kennedy economy continues to drift in a vacuum.

Although

the Cape Kennedy layoffs have slowed, there has been no substantial
influx of industry or retirees to fill the void.

A deterioration in

labor markets elsewhere has slowed out-migration from the Cape, yet
much vacant housing remains. On the other hand, the Mississippi
Gulf Coast area, where unemployment has been high, is expecting a
surge of economic activity because of a large destroyer contract and
accelerated rebuilding in the wake of Hurricane Camille.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The almost universal view.among informed observers in the
Seventh District is that only a very slight rise in real activity
is likely through the remainder of the year.

Businesses, consumers,

and local governments continue to show caution in current spending
and in making new commitments.

Some industry analysts think that

equipment output will continue to decline, perhaps reaching a trough
in the second quarter of next year.

The rate of price rise for

finished manufactured goods appears to have been maintained. Labor
markets continue to ease In almost all areas and lines of activity.
Residential construction is headed up again, but most of the
improvement is expected in multi-family units.
The great uncertainty, of course, is the possibility of a long
strike in the auto industry.

Those who follow the Industry think it

likely that negotiations will continue by mutual consent without a
work stoppage beyond the September 14 deadline. The UAW is talking
with General Motors and Chrysler, with the indication that one or the
other will be the target if a strike is called. This development
spotlights the limited weight that should be placed on "informed
opinions.''

Some knowledgeable people had been virtually certain

that Ford would be the target again because "G.M. is too strong,
and Chrysler is too weak."
Production is proceeding very rapidly on 1971 models,
especially the new small cars.

Important components of the new small

cars-engine, transmissions, etc.-are being made in England and Germany,
and some cars are being made in Canada. Therefore, if sales of the
new small cars are strong, as expected, the beneficial effect-both

on the balance of payments and on U. S« employment-will be limited.
Merchants find that consumers are continuing to "trade
down" both hard and soft goods and are cautious in Incurring
Instalment debt.
Sales of trucks and trailers recovered after the truck
strike that ended in the Chicago area in early July, but the
improvement was less than had been expected.

Demand for trailers

is not expected to revive until next spring.
Sales of farm and construction machinery have failed (by a
wide margin in some cases) to meet expectations.

New orders for

machine tools are reported by one producer to be the *'worst since
the Thirties."

This may be an exaggeration, but it characterizes

the pessimistic mood of many equipment manufacturers.

But sales

of some types of equipment-associated with electric power generation,
air conditioning, mining, and data processing-have remained relatively
strong.

New orders for a variety of capital goods components have

improved slightly in recent months after a sharp decline in the first
half.

Despite the general pessimism, most equipment producers are

convinced that many orders hang in abeyance awaiting a clarification
of the business outlook.
A number of manufacturers who have reduced output report that
inventories, both of purchased materials and end products, are at
desired levels.

An appreciable pickup of sales would require

additional output to keep pipelines, full.
Steel firms in this area are. losing the export business that
they obtained in the past year. Mill inventories are being maintained
to fill domestic orders rapidly as required by close competition. With

steel a notable exception, delivery schedules have not improved
as much as in past years when excess capacity became general.
Partly, this is because producers prefer to accumulate sufficient
orders to permit economical runs of particular products and partly
because of reductions in staff and other economies on the part of
suppliers.
The Chicago-Gary steel area has an ample labor supply for
the first time in about five years.

Only special skills are hired

currently.
Despite the rise in unemployment in all areas, employers
continue to complain of the low quality of job applicants, absenteeism,
"poor attitudes," and related factors that hamper efficiency.
Experienced workers with clerical, mechanical, and professional skills
are still in demand, and less desired positions in restaurants,
hospitals, laundries, dry cleaning, and commission sales remain
unfilled.
Vacancy rates for housing units in the Chicago area have
increased somewhat.

Rents on apartments appear to have stopped rising.

Doubtless, these developments are related to increased unemployment.
Office space also has become more available.

In view of the tremendous

volume of office space scheduled to come on the market in downtown
Chicago in the next few years, fears are expressed that the area will
be overbuilt. We have no evidence, however, of cancellations or
postponements of plans for construction of large new buildings-some
very large indeed.
A reliable assessment of the damage caused by the corn blight
is not available.

Infestation is scattered geographically and the

degree of damage varies widely, even within the same fields.
Recent field reports, however, indicate a much smaller loss than
had been feared-perhaps well under 10 percent of the crop. Moreover,
carryover supplies of corn from previous harvests and large supplies
of other grains assure ample feed for Increased livestock production.
Small seed corn companies are adversely affected because they
concentrate on varieties that are susceptible to corn blight. Some
of the larger seed companies are said to possess varieties of seed
that are resistant, but the available quantity of such seed is not
known.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

A few scattered signs of improvement in economic conditions
are apparent in the Eighth District, but pessimism is still the
prevailing mood.

Some major retail establishments report minor sales

gains on a seasonally adjusted basis. Long-run investment plans are
being revised downward in a few cases.

Few firms are planning

employment layoffs, but with the impending automobile strike and
normal attrition, some further increase in unemployment is expected.
Residential construction continues at a very low level, while apartment
and office buildings are still being constructed at only a moderate
pace.

Farm commodity prices have declined sharply in recent weeks

and during the remaining months of the year are likely to remain lower
than average prices since January.
Retail sales have apparently increased slightly throughout
most of the District in recent weeks * Major retail establishments
in both St. Louis and Memphis report some gains in August on a
seasonally adjusted basis.

Likewise, one large St. Louis chain with

numerous stores in outlying areas reports sales increases in the
smaller cities and towns.
Major manufacturing industries still indicate little change
In long-run expansion plans.

Some manufacturing plants have been

closed, but. expansion continues in retail establishments, especially
the discount type.

There has also in recent weeks been some increase

in inquiries relative to plant.location sites in the St. Louis area.
There is little prospect for an increase in Eighth District
employment in the near future. The-larger manufacturing firms report
little hiring and few layoffs, which implies a reduction in the work

force through attrition.

Expected employment gains in retail trade

will likely be offset by some reduction of workers in the manufacturing
sector.

Defense employment in the District continues to decline

corresponding with the national trend.

Overall, the employment situation

points to some further increase in the unemployment rate.
Business profits In the area continue on the weak side with
little prospect for early Improvement.
Residential construction is reported at a relatively low level
throughout the District and is described as 4'very low" in St. Louis.
Potential home purchasers appear to be switching their demand to
apartments and mobile homes, at least temporarily.

Apartment and

office building construction continues at a moderate level.

Applications

for apartment rentals are reported to be most active in the low to
medium price range.

High interest rates, greater labor costs, and

outdated building codes are being blamed for the reduced level of home
construction.
Some banks report increased liquidity.

One bank In the District,

with $45 million of deposits, lowered its prime rate to 7 1/2 percent
last week.

Consumer loan demand at commercial banks is up, especially

in Arkansas, where finance companies have been leaving the state.
Farm commodity prices have declined sharply during the past
month, pointing to lower food prices and reduced farm Incomes in the
months ahead.

Lower meat prices are in prospect for the rest of the

year, compared with levels a year ago and earlier this year, but grain
prices average somewhat higher, reflecting the impact of the southern
corn leaf blight on production.

Eventually, if grain supplies are

reduced substantially, they will have an upward impact on livestock
and meat prices.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Economic conditions In the Ninth Federal Reserve District
continued weak through July and August.

Primarily as a result of

increasing unemployment nationwide, there appears to have been some
back-migration to the rural areas and smaller towns of the District.
Retailers in the District have become more optimistic in their
six-month sales forecasts, but District manufacturers have revised
their anticipations downward.

Retail, price increases are becoming

less prevalent than they were earlier this year, but industrial price
increases show no signs of abating.
Increasing rates of unemployment in urban centers nationwide
are resulting in some movement back to rural areas and small towns in
the District.

Bank directors felt that more people would be coming

back if there were suitable job opportunities not necessarily at the
same skill or pay levels.

It Is interesting to note, however, that

some of the directors felt that this reverse migration, although
largely caused by lack of urban job opportunities is also the result
of a growing disenchantment with urban conditions.

For example,

one director cited the case of Billings, Montana, school system which
received 1,200 teaching applications this year, many from experienced
teachers in eastern cities.
Directors and officers of this bank, with some exceptions, felt
that retailers are becoming more optimistic in their sales outlooks for
the rest of the year.

Reasons given for this optimism included such

things as the recent signs that the slowdown nationwide may have
bottomed out and the fact that people are not as uncertain about their

employment status as they were a few months ago.
Some of the directors, however, cited cases where retailers
were not anticipating sales Increases through the rest of the year.
One director, from his observations of retailers in the Twin Cities,
felt that they were becoming more conservative in their outlooks over
the next year than they had been six months ago.

Directors from

agricultural sections of the District observed that retailer's outlooks
were generally favorable, but that there was some concern about sales
because of recent sharp drops in livestock prices and lower crop yields
in some areas due to a lack of moisture.
In contrast to the generally brighter retail sales outlook,
District manufacturers do not expect any significant recovery in sales
over the next six months.

Respondents to our quarterly industrial

expectations survey taken around the first of August revised their
previous expectations downward.

Sales in the current quarter are now

expected to be only 2 percent greater than a year ago before rising
in the next two quarters to about A percent above year-earlier levels.
This finding is consistent with observations by this batik's directors.
One case was cited in which a farm implement manufacturer, apparently
overstocked with certain types of machinery, was offering large dealer
discounts In order to move this machinery out of inventory.

Another

director felt that capital goods producers had been hurt by the recent
cutbacks in plant and equipment expenditures.
There are some indications that price increases at the retail
level are becoming less prevalent than they were a few months ago.
One director felt that although settlement of the recent teamsters'
strike has resulted in some upward price adjustments, retailers are

trying to cut down inventories by reducing prices.

For example, boat

sales were down this year, and dealers are selling them at only
slightly above cost. Dry goods prices have remained essentially flat
over the last few months, and increased competition from suppliers
has held down price increases in men's wear.

There is some indication

that wholesale prices of men's suits have risen slightly in the last
month or so, but retailers are shaving their margins in order to
maintain prices.
The directors felt, however, that Industrial price increases
have not become less prevalent or less frequent than they were six
months ago. With the exception of some price cutting to lower kinds
of farm equipment inventories, the directors were not aware of any
cases where industrial prices have been reduced. Moreover, they felt
that industrial suppliers are still making across-the-board increases:
U. S. Steel has announced a 5-percent increase for steel used in
construction effective on November 16«

This is essentially the same

rate of increase posted on January 1 of this year, and it appears that
other steel companies will follow U. S. Steel's lead. At the beginning
of next year, the price of cement used in construction is also scheduled
to rise about 5 percent, much the same as it did at the beginning of
this year.

In addition, users of foundry products recently faced a

6-percent across-the-board price increase.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Business and economic conditions remain reasonably firm across
most of the Tenth District.

Reporters generally stress the volume of

construction in several of the large cities and the steady trend in
total employment.

In general, agriculture is experiencing a fairly

good year, although there are a number of areas with moisture
deficiency.

The exceptions to this generally favorable appraisal

of the District's economy continue to be Wichita, where aircraft
production is down substantially, and Kansas City, which has been
plagued by a long construction strike.
In Kansas City, that strike appears to have reached an end
with the agreement this week to a four-year contract by one of the
striking unions and the builders association. Negotiations with four
other unions continue, and the outlook for settlement is hopeful.
The agreement with the common laborers union is strongly inflationary,
involving an overall increase of $4.15 per hour over a four-year
period.

Thus, laborers who have been receiving $4.02 per hour will

receive $8.16 per hour by 1973. The first year increase is $1.00
per hour.
Settlement of the strike in Kansas City will bring a renewal
of construction and a new tempo In the local economy.

A major strike

in the auto Industry, however, would prolong depressed conditions
in Kansas City.

For the longer run, the impact of the inflationary

construction settlement is uncertain at this time, but is probably
adverse to new construction.
Loan demand at District banks has eased somewhat, but continues
strong.

However, there is scattered evidence that demand is turning

weak in some places.

For example, a large Denver bank reports It has

had requests from other banks to purchase loans, including requests
for $1 million purchases.

Not much change in loan demand is expected

during the fall if Interest rates stay at current levels.

There are

indications, however, that some customers are waiting for lower rates
and that a reduction in the prime rate could result In an increase
In loan demand.
Deposit experience in different cities has been mixed depending
upon the activity of larger banks in seeking CD's.

The suspension of

ceilings on CD's of under 90 days maturity has enabled several of the
larger banks to attract substantial amounts of funds.

Some other banks

report that their CD growth would be more significant if the minimum
size for large CD's were reduced to $50,000.
Despite the growth of CD's, bank-related Issues of commercial
paper have remained substantially unchanged.

The extension of reserve

requirements to commercial paper will not produce initially a significant
reduction in the amount outstanding.

A couple of banks were vigorous

in their protests of the application of reserve requirements to
outstanding commercial paper issues, since the interest costs on such
paper are fixed and the reserve requirements effectively increase the
cost. Most of the banks will continue to issue some commercial paper
because of its advantages over large CD's, such as smaller size
possibilities, longer maturities without Interest ceilings, and the
ability to terminate a contract.
The combined effect of the extension of reserve requirements
to commercial paper and the 1 percent reduction in requirements against
time deposits over $5 million will vary greatly among cities.

Banks in

a couple of cities will experience significant increases in required
reserves, while reductions elsewhere will be relatively small.
There is a general consensus that the prime rate will be
reduced in the next few weeks.

For the most part, bankers do not

believe that a reduction is justified at this time in view of the
continued strong loan demand and the high cost of obtaining funds.
Because of these considerations, several bankers indicated that a
prime rate reduction may not be extended to as many borrowers as in
the past.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Data for this report were gathered by telephone interviews
with branch board directors In early September.

On balance, the

directors appeared to be cautiously optimistic.

They noted that the

slowdown never got too severe and there are now some signs of a
modest pickup in business.
most directors.

Inflation is still strong in the view of

The bankers reported a continuation of heavy

loan demand, but also improved liquidity positions at their banks
during the last three months.

A few bankers expect the prime rate

to be cut before the end of the year, an expectation based on
noneconomic reasons.

Construction may have picked up slightly in

very recent weeks.
Business conditions are generally regarded as somewhat
stronger now than three months ago.

Several of the bankers noted

that business never got particularly bad and that conditions now
appear to have leveled out or picked up in the last three months.
Several of the nonbank directors noted that their firms' orders had
picked up recently, and they looked for some expansion in orders for
the rest of the year.
While a few directors see price pressures easing, most list
the continuation of inflation as a major concern.

Those who do see

some signs of abatement in price inflation refer particularly to
selected goods prices, while appearing discouraged about services
prices.

The nonbankers reported that prices of inputs were not

rising quite as fast in the most recent, weeks as earlier this year,
except perhaps for machinery parts.

Product price declines were

reported by two directors, one due to a local market milk-price

war and the other to generally slack demand for paper and paper
products over the past six to nine months.

All directors expressed

concern over the price of labor. One voiced a fear that the minimum
wage would be raised and possibly tied to the CPI, a move, if adopted,
that he considered certain to add to cost pressures in the months
ahead. A number of directors cited the auto negotiations as crucial
in either setting a pattern of moderate wage increases or excessive
wage increases.

There was some feeling that the outlook for inflation

would improve if the auto settlement was moderate (below 8 percent
in first-year wages).
The bankers were almost unanimous in reporting that liquidity
positions at their banks had improved in comparison with three months
ago.

The only banker reporting a worsening in his liquidity position

cited seasonal factors as the cause and expected improvement in October.
The bankers were split about evenly on whether liquidity was still a
serious problem for firms in their area.

The nonbankers, however,

indicated that they did not feel liquidity was a problem for firms in
their industry.

On balance, it appears that liquidity is of much less

concern now than a couple of months ago.
Loan demand is reported strong by most bankers.

Over half

reported that loan demand was greater now than three months ago,
while many who judged their loan demand to be weaker or the same as
three months ago still characterized that demand as strong.

Real

estate loans were reported especially strong in several areas, and
one banker noted heavy demand for feedlot and cattle loans.

Banks in

Corpus Christi, Texas, face heavy loan demand from individuals and
businesses desiring to repair damage from Hurricane Celia.

Most bankers reported that the recent reserve requirement
changes would ease their bank's position only slightly, with the
move viewed as being more psychological than substantive.

There

were Indications that the ease in reserve positions would Improve
liquidity but would not lead, at least directly, to additional loan
commitments.

One large Houston bank reports that It Is considering

abandoning the sale of commercial paper as a result of the reserve
requirement dianges.

This bank would expect to concentrate more

effort on Increasing its volume of large CD's outstanding.
Economic conditions do not currently justify a further cut
in the prime rate, according to District directors.

Several expect

a cut, however, before the end of the year because of political
and public relations considerations.

Two bankers indicated that

they had not yet lowered their prime rate from 8 1/2 percent and
might maintain that rate even if most banks make another cut in the
next few months.
Signs of a pickup in construction activity in recent months
were noted by some bankers, but no strong rebound is reported. One
banker commented that many construction companies were forced out of
business during the last 18 months so that it may take some time for
resources to move back into the industry.

The few areas where

construction strength was cited were FHA-235 housing, university and
local government construction, and gas drilling.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

There is a somewhat more optimistic tone to the comments
received this month from Twelfth District bankers and businessmen.
The immediate pace of economic activity has not moved toward a higher
rate of expansion as yet, but the general feeling seems to be that
the worst of the current slowdown is over and that there will be a
recovery toward the end of the year, or in 1971. Much of this optimism
is based on expectations of easier monetary conditions.
In the meantime, the current situation has not changed from
recent months.

Businesses are not reporting major expansion plans and

are still under pressure to reduce costs.

Several reports stress

continuing efforts to keep costs under control.

In some cases, these

efforts have taken the form of layoffs of both production and clerical
workers.

Several firms have raised prices partly because of rising

costs and partly to offset revenues lost from falling sales.
A common response has been to attempt to cut inventories or at
least prevent them from rising. A frequent explanation for the emphasis
upon inventory reduction has been the high cost of finance; this is
especially true of smaller businesses. Lower sales have also been
a factor, although the lower sales have resulted in inventories being
somewhat higher than intended.

One.firm reported that it announced a

price rise and gave its customers a chance to make price-protected
orders.

The response was smaller than.expected and this was interpreted

as suggesting that customers would rather pay a higher price later than
build up inventory now.
One exception to.this trend is in the oil industry where
inventories are being built up in certain products, despite a slight

decline In total inventories.

Crude oil inventories are being kept

at above normal levels as a cushion against anticipated periodic
foreign crude supply shortfalls during the remainder of 1970. On
the other hand, light-product inventories are being kept at minimum
level to reduce carrying costs.
As before, the areas with the greatest problems are those
dependent upon the aerospace and lumber Industries.

The Pacific

Northwest, in particular Seattle, and to a lesser extent, southern
California, reported continued heavy unemployment, and, especially
in the Seattle region, rising vacancies in real estate.

Retail sales

in the Pacific Northwest, while not actually falling, were described
as comparing unfavorably with the same period a year ago. The rise in
unemployment In the aerospace industry in southern California has not
had as marked an Impact since the local economy is more diversified.
Nevertheless, retail activity is slower than normal, as is true of most
areas.
A few regions have experienced what they describe as a good
year.

This is the case for Utah, Idaho, and parts of Nevada where the

local economies are more dependent on agriculture and tourism. Tourist
expenditures were at normal levels. Yields from the principal crops are
very promising and prices for agricultural products and livestock are
expected by farmers to hold at present prices. Banks in these areas
reported that their customers had a year approximately as good as last
year, if not better.

Retail sales, in consequence, have held up in

these states and inventories have not fluctuated much during the past
few months.

Housing continues to show some strength In multiple units
(except In the Seattle area) but not In single-family homes.

For

single-family homes, both construction of new units and sales of
existing homes have fallen off compared with 1969. There has been some
Increase In the availability of funds and some reduction in interest
charges* which, it is expected, will help the housing marketBankers In the Twelfth District report a continued buildup
of deposits and an easier liquidity position.

Some commented that

they are not bidding as aggressively for long-term CD's and others
noted that the public is increasing its savings.

Although the banks

are continuing to exercise care in their lending, they have been able
to ease up somewhat on their restrictions and in some cases are
looking for new borrowing customers.

These moves to greater ease

are still minor and lending is still carefully scrutinized.
In summary, the reports indicate a shift toward more optimism
even though no immediate improvement is being felt.

Unemployment has

not started to fall and firms continue to devote efforts toward cost
and inventory reduction.

The general impression seems to be that the

economy will begin to expand at a faster rate by the end of the year.

