CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff

June 23, 1971

SUMMARY*

Reports in this Red Book generally confirm the slightly more
optimistic tone of the two previous issues. Most districts report
moderate improvement both in retail sales and in manufacturers' shipments
and orders.

Residential construction is very strong almost everywhere.

Defense cutbacks continue.

Demand for business equipment remains weak.

Unemployment remains high with no present prospects for improvement.
Employment generally is steady to slightly higher. Although a few
scattered price declines were noted, one of the clearest impressions
through the district reports is a strengthening of the inflationary
psychology—in large part because of generous wage settlements.

Author-

ized and wildcat strikes continue to hamper activity.
In the financial sector, a pickup in loan demand was noted in
a number of districts—especially New York, Chicago, and San Francisco.
Consumer and mortgage loan demand also is up.
have slowed, but remain at a high level.
banks have firmed.

Savings inflows at banks

Interest rates charged by

Home mortgage rates are steady to higher—by a

quarter percentage point or more.
Businessmen and bankers now have learned to refer to the rapid
growth of the money supply, which they typically deem excessive and
inflationary.

One "verbose" academician, however, finds the rapid

growth of the money supply to be eminently appropriate to conditions.
Increases in retail sales were reported in most districts, but
higher prices account for most of the gain from last year.

Stronger

sales of autos, appliances, and home furnishings were noted in a

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.]

number of districts.

A pickup in tourism was observed in the Minneapolis

and Atlanta Districts.
The pace of the recovery appears to have moderated in the Cleveland District, but this partly reflects the beginning of the cutback in
steel production as inventory buildups are completed.

Districts com-

menting on the potential steel strike that may start August 1, expected
a settlement or a relatively short strike.
Among the strongest sectors are residential construction and the
industries that supply building materials and components.

At the other

extreme are defense industries and capital goods (other than utilities)—
with machine tools severely depressed.

In some districts—Richmond and

Atlanta—strength in nonresidential construction was noted.
Business inventories, except for strike hedges, are generally
under good control—a point emphasized by New York and St. Louis.
Richmond finds some manufacturers' inventories on the high side.
A number of districts commented on farm income prospects.
Drought conditions are hurting crops and cattle in the Dallas District,
while growing conditions are favorable in the San Francisco and St. Louis
Districts. Planted corn acreage is larger this year in the Chicago
District, and crop prospects would be favorable, but for the spector
of the corn blight.

In general, it is expected that higher prices will

boost farm cash receipts in the nation in the second half of 1971, but
net farm income for the year may be lower than in 1970 because of rising
costs.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Compared with Che growing uneasiness reported in May, some
restoration of business confidence in the economic recovery is apparent
this month, as May and June improvements in orders have offset the April
downturns.

Respondents continue to speak of the upturn in such phrases

as "creeping" and "tenuous." However, First District financial conditions
continue mixed and partly Immobilized by unusual uncertainties over
future developments.
May deposit flows into area commercial banks and thrift institutions were off from levels reported in the January-April period, but
continued at relatively high levels, surpassing any of the five previous
Mays.

Commercial bank loan demand remains spotty and somewhat lack-

luster. Mortgage rates at New England mutual savings banks have remained
largely stagnant with 7 1/2 percent continuing to be the most common
conventional mortgage rate.
Wide extremes continue to appear between certain sectors of
regional manufacturing:

June reports show some recreational products

(boats, campers) and certain lines of industrial machinery selling far
above projections at the same time that machine tool producers continue
to face severely depressed conditions.

As a general rule, however,

regional manufacturers seem to be just meeting their projections, and
that only with considerable effort. Auto-related manufacturing is
generally running at lower levels than had been expected earlier this
year.
Professor Samuelson proved quite verbose this month on the
matter of monetary growth, scoring economy-watchers generally for an

excessive preoccupation with short-term M^ growth rates.

Stating that

quarterly growth rates reflect too short a period of time to mean much,
Samuelson urged the system not to panic at the high M^ growth rates recorded earlier this year.

Samuelson stressed several factors to be kept

in mind in the current formulation of monetary policy.

First, it is

only prudent behavior on the part of monetary authorities to "lean
against the wind."

In a sluggish recovery period this can only mean

stimulating a considerably faster monetary growth than would be desirable
over the long run.

Further, inflation effects loom large in current

M^ growth figures, and will continue to do so over the rest of the
year.

Discounting these, an 8 to 10 percent rise in M^ for the year

would not seem unreasonable to Samuelson, particularly as velocity should
remain steady to declining over this same period due to lower rate levels.
Finally, Samuelson stressed that large precautionary demands for liquidity
are inevitable in periods like 1967 and 1971, but it cannot be assumed
they will later be translated into commodity demand.
On the fiscal side, Samuelson welcomes any congressional spending
overrides which will develop this year, as they will move us toward a
more desirable full-employment deficit.

He remains opposed to a personal

tax cut, however, due to his views on the needs of the public sector. On
the employment outlook, Samuelson cited a number of forecasts ranging
from 6 1/2 - 7 percent unemployment later this year, and suggested that
the lower end of this spread seems most likely to him.
Our other academic respondents were unavailable for comment this
month.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The views expressed by the directors of this bank and the
Buffalo branch, as well as by same large retailers, point to a continuing gradual increase in consumer spending, but very cautious
inventory policies by businessmen.

In general, most respondents

looked for a slight easing in wage demands, but do not expect any
marked change in the price picture.

Opinions regarding the strength

of the demand for business loans indicated some strengthening on
balance.
With respect to consumer spending, all the Second District
directors and retailers who expressed an opinion on the subject felt
the upward trend was continuing.

A number of the respondents, however,

adopted a relatively cautious attitude towards the strength of retail
activity.

Thus, the treasurer of a large nationwide chain of retail

department stores specializing in softwear felt that much of the rise
in his firm's dollar volume reflected higher prices, with the physical
volume of sales running only moderately above last year.

He felt that

official tabulations indicating increasing strength in consumer spending
were somewhat exaggerated, and reported that his firm as well as other
retailers he had spoken to had not as yet seen signs that consumer
retail outlays were reaching such proportions.

As a result, he felt

that "doubt was cast" on same of the official statistics.

Similarly,

while the vice president of a large New York department store with
branches in the suburbs reported a "healthy" rise in his firm's sales
in dollar terms, he noted that higher prices accounted for a good

part of this increase.

All of the Buffalo branch directors detected

a continuing upward trend in retail activity, with a "spurt" in some
areas related to seasonal factors.

The New York bank directors,

however, characterized the pick up in retail sales as "moderate" to
"slow."
All of the respondents felt that businessmen were continuing
to pursue cautious policies toward increasing their inventories, and
that such building as was taking place was largely due to special circumstances.

The chairman of the board of a large manufacturing concern

reported that he knew of no company accumulating inventories with
"speculative motives," but he thought that some accumulation was
taking place as the result of special factors, such as anticipations
of strikes and environmental protection measures—especially the
spreading ban on phosphates and restrictions on the paper industry.
The vice president of Rochester's largest firm also reported that
strike-hedging purchases had resulted in a substantial increase in
inventories at his firm. However, he also pointed to the trend among
retailers to limit their inventories and to rely increasingly upon
the ready availability of adequate stocks from jobbers and distributors . The retailers who were contacted indicated there had been a
slight rise in their inventories in preparation for an expected increase
in sales activity later on in the year.
The views of the directors regarding business loan demand
seemed to indicate some strengthening.

Thus, the presidents of three

upstate banks and the chairman of a large nationwide manufacturing
concern felt that the demand for this type of loan had increased in
recent weeks, and one pointed particularly to the strength in the

mortgage area.

And, while the chairman of the board of another upstate

bank reported that his bank had not experienced any strengthening of
loan demand, he noted that business loans are not a major part of his
portfolio.
The respondents all continued to voice concern over the wage
and price situation, although on balance the opinions expressed
seemed slightly less pessimistic than a month ago.

Thus, Buffalo

branch directors reported some slowdown in the rate of wage increases,
particularly among nonunionized concerns, and felt this trend might
continue for the balance of the year.

On the other hand, no significant

change in the rate of advance of prices was evident to any of the Buffalo
directors.

One of the two New York City manufacturing executives on this

bank's board saw inflation as continuing, but detected signs of an easing
in wage increases.

The other New York manufacturer saw a pattern of

first-year wage increases averaging about 10 percent "less of a disaster"
than previous increases, but "still a disaster" since he expected productivity to rise by only 3 percent to 3 1/2 percent in most industries.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Businessmen and directors in the Third District are fearful
that inflation will intensify rather than abate during the second half
of the year.

On balance, they believe that the recovery now underway

will continue, but they see some weak spots in the economy.
8ales in June are running ahead of the May level.
struction remains strong.

Retail

Residential con-

But industrial demand, especially for capital

equipment other than for utilities, is weak, report area manufacturers.
Representatives from the steel industry think the odds have shifted in
favor of not having a strike.
Businessmen and directors have become more pessimistic about
the outlook for inflation. A recent poll of large manufacturers in
the Third District shows that three out of four believe that prices
paid by them will be higher six months from now. A year ago only
about half of these manufacturing executives expected prices paid to
be higher a half year ahead.
Among directors, inflationary expectations have intensified
within the last several weeks.

One director says that the rapid growth

in the money supply is laying the foundation for serious inflation
problems later on. Another director pointed to the unrelenting demands of labor for higher wages as a reason for thinking inflation may
get worse.

Still another director indicated that "Congress is running

wild" with the budget.

Several directors also noted rising infla-

tionary expectations among business associates and people in their
communities.

On balance, area businessmen are confident that the recovery
from last year's recession will continue, although gradually.

Our

latest polling of large manufacturers in the Third District shews
that for June twice as many firms are experiencing increases in sales
and new orders as are registering decreases. However, some weaknesses
are still apparent.

Several directors say that while the demand for

consumer goods is holding up, industrial demand is flat. Orders for
capital equipment other than for utilities are stagnant, according
to one director.
Residential construction, in contrast, remains strong.
tors report that housing is booming in their areas.
indicated strength for mobile homes as well.

Direc-

Other directors

Business economists in

the Philadelphia area expect housing starts to stay at the 1.9 million
unit level for the balance of the year.
Reports from area department stores indicate that retail sales
in June are bouncing back from their lackluster performance in May.
Merchants expect further gains in the third quarter and are hopeful
about the fourth. Wearing apparel is especially strong.
appliances and hardware items are also moving well.

Small

Increases in

home furnishings, such as carpenting, are likely, according to retailers . One department store executive says he sees some bright spots
for large appliances as well.
According to representatives of the steel industry in the
Third District, the betting now is that there will not be a strike.
These representatives say that both management and labor realize that
the final package will have to be close to the 9 percent wage settlement in the aluminum industry.

"Why strike about a settlement that

18 already known," they reason.

In the absence of a strike, these

sources estimate that it will take until the first quarter of 1972
for steel inventories to be brought back into line with final demand.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The pace of the recovery in the district appears to have
moderated recently, partly reflecting developments in the steel industry. Manufacturing activity is shewing signs of moderating, but
residential construction continues to expand more vigorously in the
district than in the nation. New car sales have rebounded at about
the same pace as in the nation, but gains in overall retail sales
have not measured up to the national performance.

Our directors re-

main pessimistic about prospects for curbing wage-push inflation.
Among the more significant recent developments in the district, the insured unemployment rate, which had been relatively steady
from late December through April, began to rise sharply in May and
was still rising as of early June.

Steel mills are already beginning

to lay off workers, and unemployment is rising noticeably in steelproducing areas, such as Pittsburgh, Wheeling, Youngstown, and Canton.
Economists from three major steel companies in the district
agreed that July would be a very poor month for their firms, even
though it is the last month prior to a labor contract expiration.
New orders have dropped in recent weeks, shipments will peak in June,
and raw steel production is being sharply reduced.

The economists

attribute at least part of the weakness in their industry to the
fact that customers placed orders for delivery before price increases
became effective on certain products (some in Mid-June and others
on July 1).

Moderating tendencies in the district's manufacturing sector
are also evident in the behavior of our indexes of manufacturing output, which have been tapering off in some metropolitan areas in recent months or have actually turned down in other areas.

Our survey

of manufacturers indicates that new orders and shipments have been
increasing at decreasing rates in recent months.

Reporting firms

expect further modest gains in new orders and shipments during June,
along with continued reductions in backlogs and inventories. The
latest survey also shows no easing in the rate of increase in prices
paid; in fact, the majority of the respondents expect the rate of inflation to accelerate somewhat in June.
Inflationary expectations remain a matter of serious concern
to some of our directors, especially in view of what they consider to
be labor's "exorbitant" wage increases.

One director noted "no in-

dustry wants to be the first to suffer a long strike in order to
break the back of labor's wage demands."

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Our regular survey of businessmen and bankers suggests no major
new trends in the Fifth District economy.

In general, responses of sur-

vey participants indicate a continuation of the gradual business recovery, with some evidence that consumer spending may be strengthening.
Retail sales, especially sales of automobiles, are reported as rising,
and banking respondents indicate sizable increases in consumer loans.
Bankers also report improved demand for other types of loans.

The con-

struction sector remains strong, and employment generally appears to
have stabilized.

Manufacturers report further increases in shipments

but little change in new orders and backlogs.
In manufacturing, a number of respondents reported an increase
in hours worked per week, and a few reported that employment was up
from the previous period.

In general, however, the responses suggest

little change in the overall employment situation.

Several respondents

commented on increased unemployment resulting from large numbers of
college and high school students temporarily entering the labor force.
Cutbacks in defense-oriented industries and installations apparently
continue to affect employment in some areas.

On balance, manufacturing

respondents Indicate a decline in inventories, although inventory levels
still appear to be higher than desired.

Two large furniture manufac-

turers reported that new orders and backlogs of orders were down from
the previous reporting period.
Construction continues to be a major source of strength in the
district economy. A majority of the banking respondents reported an

increase in both residential and nonresidential construction in their
areas.

One brick and tile company reports sales at a 15-year high, with

production running three months behind orders. A manufacturer and distributor of food products reported substantial construction of new plant
facilities in process.

One banking respondent noted a sharp increase in

apartment construction in his area, which he attributed to a rush among
contractors to get construction loan approval before anticipated interest rate increases.
The outlook for business expenditures on plant and equipment
in the district does not appear to be bright.

Most respondents indi-

cated that current plant and equipment capacity was adequate or more
than adequate.
Wildcat strikes by coal miners in Virginia and West Virginia
had a temporary effect on some local areas in the district.

But re-

spondents in most areas continue to report increases in both general
retail sales and automobile sales. A large majority of the bankers
polled indicated stepped-up consumer loan demand, with some reporting
sizable Increases in their outstandings.
District cash receipts from farm marketings during January-April
were 4 percent below those in the same period a year ago, compared with
a national decline of 3 percent.

An 8 percent decrease in district live-

stock receipts more than offset an 8 percent increase in receipts from
crops.
Respondents' opinions on the outlook for the near-term future
are mixed. Approximately one-third of the bankers in the survey expressed the opinion that the level of business activity would rise in

the Immediate future, while the remainder believed that it would remain
unchanged or decline.

Prospects for increases in business investment

in fixed plant and equipment are rated low, although respondents remain
generally optimistic about prospects for residential construction and
for consumer spending.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Reports of leading businessmen and bankers Indicate the recovery is continuing but at a slow pace.
after being optimistic.

The outlook has turned mixed,

One Alabama businessman describes the economy

of his area as continuing a slow, barely perceptible growth. Another
businessman reports growing uneasiness about the sluggishness of recovery.
Yet another speaks of a more confident atmosphere.

Announcements of

plant expansions continue, but a few plant closings and sizable layoffs
have cropped up.

Construction is strong, with some exceptions.

On balance, there is little vigor in manufacturing.

Some com-

panies in Tennessee are reported to be operating on only a four-day
week, and even then inventories are piling up. An Alabama industrialist reports that manufacturing is the "weak spot" in the Alabama
economy.

A north Florida banker, who has been reporting strong economic

gains in his vicinity, now describes activity as being on a plateau.
There have been a number of layoffs and plant closings in recent weeks.

Between 500 and 750 workers have been idled by an aluminum

company, reportedly because of stockpiling before the recent labor
negotiations. A textile mill employing 1,000 in Alabama is scheduled
to close, but an effort is underway to try to find a buyer to take over
the operation.

About 300 workers are being laid off in Alabama because

a vending machine manufacturing operation is closing.

A spinning plant

in Georgia has idled 200 and is anticipating another 200-man layoff,
allegedly because of air pollution problems and foreign competition.
An engineering firm in Tennessee is laying off 120 workers because of

reduced aerospace research and rising costs.

On the other hand, it

has been reported that some firms that did not recruit at the University of Tennessee in the spring are planning to return this fall.
New plant announcements have been slow but steady. They include an electric motor plant in Mississippi, a carpet dyeing and
finishing plant in Georgia, a mobile home plant in Georgia, a plant
to manufacture leisure wear in Tennessee, and three plants to separate
sulphur from oil produced in Alabama and Florida.

Several plant

expansions are occurring at a variety of businesses in Tennessee.
Outside of manufacturing, there are signs of economic strength.
South Florida tourist business is vigorous.

Long distance calls and

telephone installations in Alabama are increasing strongly.
has picked up in the Tampa area.

Air traffic

Retail sales are generally reported

good, with one merchant noting that consumers have started to charge
more of their purchases, presumably an indication of increased consumer
confidence.
Construction activity is generally reported to be strong.
Jackson, Mississippi, for example, is experiencing a high level of
activity, and two large motel complexes have been announced recently.
A shortage of skilled labor is anticipated in that area.

A large

residential and industrial complex has been announced for an area
northeast of Atlanta.

The northern Gulf Coast of Florida is experienc-

ing a motel and condominium building boom.
is brisk in the Auburn, Alabama, area.

Residential construction

Builders there are planning

to construct speculative houses in the $23,000 to $27,000 class because they are moving much faster than homes in the $35,000 to $45,000
class. Another residential recreation project is going to be built

on a lake in east central Alabama.
planned for St. Petersburg.

A $15 million condominium is

Counter to the generally favorable con-

struction news, condominiums are reported to be overbuilt in south
Florida, and construction is reported to be at a very low level in
Lake Charles, Louisiana, where some announced projects have not as
yet commenced.
IVo prominent businessmen report growing concern over the
inability to lick inflation.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

In the past month or so the gap between the most optimistic
and the most pessimistic forecasts of total activity for 1971 in this
district have tended to narrow, moving toward a middle ground. Prospects for either a second slide-off in activity
appear to have faded.

or a vigorous upsurge

Continuance of the gradual uptrend, dampened by

the steel inventory reduction after August 1, is now the general
expectation.
Also in recent weeks, sentiment has jelled more firmly in the
view that price inflation is not subsiding significantly, and Indeed,
may accelerate.

Inflation psychology is credited with a role in the

strengthening of long-term interest rates, which are supposed to
incorporate an allowance for the potential reduction in the purchasing power of the dollar.
Reports of purchasing agents in the Chicago area in recent
months have indicated a continued moderate rise in orders, shipments,
and inventories.
ing is evident.

Order backlogs have stopped declining, but no buildProfit margins are believed to have continued to

deteriorate on average through May.
for these firms on average.

Employment continues to edge down

Increases in prices paid to suppliers are

almost as common as a year ago, while decreases are rare.

This general

picture also is reported by certain small companies that have been good
pacesetters for general activity in the past.
The improvement in business activity largely reflects developments in consumer goods and residential construction.

In the case of

motor trucks, sales of light trucks (often really family vehicles) are

nuch stronger than sales of heavy trucks.

Demand for farm machinery

picked up in the late spring from a very low base. Among the consumer
goods for which business has improved in recent months are floor coverings, furniture, and some types of appliances, large and small.
A 142-day strike ended in mid-June at plants of a major laundry
appliance producer.

A major construction machinery producer was shut

down because of a strike at a vital parts plant.
Output of "raw steel" declined in the first half of June. Mill
shipments doubtless will be lower in July than in June, contrary to
earlier expectations. Many steel customers are said to have hedged
their requirements less fully than in prior pre-strike periods. This
may reflect both the belief that no long strike will develop, and the
fact that steel "chew-up" has failed to meet expectations.

Steel order

books for the August-September period are virtually empty.
Producers of business equipment now are highly receptive to proposals for a more open trade policy with Iron Curtain countries, even
though this means exporting technology in the form of whole plants and
systems.
Current reports on auto sales are difficult to evaluate.

Ten-

day delivery reports are strongly influenced by the timing of incentives
and other special factors.

Production for June is scheduled at a high

800,000 units, but some plants have been shut down for inventory adjustments, and closedowns for model changeovers will begin shortly.
Residential construction, of course, is booming with permits in
the Chicago area double last year's level in recent months.

Record

construction of housing for the second half of 1971 seems assured, on
the basis of existing financial commitments.

Doubts for 1972 are

lncreasing, however, partly because of the uptrend In interest rates,
and partly because of vacancy rates In some apartment areas. Breakthroughs in nodular construction of housing (union relations, etc.)
are believed to be at hand.
Grain prices have Increased sharply in the past two weeks
because of the growing corn blight scare.

Planted corn acreage is up

at least 6 percent, but the blight has now been identified, in a variety
of forms, in all district states—including the Illinois, Indiana, Iowa
Corn Belt.

Clear indication of significant damage is still lacking,

but some grain traders are gambling on a heavy crop loss.
Business loan demand is increasing more than had been expected
a few weeks ago.

Some bankers view the recent trend in loans as a

return to a more typical seasonal pattern.

Banks are more aggressive

in seeking CD money, partly because of an anticipated

further rise in

loans, but also because of a slower inflow of funds to passbook and
consumer certificate accounts.

Virtually all major banks now expect

stable, or higher, long-term interest rates.

Continued heavy total

demand for funds, growth in the monetary aggregates, and continued price
inflation are offered as reasons for this view.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Businessmen in the Eighth District indicate that the upward
economic trend of recent months is continuing and they are "reasonably
optimistic" about business prospects for the rest of the year.

However,

many businessmen expressed concern that inflation will continue unabated.
Retail and manufacturing sales, production, and construction continue
their upward advance from the autumn trough.

Financial agencies are

pessimistic as to loan demand, but report that they must continue to
pay high rates for funds in order to attract savings.

The outlook for

agriculture and related industries is more promising now that weather
conditions have improved.
Representatives of major retail outlets in the district report
continuing increases in sales.

Some feel that the recent rise in sales

volume reflects a less apprehensive consumer attitude with respect to
the economy.

None Indicated a relaxation of the more stringent inven-

tory policies initiated last year, despite their belief that sales will
continue to be strong through the fall.
The trend of manufacturing sales and production remains basically
unchanged from last month. Manufacturing respondents indicate employment is holding steady and foresee no significant increase in hirings
in the near future.

The machine tool business still has not recovered

from its recent slump.
Business investment continues to rise slowly, and respondents
indicate that investment this year will be slightly above last year's
dollar volume but less in real terms.

Both residential and industrial construction continue to expand
throughout the district.

Construction in St. Louis county, the largest

county in the district, set a record in the first five months of this
year, according to the public works director.

Total construction in

the first five months of this year reached $81 million, exceeding the
previous record set in 1969 by $5 million and the 1970 total by $26
million.

Housing construction is likewise reported to be vigorous

in other metropolitan areas of the district.
Loan demand has apparently lagged behind other economic indicators in the Eighth District.

The decline in business loan demand

at commercial banks, which began last December, seems to have ended.
However, no substantial increase in commercial loan demand is expected
until the end of the third quarter.

One respondent stated that the

prime rate is too low in light of the high rates paid on deposits,
and anticipates raising the prime rate in the near future.
Despite the rise in construction, loanable funds at savings
and loan associations in the St. Louis area continue to be available
with little change in interest rates. This is due to the extremely
rapid flow of deposits into these institutions in recent months.
One savings and loan association official expressed concern about the
possibility of higher market interest rates, which in view of the
ceiling on rates paid, may lead to a slower rate of growth in deposits.
The outlook for agriculture and farm-related business has
picked up in recent weeks.

The earlier adverse weather conditions,

which required many crops to be replanted, have generally improved,
and farmers are now more optimistic.
were reported.

Increased agri-business sales

Herbicide sales were especially strong, in part re-

flecting increased crop acreage.

Progress of government efforts to curb inflation has been disappointing to most respondents.

They are concerned about recent large

wage settlements which they feel set dangerous precedents for future
wage negotiations.

Many businessmen expressed concern about the recent

acceleration in the rate of growth of the money stock.

One respondent

stated that this rapid growth of money will cause inflation to be an
"uncomfortable yoke for some time to come."

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Although directors of this bank have not experienced any significant increases in wholesale prices in their businesses over the past
month, they are not optimistic in expectations of future costs and prices.
Capital spending plans among district businessmen, while still relatively
bearish, do not seem to have changed since the beginning of the year.
Retailers did not experience any significant rise in consumer spending
in the past few weeks but are still optimistic in their sales forecasts.
Meanwhile, tourist activity, which is beginning to expand seasonally,
is expected to rise about 6 to 10 percent this year over last.
Contrary to what would be expected because of the significant
rise in the wholesale price index during May, the directors of this bank
were generally unaware of any significant price changes in their businesses
over the past month. Among industries with recent price increases are
packaging materials, wholesale groceries, construction, and raw materials
used in manufacturing heavy equipment.

A number of directors, however,

were able to cite cases where prices had actually declined over the past
month—most notably, ready-to-wear clothing and apparel industries. One
director felt that these recent reductions, primarily caused by an increase in foreign competition, were large enough so that retail clothing
prices this summer will not be higher than they were last year. Wholesale cattle prices also have slipped in the past few weeks.
The directors did not view these recent price reductions as
indications of curtailment in inflation; the prevailing opinion still
seems to be that prices will continue to rise.

In the construction

indusCry, for example, Increases in steel are expected later on this
summer, and another general round of price rises are anticipated after
January 1 of next year.

One director, who is the president of a utilities

firm, said that, "purchasing agents, with few exceptions, continue to
think of rather large price increases as a way of life. When anticipating
future outlays, the big question is whether to build in expected cost
increases of 7 to 10 percent."
Manufacturers in the Ninth District apparently have not changed
their expectations regarding capital spending plans.

Investment through-

out the district is at a reduced level, but this is the result of decisions made as early as 1969 and not because area businessmen have recently reduced their anticipations.
Consumer spending has not changed in the past few weeks, although
retailers continue to be optimistic.

The directors felt that auto sales

in the district were doing a little better than earlier in the year,
despite a tendency for consumers to buy lower-priced units. Department
store sales also appear to have picked up, largely because of the recent
changes in fashions.
It is still early in the season, yet tourist operators throughout the district are already expecting an increase in summer tourist
travel.

A number of directors have noticed a significant increase in

campers and trailers on the road, and advance reservations at resorts
and motels suggest that tourist activity in the district will rise about
6 to 10 percent this year.
Mortgage interest rates in the Twin Cities have become slightly
more restrictive in the past few weeks. Whereas government-insured
mortgages in the Twin Cities were down to around 7 percent plus 2 points

to the seller as recently as a month ago, a minimum of 3 points is now
being charged to the seller.

A number of lenders also have raised

conventional mortgage rates to 7 3/4 percent from the 7 1/2 percent
which prevailed three weeks ago.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CIT?

According Co a survey of bank directors and other area businessmen, economic activity in the Tenth District is continuing to proceed at
a moderate pace.

Consumer spending remains steady, while construction

activity continues to be quite buoyant.

The employment situation is

still rather soft, and no marked improvement is expected during the
summer months.

Farm income in the district is expected to Improve

somewhat over the months ahead due to a firming of farm prices and a
larger volume of farm marketings. However, the prospect of firm prices
at the farm level, together with anticipated increases in marketing and
processing costs in the food industry, suggest that food prices will
increase in the period ahead. With respect to prices in general, most
respondents expressed concern over the continuation of strong inflationary expectations and felt that the current upward movement in prices
would not be moderated significantly throughout the year.
Retail sales in the district are generally advancing at about
last year's pace or slightly better. A variable pattern exists within
the district, with retail sales showing good growth in Denver, while
the rate of increase of sales in Omaha, Oklahoma City, and Kansas City
is reported to be not much different from a year ago.
Residential and nonresidential construction activity is still
generally vigorous throughout the district.

Building activity remains

quite strong in Denver, Tulsa, and Oklahoma City, but heavy construction has slowed somewhat in Omaha.

In Kansas City, home builders

expressed concern that the recent rise in interest rates night act as
a depressant to future building activity.
Ihe employment picture is still less than satisfactory as many
reports indicate a large shortage of summer jobs. However, wage demands
of organized labor remain high.

In Denver, operating engineers and

teaneters settled with the concrete mix firms for an 18 percent wage
increase during the first year of their contract and a 38 percent increase over the next three years.
District cash receipts from farm marketings in the first quarter
of 1971 were up slightly over the same period of last year.

Crop re-

ceipts accounted for all of the gain, as livestock receipts fell somewhat below year-earlier levels.

During the remainder of this year,

livestock receipts in the district are expected to rise moderately
above year-ago levels due to the likelihood of a larger volume of fed
cattle marketings, and to stronger prices resulting from increased
consumer demand for beef and a cutback in U. S. pork production.

Crop

receipts for the rest of the year also may show improvement over yearago levels.

The recent decision by the President to rescind shipping

restrictions on grain exports to Communist Bloc countries is expected
to lend support to grain prices. However, feed grain prices may fluctuate widely until fall in view of the uncertainty about the impact
of the corn blight disease.
The net result of these anticipated changes in livestock and
crop prices suggests that the index of prices received by farmers will
likely remain firm in the months ahead.

If this analysis is correct,

further rises in food prices are indicated, as higher marketing and
processing costs in the food industry seem certain. Hopefully, food

prices will not rise as much as the 5 percent Increase posted last
year.
Loans at district banks continue to grow at the moderate pace
o£ recent months. Construction and consumer loan demand remain strong,
while business loan demand was most often described as "steady" or
"up slightly."

The recent move toward a higher prime rate by some

banks in the nation was not unexpected by district bankers, most of
whom thought that interest rates would continue to climb somewhat in
the months ahead, with the prime rate being about 6 percent at year
end.
Deposit inflows remain strong at district banks, particularly
in the category of consumer time and savings accounts.

Only a slight

rise was reported in the larger denomination time and savings accounts,
as banks appear to be adjusting the rates they pay on these deposits
only enough to prevent outflows and not to attract new funds.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The economy in the Southwest is still somewhat weaker than a
year ago in the opinion of economic analysts with the Southwest regional office of the U. S. Department of Labor and with the district
states' Labor Commissions. However, a slim majority felt that the
situation would improve by year end.

But these analysts generally did

not expect the current rate of inflation to change much by year end.
Most expect area prices to increase about the same as nationally, and
for these price increases to be mainly in consumer durables and services.

In addition, they also anticipate moderate increases in both

short and long interest rates over the balance of the year.
Most of the respondents view the present level of employment
as about the same as it was at the end of last year. But a few analysts
reporting on New Mexico and Oklahoma felt that the situation has worsened in their states.

About half indicated that the unemployment

problem in their region was concentrated in relatively few areas.
Counties with defense Industries or Indian reservations

and counties

in southwestern New Mexico and in southern Texas are feeling the pinch
in particular.

For the district as a whole, defense-related industries

were cited as industries in which unemployment problems were most severe. However, a number of other industries were also reported as suffering high unemployment in the different district states, including
transportation equipment, electrical equipment, general services, and
construction.

Moreover, the outlook £or employment in the Southwest is not
particularly promising.

Only about half of the respondents felt that

the situation would improve somewhat by year end, with the others
anticipating no change or some further increase in unemployment.

Also,

everyone thought the outlook for summer employment is particularly
bleak.
Those that expected some improvement in the unemployment situation felt that it would be selective, likely to occur principally in
construction, manufacturing, trade, and state and local governments.
Those anticipating no change or a worsening in unemployment emphasized
the anticipated growth in the labor force.

They pointed out that the

labor force had increased substantially since a year ago, reflecting
in part returning veterans, entering youth, and migration.

Moreover,

it is anticipated that virtually every labor category, with the exceptions of unskilled and agricultural labor, will increase between now
and year end.
Most did feel, however, that the impact of unemployment had
fallen less on minority groups in past months than it had in other periods of economic slowdown.

But they thought that the outlook for minor-

ity group employment was no better or worse than that for workers as a
whole.
District economic indicators available since the last issue of
the Red Book continue to evidence a mild upturn.

Registrations of new

passenger cars in Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio were 8
percent lower in May than in April, but continued to be 9 percent greater
than the same period a year ago.

Department store sales were 9 percent

hlgher in the four weeks ended June 12 than for the corresponding period
a year before, and 8 percent higher on a cumulative basis this year than
for the same period last year.

The Texas Railroad Commission, however,

reduced Texas oil production allowables from June's allowable of 75.4
to a factor of 68.7 percent for July.

New Mexico also cut her produc-

tion allowable for her southeast fields from 80 barrels to 70 barrels
a day per well.
Agricultural conditions in the Eleventh District remain somewhat precarious.

Recent rains have failed to totally break the drought

in Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, and arrived too late to aid the
small grain crops.

Range and cattle conditions in the four western

states remain substantially below the ten-year average due to drought
stress. The outlook depends largely on the adequacy of water supplies,
both irrigation and rainfall.

Arizona and New Mexico both face possible

water shortages, but at this time
trict are progressing well.

irrigated crops throughout the dis-

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Economic activity is continuing to expand moderately according
to reports from bankers and businessmen in the Twelfth District.

Some

sectors, such as lumber and plywood, are experiencing an expansion in
demand, while other industries, particularly aerospace, are facing the
prospect of further declines.

Consumer spending is a source of support,

being generally about 10 percent higher than the same period a year ago.
Demand for bank loans is also reported as higher in most areas.
Retail sales are growing at a reasonable rate in most areas of
the district.

There are variations between areas, but a 10 percent

gain over last year is common.

Part of this increase is due to higher

prices, but much is due to vigorous promotional efforts.

In the

Seattle-Tacoma area, aggressive sales efforts by local department
stores have stimulated more buying, despite the continued low level
of local business generally.

Similarly in southern California, the

larger chain stores through heavy promotion are managing to increase
sales, while smaller merchants are having difficulty even in maintaining sales levels.

Sales of large appliances are showing only

a slight improvement, with consumers remaining cautious and buying
selectively.
Automobile sales reflect this mixed picture.

In total, sales

are somewhat higher, but not all types of cars are doing equally well.
The greatest increases are being registered by domestic compact and
foreign cars.

In one southern California market, foreign cars make up

40 percent of the total.

Full-sized cars are not doing well.

In

consequence, car sales are described variously as "slow" or "lagging" by
some, and as showing a "marked increase" by others. Many buyers
apparently have been turning to used cars, for which the demand seems
to be quite strong.
The construction market is continuing to expand, especially
for new residential housing.

One Oregon banker described housing

as "a bright spot on the horizon." The demand for mortgage loans remains strong, although mortgage rates have risen approximately 1/4
percent, and further rises might occur.

Commercial construction is

also strong in such areas as San Francisco.

On the other hand, rising

construction costs caused one large food processing company to hold
back on planned capital expenditures.
Industrial activity continues to show weakness.

In southern

California, there is concern over the decline of the aerospace industry.
Prospective strikes in the steel, copper, and metal industries are
also a dampening influence for some manufacturers.

A large oil company

has experienced a smaller sales volume in recent months, with lack of
demand for gasoline and jet fuels being most Important in lowering
sales. However, this company expects that the projected recovery
of the economy in the second half of this year will stimulate gasoline
sales.
In contrast, higher lumber and plywood prices have been stimulating the timber industry in Oregon and Washington.
are also good prospects in district agriculture.

Similarly, there

Cattle prices are

holding up, and in Oregon the weather has been favorable for most
crops.

The overall expansion in the economy is apparent in the rising
demand for loans.

Bankers throughout the district report stronger

demand for most categories of loans—business, personal, and mortgage.
Mortgage rates are somewhat higher, and many banks report paying
higher rates on time deposits in both the CD and open-account categories.

Some expect a higher prime rate.

Some banks also are taking

actions to restrict loans, screening loans more closely and setting
more restrictions on future mortgage commitments.

Therefore, despite

weakness in some areas and industries, demand for finance is higher
as a reflection of the gradual expansion of the district economy.

