CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

August 18, 1971

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 13
Sixth District-Atlanta page 15
Seventh District-Chicago page 18
Eighth District-St. Louis page 21
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 23
Tenth District-Kansas City page 26
Eleventh District-Dallas page 30
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 33

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.]
According to the Reserve banks' reports, the economic recovery
still appears to be proceeding quite slowly in most districts, with the
industrial sector particularly sluggish.

Strikes and strike-related

effects have further dampened economic activity in some districts.
The slow pace of the expansion has not yet generated renewed inventory
accumulation.
in others.

Retail sales are rising in some districts, but are slowing

The brightest spot continues to be residential construction.

No improvement was noted in the employment situation.

Prior to the

President's imposition of the wage-price freeze, the bank reports
indicated no slackening in the pace of inflation.

In the financial

sector, all the banks reported that business loan demand was slack and
that flows into consumer savings accounts had slowed noticeably.

Only

three banks included reports on the reactions in their districts to
the President's new economic policies.

Initial reactions were highly

favorable.
Durable goods manufacturing appears to be the most sluggish
sector.

The Boston, Richmond and Cleveland banks reported that new

orders are weak in capital goods industries and backlogs are shrinking.
The St. Louis bank noted that while orders are quite low for steel and
durable goods manufacturers, nondurable goods producers are optimistic.
A number of banks mentioned that suppliers to the construction industry
were experiencing very good sales.
The construction sector is reported as booming in all districts
except New York.

Nonresidential building, as well as housing starts,

was robust in a number of districts.

The San Francisco bank reported

that residential construction is providing the principal stimulus
to the district's economy.

Heavy construction activity was cited as

a major reason for low unemployment in several areas within the
Atlanta district.
Half the banks reported that retail sales were rising in
their districts.

The San Francisco bank, however, noted that retail

sales were only holding steady and the Atlanta bank reported that
sales have moderated recently.

In the New York district, retail

sales varied from trendless to slowing.
There does not appear to be any strengthening of inventory
spending.

The Richmond bank reported a substantial increase in the

number of manufacturing firms decreasing inventories and that both
trade and manufacturing inventories were still at higher than desired
levels.

Inventory cuts by industrial firms were also expected in the

Cleveland district.

Sluggish retail sales were cited by the San

Francisco bank as restraining inventory investment.

The St. Louis

bank reported that steel producers expect steel inventories to be
run down over the next six months, depressing their production levels.
The Cleveland bank reported the beginning of coal stockpiling in anticipation of an October strike in the coal industry.
Strikes and strike-related effects were depressing economic
activity in several districts.

Coal mining areas in the Richmond

district have been hurt by the rail strike and the slowdown in the
steel industry.

The copper strike is reported to have affected

economic activity in Maryland, Utah and Arizona.

The San Francisco

bank noted that the rail strikes especially hurt shipments of agricultural
products, while the dock strike is affecting a widening number of
industrial and agricultural producers in the twelfth district.
No improvement in the employment situation was noted by any
of the Reserve baiks.

The employment situation was described as unchanged

by the Richmond, Dallas, and Chicago banks and as weak by the Minneapolis
bank.

The Chicago, Cleveland and New York banks reported high unemploy-

ment in steel producing areas, with layoffs continuing during early
August.
Continued inflation at recent rates was mentioned by a number
of banks.

The Atlanta and Dallas banks reported that retail prices

were expected to continue increasing at recent rates.

A survey of

purchasing managers by the Kansas City bank (made before the President's
August 15 speech) found concern about the near-term prospects for
any slowing in the rate of inflation.

In the Minneapolis and Cleveland

districts, concern was reported over the inflationary effects of the
steel settlement and announced steel price increases.

The Minneapolis

bank reported that a number of price and cost increases have already
been instituted as a result of the steel price hikes.
In the financial sector, the demand for business loans was
generally reported as sluggish.

The Richmond, San Francisco and Chicago

banks, however, reported either good or improving demand for business
loans in sections of their districts.

Most banks also reported a

considerable slowing in the growth of time and savings deposits.
Fears of disintermediation were mentioned by the Kansas City, Chicago
and Atlanta banks.

Only a few banks contacted their respondents after the
President's speech.

Philadelphia reported that directors, bankers

and businessmen in the third district, while surprised at the magnitude
of the policy changes, were overwhelmingly in favor of them.

Businessmen

noted problems in implementing the wage-price freeze, but their general
mood was one of cooperation and optimism.

Initial reaction in the

Chicago district among bankers and businessmen was also generally
favorable.
for comment.

Only one bank director in the Boston district was available
He was very enthusiastic about the new policies, although

he noted some problems in implementation for banks.

As a result of the

President's speech, the Boston bank's academic respondents were generally
encouraged by the prospects for breaking inflationary expectations and
achieving a more stable international monetary system.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The economic recovery appears to be very weak in most business
areas, but especially in the capital goods industries.
Most of our directors reported no change from the sluggish business
outlook that they had reported last month.

Industries like precision bearings,

superalloys, and machine tools which are tied to investment spending are still
very weak, backlogs are shrinking and new orders are either not higher or only
slightly higher than a year ago.
declining as are backlogs.

Similarly, military aerospace orders are

Orders for commercial aircraft engines are also

being stretched out or in some cases cancelled.

Products connected with the

housing industry, like gas meters, are doing very well.

The settlement of

construction labor contracts has also opened up business for a supplier in
the nonresidential building market.
Consumer sales continue to be the best business area.

A conglomerate

manufacturer of a large variety of consumer goods reports sales up 10 to 11
percent from last year.
strong.
rise.

Products for the home sewing market are particularly

As a result of rising sales volume, inventories are being allowed to
Of all the directors spoken to, this was the only indication of an

easier inventory policy.

And even this director stated that in other lines

of his business, inventories were being kept at low levels.
Despite the moderate rate of domestic auto sales, tire sales are
doing very well as a result of a good pickup in demand for replacement tires
and production of the 1972 models.

This supplier to the auto industry was the

only director to mention that business had been affected by the rail strikes
in July.

Lack of supplies caused his company to close 3 of its 6 plants for

up to a week at the end of July.

Another pessimistic note for domestic auto sales:

a Ford dealer

in our district, who had the second largest sales of any Ford dealer in the
nation, gave up his franchise in July because "he saw the handwriting on the
wall" for domestic autos.
A bank director reported that while the bank is flush with deposits a 20 percent gain over last year - the only demand for funds is for mortgages.
Both business and consumer instalment lending is very sluggish.
Of our academic respondents, only Paul Samuelson and Eli Shapiro
were available for interviews before the President's speech.

According to

Professor Samuelson, the most discouraging aspect of the present economic
situation was the stubborness of, almost the re-ignition of, the cost-push,
administered price inflation.

Samuelson emphasized strongly that it was a

seller's inflation, not associated with a too rapid growth of real output.
Some kind of incomes policy was urgently needed.

"Whatever it is, I'm for it."

Eli Shapiro was opposed to the President's doing more than his recent increased
willingness to jawbone by periodically showing his alarm.
is administratively too difficult to be effective.

To do more, he argued,

On inflation, Shapiro viewed

the evidence as extremely mixed.
Samuelson described the behavior of real output as "anemic."

He

expected its future path to run at or below the "fashionable forecasts."

He

found some encouragement in the 5.8 percent July unemployment figure, but was
worried about the effect of the steel layoffs on the August rate.
attached little importance to the July figure.

Shapiro

Anticipating a "good" fourth

quarter, he expected unemployment to peak in the third quarter.

By a good

fourth quarter, he explained, he meant a real growth rate of at least 4 percent
and perhaps as high as 5 percent.
Shapiro believed monetary growth rates of 10 to 11 percent ran a

substantial risk of encouraging inflation.
direction of a 6 percent rate of growth.

He advocated moving in the

Feeling no need for additional

monetary or fiscal stimulus, Shapiro's basic policy position was to give the
present policy course a little more time.
Although we tried to contact all our respondents again after the
President's talk, only Samuelson, Shapiro and one bank director were available
to comment on the President's new economic policies.
the President's policies were "exciting and radical."

The bank director felt
He hoped that the

meetings in September would turn into another Bretton Woods and that a new
international monetary system would emerge which would 1) control Eurodollar
movements and 2) not entail a return to gold.

He foresaw some difficulty in

administering rates for non-prime rate borrowers but concluded that the controls
must be supported and made to work because this is the only policy we have left
to fight inflation.
The response of monetary authorities to the Administration's new
economic plans should be analogous to what it was during the Penn Central crisis,
Professor Samuelson said.

Their role must be to assure everybody that there will

be no credit, and no quality of credit, crisis.

For the immediate future, the

next 90 days to six months, the aim of a 6 percent rate of growth in monetary
aggregates may be appropriate, though the Fed should not be preoccupied with any
fixed figure and should be prepared to go to 8 to 11 percent.

Samuelson noted

that the flexibility of exchange rates creates new freedom for interest rates
and that the housing market may benefit in the future from the new freedom.
Shapiro emphasized the announcement effects of the recent Presidential actions:

the wage-price freeze, "the firmest form of jawboning," would

help to break inflationary expectations, inducing more consumption out of a
given level of spendable income; the tax reductions and import tax will stimulate

auto sales and business fixed investment, while discouraging imports; and the
suspension of convertibility is "a measure of our earnestness" that this
Administration is tired of debating the adjustment process and reform must
occur in September.

He anticipated that the dollar will open at a discount

but will recover and that some form of wage-price regulations must persist
through the summer of 1972.

The new stimulus reconfirmed Shapiro's earlier

view that the Federal Reserve can move toward a 6 percent growth rate in the
money supply.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The pessimism regarding the economic outlook that had been
expressed by the directors of the New York Bank and of the Buffalo
Branch last month was still evident, and perhaps intensified, this
month (before the Administration announced its new measures).

In

general, the assessment was for no significant change in consumer attitudes,
while some directors believed there had been an actual scaling back of
buying intentions; business inventory spending was not expected to
strengthen in the near future; no noticeable improvement in labor
market conditions was foreseen and most of the directors felt that a
general economic upturn would gain momentum later than had been
generally expected.
Concerning consumer spending, the Buffalo Branch directors
viewed retail sales activity as relatively better than a year ago,
but with no discernible trend either up or down.

The New York

Branch directors were somewhat more pessimistic.

A director from

Rochester had had recent discussions with a cross section of New York
City department store executives, who reported a slowdown in consumer
spending in recent weeks and were generally pessimistic regarding the
immediate future.

The chairman of the board of a nationwide manufac-

turing concern believed that consumers were exhibiting caution and
more selectivity regarding both price and quality, and saw consumer
reluctance showing up particularly in discretionary spending, such as
that for travel.

Other directors also thought there had been a

scaling back in consumer buying plans.

One director, the president of an upstate New York bank,
commented on construction activities.

He referred to the recent

experience, which he felt was fairly typical, of a general contractor
in his area who builds schools, factories and other nonresidential
structures.

This contractor, after many years of good business, now

had few orders, a development that the contractor attributed to high
construction costs, particularly wages.
With respect to business inventory spending, several
directors expressed the opinion that such outlays would continue to
be sluggish, largely because of more stringent inventory controls as
part of cost-reduction programs.
No noticeable change in the unemployment picture was expected
by the Buffalo Branch directors.

They believed that layoffs in the

steel industry would offset employment increases in the auto industry
and in seasonal construction.
All the Buffalo directors expressed concern about the expected
further erosion of the steel industry's competitive position in both
foreign and domestic markets as a result of the recent steel wage and
price developments.
Regarding this country's foreign trade in general, the
Rochester merchant who is on the New York board noted that sales of
imported goods have been increasing steadily.

Another director

expressed the opinion that the continued deterioration in this
country's exports was due chiefly to high prices resulting from high
labor costs, while a third director found our recent adverse trade
balance surprising, since European countries were also experiencing
a high rate of inflation.

To assess recent developments and expectations for the next
two months, in commercial bank savings and cons timer-type time deposits
and in loan demands, nine District Banks were contacted August 11-13,
five in New York and four out of town.

The majority of the banks

reported that the strong increase in their deposits in the first
five or six months of this year had been replaced by a "slow attrition,"
and most of them expected the attrition to continue or the rate of
advance to flatten out.

At a majority of the banks, demand for com-

mercial and industrial loans had been "weak" or "lusterless" recently,
and the banks expected only seasonal fluctuations over the coming
months.
As regards the general business outlook, all the directors,
both of the New York Bank and the Buffalo Branch, were relatively
pessimistic concerning near-term developments, with some directors
noting that they thought a strong upturn would take longer than they
had previously anticipated.

Several directors expressed (before

President Nixon's August 15 address) a lack of confidence in the
Administration's economic program.

THIRD DISTRICT—PHILADELPHIA

President Nixon's shift in economic policy has been well
received by directors, bankers and businessmen in the Third District.
Most however, expressed surprise at the comprehensiveness and magnitude
of the policy changes.

Some businessmen candidly admitted that the wage-

price freeze will cause management problems they had not consciously
thought much about previously; nonetheless, the general mood appears to
be one of "cooperating" rather than "complaining."
The reaction to the President's speech has been overwhelmingly
favorable in the Third District.

Typical of some of the responses are!

"Delighted to hear it," "Best thing we have had so far," and "Necessary."
The general feeling is that the new policy actions will go a long way
towards restoring confidence in the economy.

One large retailer said he

believes consumers would be spending more because of the psychological
uplift.

A banker reported that his board of directors gave the "go ahead"

to a new building in light of the President's actions.

Several manu-

facturers indicated that the size of the proposed investment tax credit
would cause them to review their capital spending plans.

Another banker

predicted that interest rates would go down because inflationary
expectations will likely subside.
Although many people we contacted felt the President "had to do
something," few anticipated the extent and boldness of his actions.

Most

expected some additional stimulative measures from the fiscal side; but
not including something like revocation of auto excise taxes.

Likewise,

some form of wage-price restraint seemed probable to them, but not an all-

out freeze.

Also, the few who had had time to think about the floating

dollar and excise tax on imports were stunned.
Several executives, although previously advocating wage and
price restraints, said they really had not thought much about the management headaches they would face in the event of a freeze.
they said, are now coming into sharper focus.

These problems,

But, despite the confusion

and headaches they believe lie ahead, the general mood is one of
cooperation and optimism.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The general theme of the remarks of our directors at meetings
of the Cincinnati Branch board on August 9 and of the Cleveland board
held on August 12, was that there is strengthening in some areas of
the economy, but that the pace of activity in the industrial sector
generally remains sluggish.

Concern was expressed about the persistent

inflationary pressures and about the effect that recent wage settlements
can be expected to have on prices.

Several directors reported that, in

contrast to their domestic experience, demand for their products in
international markets has remained extremely strong.
The particular areas of strength cited by the directors were
in housing-related glass products and auto-related products.
tires has remained particularly strong for several months.

Demand for
One director

noted some recent signs of strength in the firm's consumer-oriented
products, and another director reported an increase in sales of glassware and plastic products at the retail level, reflecting the fact that
retailers have completed their inventory reductions in recent months and
are now buying from the company once again.

Another director commented

that coal sales, which have been depressed for several months, picked
up recently as major coal users began some stockpiling in anticipation
of a possible strike in that industry (the union contract terminates
on September 30).

The consensus of our directors was the demand for

almost all kinds of capital goods has remained sluggish, reflecting the
lackluster performance of the economy.

Particular areas of weakness cited

were machine tools, computers, and railway equipment.

The directors remain seriously concerned about inflation and
inflationary expectations, and particularly about the effects that the
settlement in the steel industry would have on prices, and about the
built-in inflationary effect that the cost-of-living escalators will
have in the future.
Results of our August 16 survey of District manufacturers
corroborate the views of our industrial directors regarding the sluggish pace of manufacturing activity.

On balance, firms are experiencing

no improvement in new orders, and they are still working down their
backlogs.

Employment and hours are both being reduced.

Inventory

reduction is expected to be particularly heavy in August, as the
largest percentage of firms since 1967 anticipate a cutback in stocks.
The steel industry, of course, is exerting a major dampening
influence on the District's economy.

Insured unemployment rose sharply

during July with the District's rate up 0.7 of a percentage point between
the first and last weeks of the month (compared with a 0.2 point rise in
the nation).

During the first two weeks of August, the steel industry

was continuing to lay off workers.

Among the steel industry economists

we contacted, one expressed the belief that unemployment in his industry
is currently at its peak.

But he added that some workers are on vacation,

and it is not known how many could be placed on layoff status (thereby
raising unemployment) when the vacations run out.

Another steel

industry economist thought there would be further layoffs, especially
among white collar workers in the industry.

Estimates of steel production

in August call for a seasonally adjusted decline (from the July level)
ranging between 36 percent and 46 percent.

One economist said August

could be the lowest shipping month for the industry, excluding strike
years, since 1939.
On the financial side, several banker-directors reported
strong loan demand in recent weeks.

One director, associated with

a large bank, reported that loan commitments were up considerably
from a year ago, with part of the increase in real estate and part in
the commercial and industrial category.

This director also pointed

out that the increased cost of funds to the banking system will keep
upward pressure on the prime rate for the near term.
A telephone survey of large banks in the District revealed
that most banks have observed a more-than-seasonal slowdown in consumertype time and savings inflows.
slow slightly further.

Bankers expect the rate of growth to

Most banks also expect little near-term

improvement from the year old sluggish condition of business loan
demand.

Large loans to large customers are expected to remain flat,

in part because of the expectation that funding of corporate debt will
continue.

Some banks have had requests for increases in contractual

revolving lines of credit, apparently reflecting business attempts to
improve liquidity.

But the banks did not expect the increased credit

lines to be drawn upon-

FIFTH DISTRICT—RICHMOND

Our latest survey of businessmen and bankers suggests an
extension of the recent moderate pace of business recovery, although the
manufacturing sector may have weakened slightly in the recent past.

Con-

struction activity continues robust, bankers report strong loan demand,
and retail sales are apparently continuing the recent upward trend.

But

manufacturing respondents indicate a sluggish pace of shipments, new
orders, and backlogs.

Little or no change is reported in the level of

employment or of prices.
Survey responses indicate that District manufacturers have
experienced no change in the level of shipments since the last reporting
period.

The diffusion of responses suggests some decline in both new

orders and backlogs.

Also, there was a substantial increase in the number

of firms reporting a decline in inventories.

Nevertheless, manufacturers

believe that current levels of inventories are high relative to desired
levels.

The rail strike and the slowdown in the steel industry have

apparently exerted a dampening effect on District industrial activity,
especially in the coal mining areas of West Virginia and Virginia.

Also,

a strike in the copper industry closed down a large copper producing
plant in Maryland.
Respondents indicate further increases in retail sales.

A

majority of banking respondents reported that automobile sales had increased in their areas.

Our latest survey, however, shows consumer loans

rising at a somewhat slower pace than in June and early July.

As in the

case of manufacturers, trade inventories are also considered larger than
desired.

Little change is evident in the District employment situation.
The majority of respondents reported that employment remained the same in
their areas, and the number reporting decreases in employment was
approximately equal to the number reporting increases.

The survey

indicates that District firms, especially the trades and services group,
are still experiencing upward wage pressures.
Strong demand for loans of all types is still apparent in the
District.

The number of banking respondents reporting increased demand

for business and mortgage loans was larger than it was in the previous
survey.

District bankers report some recent weakness in consumer savings

deposits but attribute this weakness entirely to seasonal factors.
Respondents report continued strength in residential and nonresidential construction.

Several mentioned specifically a sizeable

increase in construction of apartment buildings while others noted that
commercial and industrial construction was exercising a favorable impact
on business in a number of areas.

Some areas are also apparently

benefiting from new interstate highway construction.
District cash receipts from farm marketings during JanuaryMay were three percent below those a year earlier.

Crop production

prospects on August 1 were generally higher than a year ago.
The banking community remains mildly optimistic regarding prospects for the immediate future, although somewhat fewer respondents
expect further improvement than was the case in our July survey.
Generally, the consensus among both bankers and other businessmen appears
to be that recovery will continue at the recent moderate pace.

SIXTH DISTRICT—ATLANTA

This report is based on three special surveys, all of which were
concluded prior to the President's speech of August 15.

The surveys in-

dicate that businessmen, bankers, and retailers expect slow growth and
inflation in the coming months.

The retail sales outlook is mediocre,

partly because of uncertainty among consumers.

A slowing in the growth

of consumer time and savings deposits is expected to continue.

Business

loan demand is reported moderate, and no strong upswing is foreseen.
In the past few weeks, a survey was made of businessmen and
bankers located in areas experiencing either high or low unemployment.
Businessmen located in areas experiencing high unemployment cite defense
and aerospace layoffs, sluggish manufacturing growth, poor consumer
sentiment, and rapidly growing labor forces as causes of high unemployment.

In only one of the surveyed areas, Miami, did an interviewee anticipate

substantial improvement in economic conditions during the next few months.
On the other hand, none of those surveyed expect their economies to
deteriorate further in the near future.

In Miami, a large increase in

consumer liquidity was mentioned as the source of a potential consumer
spending boom.

A banker in another high unemployment area, however,

thought that it would take a great turnaround in consumer sentiment to
dislodge s avings.
Businessmen and bankers in low unemployment areas cite either
construction booms or a stable economic base as a reason for low unemployment.

In areas such as Jackson, Mississippi; Macon, Georgia; and

Jacksonville, Florida, a surge in construction is leading strong economic
advances.

Such stable employers as state governments and universities

are cited as reasons for low unemployment in other areas.

None of the

interviewees from low unemployment areas foresee significant changes in
the prosperous conditions of their local economies during the next few
months.
A sampling of retailers indicates that sales increases have
moderated recently and that price markups continue.
sales gains are anticipated for the fall.
"on target."

Inventories are reportedly

Price increases from suppliers continue but not at an

accelerating rate.
brisk pace.

Only modest retail

Retail price increases are expected to continue at a

As a result of the steel price increase, a rather large price

increase is anticipated for appliances.
Bankers through the District are detecting a slight slowing in the
growth of consumer time and savings deposits.

The growth of 90-day

maturity deposits—often called golden savings—has held up better than
the growth of passbook savings and CD's.

The slower growth of consumer

time deposits was mentioned as a reason for aggressive bidding for large
negotiable CD's.

One major bank in the District has increased its

negotiable CD's—as a result of a concerted effort—by more than 60 percent since May.
Bankers cannot agree upon the reasons for the slower growth in
consumer time deposits.

Several bankers think it is because of the rise

in market interest rates, especially as reflected in the AT&T preferred
issue and the latest Treasury refunding.

Other banks feel that consumers

are becoming increasingly aware of the higher rates paid by S&L's.

Others

cannot explain the slower time deposits growth, only noting that the
accumulation of consumer deposits in the last year has been very large.

Most of the banks interviewed expect the slower growth in consumer time
and savings deposits to continue.

There are some fears of disinter-

mediation, especially when 5 3/4 percent, two-year CD's mature early
next year.

Banks in several areas are expecting time and savings deposits

to be used to pay private school tuition next month.
No substantial change in the strength of business loan demand
is expected in the next few months.

One banker reports that businesses

would like to enter into term loans with seven-to-eight-year maturities.
This banker said he was reluctant to make such loans, but when he did,
the loans always contained a variable rate clause.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Initial reaction of Seventh District bankers and businessmen to
the wage-price freeze and other actions and proposals of the Administration
announced on August 15 appears to have been generally favorable.

Producers

of motor vehicles and business equipment are especially pleased, mainly
because of proposed tax changes.

An academic economist with a wide

following, however, called the freeze "cosmetic rather than therapeutic,"
but the more common reaction is that the Nation's economic problems—the
wage-price spiral, unemployment, and the trade balance—were not diminishing,
and that strong words and actions were needed.

Sentiment is bolstered,

perhaps only temporarily, by the thought that "something is being done."
Opinions expressed by a group of economists representing major
District businesses and financial institutions at a recent meeting were
relatively optimistic.

Increases of $100 billion in GNP were foreseen

for 1 9 7 2 — a rise of more than 9 percent from 1971, about 5 percent price
and 4 1/2 percent real.

Inventory building is expected to accelerate in

the fourth quarter, and plant and equipment spending is expected to revive
by mid-1972.

Managers in the various organizations are generally more

bearish than economists.

Cautious policies on capital expenditures,

inventories, and hirings could change if orders and profits improve.
Employment conditions appear to have stabilized in the District,
except for the hard-hit steel producing areas.
about balancing new hires.

Layoffs in most areas are

Workers of all types and skills are in ample

supply throughout the region.

Unemployment in the automotive centers

remains very high with no sign of early improvement.
much less evident than at any time this year.

Strike activity is

Retailers appear to be fairly well pleased with recent sales
volume.

Inventories are reported to be in good balance, and orders for

some household durables are said to be picking up.
Although orders for most types of business equipment remain depressed, trucks are selling well—especially light and extra-heavy trucks.
Demand for both construction and farm equipment is significantly ahead of
last year.

Foreign sales of these products are down, however, both in

developed and in underdeveloped nations.
Orders for steel are at very low levels currently.

The drop in

orders and output is much steeper than in 1968, and greater in the Chicago
area than in the Nation, although steel consumption is up to expectations.
Large inventories, heavy imports still to come, the belief that proposed
price increases will be postponed, and the fact that mills are not
financing customer inventories (as in 1968) are said to be responsible.
In contrast, Detroit area production is holding up well.
Chicago area steel mills have begun to recall some of the 30,000
workers laid off in early August as primary operations, shut down for the
strike deadline, are reactivated.

Monday, however, the mayor of Gary,

Indiana (heavily dependent on steel) reported that his city had a 30 percent unemployment rate—far above the state labor department estimates.
The mayor wants federal help.
Home building continues strong in the District.

Analysts now

expect almost 1.9 million starts this year, and almost as many in 1972, if
federal programs are pushed.

A major producer of building materials states

that three price increases have "stuck" this year.

Factories of this

firm are on three shifts, and customers have been placed on allocation.

Sales of industrial chemicals have picked up vigorously in recent
months after a slow start earlier in the year.

Prices of these chemicals

have increased slightly, and further increases are expected in 1972 as
supplies tighten up.

Chemical prices had declined sharply in the late

1960's.
Reports from the corn belt indicate that blight damage has not
been severe, and that a record harvest is anticipated.

If present trends

continue, the corn crop will be largely out of danger in two to three
weeks.

Business loan demand at commercial banks remains moderate, but

some banks

have noted a recent improvement.

The commercial paper market

is competing vigorously with banks to supply short-term business funds.
The volume of new corporate security issues is expected to continue to
decline (except for utilities), but most analysts think long-term
interest rates will not fall significantly.

Inflows of funds to passbook

savings accounts have slowed, and some individuals are "disintermediating"
again.

Banks are having difficulty placing CD's of more than 90 days

because investors wish to remain short.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

A moderate uptrend in business activity continues in the
Eighth Federal Reserve District according to a select group of
businessmen.
centers.

Retail sales continue to expand in most of the larger

Orders from manufacturers have been spotty in recent weeks,

but were generally higher on a seasonally adjusted basis than earlier
in the year.
month ago.

The employment situation is generally unchanged from a
There has been a pause in the rate of savings growth and

interest rates have continued to inch upward.

Some banks, however,

still indicate a higher than desired level of liquidity and are
aggressively seeking business loans.
Although retail sales remain sluggish at major department
stores in St. Louis, other District centers report sharp increases.

One

of the major St. Louis outlets reported early August sales to be a continuation of the rather dismal level in July.

Another reported some

slight improvement of sales in August from the July level but well
below sales in June.

In contrast to this experience, major retail

stores in both Memphis and Louisville reported sharp gains in sales
in July and August from previous months, on a seasonally adjusted basis,
and from year-ago levels.

One of the leading Louisville firms reported

that August-to-date sales are up 12 percent from year-ago levels.
Similarly, total retail sales in Memphis have in recent months exceeded
year-ago levels by 15 percent according to an official of a large
department store.
The outlook for manufacturing activity ranges from pessimistic
to quite optimistic, depending on the type of product.

Manufacturers of

software and products associated with home construction report optimistic
levels of sales and orders.

On the other hand, steel producers and

replacement durable goods manufacturers are generally pessimistic in
their outlook for the next few months.

Steel producers report large

inventories in the hands of consuming firms and low production prospects
for the next six months while the inventories are being reduced.

After

the current inventories are depleted, the outlook for steel is more
promising.

The replacement market for durable manufacturers is reported

as being generally soft but improving slowly.
Nine of the businessmen interviewed reported significant
changes in employment prospects.

Some layoffs which have occurred in

steel industries have apparently been offset by new hirings by manufacturer!
of home building and allied products.

Most of those interviewed, however,

reported little change in number of employees, which indicated that
new hirings only slightly exceeded the number leaving the firms.
Savings flows into financial institutions have continued to
decelerate from the very high rates of last spring.

The slowing has

been most pronounced at commercial banks, but a slower rate of savings
growth has also been observed at savings and loan associations.

An

occasional increase in rates paid to savers has been announced in recent
weeks.

Some banks which lowered the rates paid on passbook savings

last spring have recently raised their rates back to Regulation Q
ceilings.

Rates on loans also continue to creep upward.

some banks continue to aggressively seek business loans.

Nevertheless

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Judging from the responses of the directors, recent developments
in the steel and rail industries will lead to higher costs and prices for
goods coming into or produced in the District.

The timing of these cost

and price increases will vary, with some already having taken place and
more to come between now and the end of the year.

Labor demand throughout

the District is still relatively weak, although a few directors thought
that business activity was generally good.

Consumer savings flows to

District banks have slowed down since midyear, and bankers are anticipating only minimal increases over the next few months.

Business loan

demand is expected to follow normal patterns over the next several months.
A number of directors were aware of price and cost increases
that had already been instituted as a result of the recently announced
steel price hike.

An equipment dealer in Upper Michigan, following the

steel price rise, raised the price of fencing even though it had been
purchased earlier this year.

One Montana director said that a steel

fabricator in his area would try to raise prices on his products to pay
the costs of holding excess inventories, but the fabricator was not sure
that competition would permit the higher prices to hold.
In addition, price increases can be anticipated in a number of
steel-using products between now and the end of the year.

One director

stated that reinforcement steel prices had risen about 5 percent, but
that he had adequate supplies to hold the price on his concrete products
until the end of the year.

At that time, though, the steel price increase

along with a 10 percent announced price increase for cement and higher
wage costs would force him to take a long, hard look at these prices.
Another director said that a heavy equipment manufacturer in
his area had stockpiled enough steel earlier this year to last until
December, at which time he would have to raise prices.

Farm machinery

prices are also expected to rise early next year, partially because of
the recent rise in steel prices, but also because the relatively strong
farm income situation is leading to a stronger demand for machinery.
Despite the rise in the District help-wanted advertising index,
the directors of this Bank generally feel that the demand for labor has
not increased significantly over the last few months, and for the most
part, only seasonal hiring is taking place.

A few directors felt, however,

that business activity was good in their areas.

Tourist traffic seems to

be up throughout the District, and spending by farmers has improved because
of the good crop prospects.
Since midyear, consumer-type time and savings deposits at
selected Reserve city and country banks have been experiencing only
seasonal or weak expansion in contrast to rapid increases earlier in
the year.

The slowdown was attributed in part to an increasing awareness

of alternative higher return investments on the part of savers, increasing
competition from government securities and higher offering rates at S & L's
in some parts of the District.

Expectations are that changes in consumer

savings and time deposits will range from only minimal increases to
moderate runoffs during the next several weeks, with any significant
declines occurring toward year-end, if short-term rates continue to
climb and if consumer reluctance to spend continues to dissipate.

Business loan demand is expected to follow its usual seasonal
advance during the next several months, and there are no sectors which
stand out as being especially conducive to large-scale expansion in the
District.

Areas mentioned as possible sources of moderate strength were

real estate, public utilities and interim nonresidential construction
financing.

Bankers are also expecting some increase in loan demand for

inventory replacements at both the wholesale and retail levels.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
[Asterisk: The telephone survey of purchasing managers was conducted
prior to President Nixon's August 15 speech on economic policy changes.]
In the Tenth District, concern remains high over the pace of
inflation and the near-term prospects for any improvement, based on a
telephone survey of a number of purchasing managers.

Respondents

expressed a sense of frustration at current policies to deal with
inflation, but most were ambivalent at the usefulness or desirability
of an approach involving controls.*

In contrast, the agricultural

sector was marked by increased concern over the likelihood of declining
farm prices in the months ahead.
The moderate improvement in District economic activity reported
in the last Red Book continues to be confirmed by reports from directors
and District bankers, although business loan demand has weakened further.
At the same time, some loss of strength in deposit flows has been noted
in recent weeks and expectations of some disintermediation are not
uncommon.
A telephone survey of a sample of purchasing managers elicited
the view that there had been little change in the pace of inflation.
In fact, a few, such as relatively large users of steel and steel products
and rubber users, indicated that there had been some quickening of the
pace.
One firm, a large purchaser of chemicals, did report that,
for the first time in several years, two successive quarters have gone
by with no renegotiation of prices on large annual contracts.

However,

other chemical purchasers indicated that there was no abatement in the
rate of price increases for chemicals.

For these firms, most recent

increases in cost of materials stemmed primarily from higher freight
charges.

A number of other firms also cited higher freight charges as

the principal reason for increased prices to them.

Most of the purchasing

managers queried said that their firms would try to pass higher materials
costs on to consumers.

However, one did indicate that they hoped to

absorb some of the higher costs of materials by selling more high-margin
items.
In the course of their remarks dealing with price trends, the
purchasing managers expressed a sense of frustration at current policies
to deal with inflation.

However, when asked about controls, most were

ambivalent at the usefulness or desirability of such an approach.
Though one respondent said that he would favor a price freeze and a
strict review of all wages, and others were in favor of some form of
incomes policy, most purchasing managers were wary of controls.

Their

major objection was that any system of price-wage controls would
undoubtedly require, in their opinion, a massive addition to government
bureaucracy.

Also, some indicated that past experience illustrated that

controls had loopholes and served only to postpone wage and price changes.
Even among those who indicated that they would not like to see wage and
price controls used at this time, there was little confidence expressed
that present economic policies would be able to contain or roll back
inflationary forces.
Recent developments in the agricultural sector of the economy
tend to confirm earlier reports in the Red Book about the likelihood

of declining farm prices in the months ahead.

At the same time, farm

equipment business in the District is reported as quite soft.
prospects for record production levels of corn, grain

The

sorghum, and

wheat point to a substantial drop in grain prices this fall.

In this

connection, two directors referred to the fact that corn prices already
have fallen sharply.

While such developments might serve to dim income

prospects for crop farmers, lower feed costs would benefit the livestock
industry.

With improved feeding margins, feeder cattle prices may

spurt upward by yearend.

If this encourages producers to carry their

animals to heavier slaughter weights, and to expand breeding herds,
slaughter prices may well fall somewhat below projected levels for
next spring and the rest of 1972.

Thus, in the year ahead, it is

conceivable that farm prices could serve as a source of stability in
the overall wholesale price index.
Deposit flows into Tenth District banks have not been as
strong in recent weeks as in the first half of the year.

This is true

both for demand deposits and consumer-type time and savings deposits.
However, net inflows of large CD's have strengthened somewhat at
several banks.

Larger banks (weekly reporting) in the Tenth District

experienced a net decline in consumer-type time and savings deposits
in July, although those bankers contacted did not seem to feel that the
situation was as bad as might have been expected.

The reason most

frequently cited for declining deposits was increased Treasury bill
rates, although some also detected an increased tendency to draw on
savings to finance purchases.

District bankers apparently are expecting

some disintermediation to occur in the next few months.

The contact at

one large bank indicated that his bank has a large volume of consumertype CD's maturing in September, and, under certain conditions, they
could experience a large outflow.
Residential mortgage and construction loan activity at
District banks continues strong.

In addition, consumer instalment

loans, such as for home remodeling purposes and for automobiles, are
showing further steady growth.

Aside from residential construction

loans, however, the commercial and industrial loan picture appears to
be rather spotty.

In fact, both recent data and discussions with District

bankers suggest that business loan demand may have weakened further in
recent weeks.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Respondents at a sample of retail stores in the Eleventh Federal
Reserve District expect business activity to pick up moderately over the
next six months.

Relatively few, however, were even mildly optimistic

about improvement in the employment picture in their areas for the near
term.

Recent sales at these stores were somewhat greater than during the

comparable period last year, with summer sales being greater than anticipated.

Nevertheless, inventories are still higher than this time last

year and a little higher than some would like.

Virtually all indicated

that wholesale prices for inventories, as well as retail prices they
charge their customers, have risen moderately over the last six months.
Moreover, nearly all anticipate that both wholesale and retail prices of
their goods will rise by about a like amount in the next six months.
About two-thirds of the respondents reported that sales
recently were above those a year ago, with a few indicating that the
increase has been substantial.

The increase was attributed by most to

greater demand, improved internal operations, and expanded facilities.
On balance, the importance of "big ticket"

items and the most expensive

"top of the line" items in total sales has not changed materially since
a year ago.

At least at these outlets, the consumer apparently has not

become more economy-minded in past months.
All of the stores surveyed ran special summer sales.

A little

over 60 percent indicated that the sales volume exceeded their expectations and was greater than during the summer sales last year.

Most

respondents indicated that the number of items on sale and the price
reductions this year were comparable with those last year, although about

30 percent reported greater number of items and larger price reductions
in this year's sales.
Even though sales have been up recently, almost 80 percent have
inventories equal to or greater than those a year ago.

Moreover, just

more than a third of the respondents felt that their current inventory
levels are a little too high.

Nevertheless, all of the respondents are

planning to keep their inventories at present levels or actually increase
them slightly over the next six months (exclusive of changes for seasonal
reasons).

A few pointed out, however, that anticipated increases in in-

ventories will probably reflect higher prices rather than greater unit
volume.
Regarding price increases, nearly all of the respondents
experienced a moderate rise in wholesale prices of inventories over the
last six months.

Moreover, the majority indicated that salaries in their

stores have risen from 5 to 10 percent during the last year; and, on
balance, the number of people employed has also risen over this period.
In light of these increased costs, almost 90 percent of the
stores surveyed have raised their retail prices in recent months.

And in

view of the near unanimous feeling that wholesale prices will continue to
rise about as rapidly in the next six months as in the last six months,
most respondents are planning to increase retail prices of their goods
moderately further in the near term.
District data continue to show a modest recovery in economic
activity.

Total nonagricultural wage and salary employment in the

District states rose 0.2 percent in June above the May level.

Most of

the growth came in manufacturing—an employment area that still lags
behind year-ago levels.

Car registrations in the four major reporting

areas in Texas showed a sharp 21 percent gain for June and are running
much stronger than a year ago.

Similarly, department store sales continue

to show strength in consumer buying.

The seasonally adjusted Texas in-

dustrial production index dropped slightly in June mainly due to a cut
in crude production.

Texas crude production allowables were reduced to

66.2 percent for August, the fourth consecutive month of such reductions.
Recent rains have broken the drought, and progress is being made in efforts
to control the outbreak of Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Business activity in the Twelfth District has shown only modest
expansion in recent weeks, with rising residential construction continuing
to provide the principal stimulus in the economy.

This in turn leads to

greater demand for the products of the lumber industry on the Pacific
coast.

Consumer spending remains at a stable level but is showing

comparatively little growth.

This characteristic of only very slow

growth at present also is reflected in the views obtained from bankers
and businesses concerning current and prospective demand for business
loans, although there are some regional differences in this regard.
Construction activity continues to be a source of strength in
most parts of the District.

Housing starts are higher in Seattle,

Portland, and in the major markets of California.

Bankers note an

accompanying increase in the demand for real estate loans despite the
recent rise in mortgage rates.

The only evidence of overbuilding

reported involves multiple-units.

In southern California, for example,

some new apartment projects have been reduced.

Nonresidential building

is showing a recovery, particularly in government construction projects.
The continued expansion of housing has benefited other related
industries.

The lumber industry in the Pacific Northwest is continuing

to expand production.

Construction suppliers report heavier sales and

they are hiring more workers.

One major hardware supplier has increased

its work force by 5 percent and put some of its plants on overtime.
Consumer spending is steady rather than growing.

In some

areas, appliance sales are higher but there are other reports of
sluggish sales activity.

According to one director, June retail sales

in California of one national chain are below average compared to its
sales in the rest of the Nation.

A major oil company reported that its

gasoline sales in June were 4 percent below those of a year ago.

Heavy

advertising seems to be necessary to stimulate retail buying and, overall,
the pressures to build up retail inventories are weak.
Strikes have hindered the economic expansion.

In particular,

the railroad strikes have caused problems to shippers, especially of
agricultural products.

Similarly, the copper strike had hurt activity

in Utah and Arizona.

Of continuing concern is the dock strike in

Pacific coast ports.

This strike is affecting a widening number of

industries and agricultural producers throughout the District.
Directors of our Head Office and Branches were asked to
comment on the current and prospective demand for business loans and a
few additional banks also were contacted in this regard.

The predominant

reply among bankers is that they expect business loan demand will continue
to run at about its current rate in the next two months.

Current demand

is variously described as "soft," "weak," "flat," and in some instances,
"moderately good" to "strong."

Regional differences are apparent in the

replies.
Current and prospective demand is reported generally to be
"moderately good" in Oregon, Utah, and Idaho where unemployment rates
are lower than in some other areas of the Twelfth District.

Lumber

production in Oregon is rising as a result of the increase in residential
construction and mills are stocking logs in preparation for the winter
season when logging operations are curtailed.

Loans to food processors

in that area are also larger than a year ago.

In Utah, the strengthening in

loan demand reflects a gradual expansion in the economy on a broad front.

Bankers in California and Washington are less optimistic with
respect to business loan demand, which reflects in part the relatively
higher levels of unemployment in those areas.

Within California, there

seems to be slightly more optimism in the Los Angeles area than in
San Francisco.

Two major banks headquartered in southern California

reported that business loan demand is rising at a moderate rate and
probably will continue to do so in the next few weeks.

Other banks in

northern and southern California characterized their loan demand as
stable or flat and reported little prospect of significant growth in
the near future.

In nearly all cases, banks did not think that repay-

ment of loans from the proceeds of flotations had been a significant
factor in restraining the growth in their volume of business loans
outstanding.
The reports from directors associated with nonbanking firms
seem to substantiate the predominant view obtained from bankers that no
significant upsurge in business loan demand is likely to occur in the
next few weeks.

With the exception of one or two firms which plan

some plant expansion that will be financed initially by bank credit,
the remaining enterprises do not foresee in the near future any change
in their need for bank credit.

