CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 10, 1971

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 19
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 25
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 31
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 34

SUMMARY*

The economic picture presented by the Red Book reports is that the
price freeze is working, but that uncertainties concerning Phase II are
hampering business planning.

Consumers are spending more freely, espe-

cially on durables, but demand for most producer goods remains very
sluggish, and inventory investment policies are cautious.

Employment in

most districts does not appear to be improving significantly.

Credit is

generally available in all leading categories, and interest rates are
lower.

Two banks (Chicago and San Francisco) report recent evidence that

the housing boom has lost momentum.
Most reports indicate that a gradual improvement in general
activity is under way that will probably accelerate in 1972.
are notable exceptions.

But there

Richmond reports a "substantial reduction in the

pace of shipments and orders," reflecting, in part, the coal and dock
strikes.

Cleveland finds the coal strike a depressing influence.

New York finds that "optimism (is) significantly more subdued."

St. Louis

states that "activity has tended to level off." A Boston academician
warns of a "downward spiral."

Cleveland, on the other hand, reports

general improvement, and, uniquely, finds evidence of a substantial rise
in capital outlays.
Lack of conviction as to prospects for future prosperity was
characterized in a variety of cliches of limited descriptive power—e.g.,
"cautious optimism," "wait and see attitudes," and "waiting for the other
shoe to drop."

Business firms are cautious on inventories (Kansas City)

*Prepared by Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

hirings (Dallas and Philadelphia), and expansion of short-term debt
(several banks).
Atlanta tells of cotton textiles producers not accepting orders
because of higher cotton prices, and other specific problems are cited
in connection with the freeze. Uncertainty over Phase II is not simply
a matter of a desire for action by Congress and the new regulatory
bodies.

Businessmen worry that prices may be controlled more effectively

than wages.

Lenders are concerned that if interest rates decline further,

increases in rates will not be allowed when loan demand strengthens.
Several banks found that purchasers of capital equipment do not
view the investment tax credit as a significant stimulus to capital
spending under current conditions.

Requirements of utilities for new

facilities remain large and will not be deterred by the factors affecting
other sectors.

Boston reports that some firms are reducing capital out-

lay budgets.
The surge in auto sales, apparently, is universal.

Some banks,

including Chicago, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, also emphasized strong
demand for household durables, especially furniture.

Increased consumer

purchases, however, have not significantly reduced the rate of rise in
liquid assets.
The trade balance may be improving because of pertinent aspects
of the NEP.

Boston sees evidence of a "Buy American" spirit.

Atlanta

reports foreign firms have "increased inquiries about plant sites and
joint ventures."
Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco report large agricultural
crops of good quality.

Crop price declines, while resulting in reduced

income for crop farmers, are helping to boost meat production.
In the financial area, all banks report credit readily
available, and generally at lower interest rates.

At commercial

banks, demands for consumer instalment loans and mortgage credit
are strong, but demand for business loans is still slow.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Our directors indicate that their consumer business is continuing to improve moderately, and in a few lines spectacularly,
while their capital goods business is still quite sluggish.

None

of our directors experienced higher wholesale prices from their
suppliers.
Judging from the sales experiences of our directors' firms
consumer spending is moderately better, but there is no evidence of
a buying spree.

The one exception to this general experience is in

boating, where dealers are expecting a tremendous boat year in 1972
and are ordering accordingly.

These orders are, however, based on

expectations, not actual sales experience.
Capital goods producers described business as sluggish in
all lines except office and public construction.

In some cases

directors noted a recent deterioration in orders.

One director said

that he had just become aware that in the container machinery field,
customers were cutting back their capital budgets.

Another director

felt that the recent downturn in capital goods orders was a result
of uncertainties about investment tax credit.
Sales of intermediate products to the industrial sector were
variously described as sluggish to poor, especially among suppliers
to the aerospace and chemical industries.

Only one director mentioned

that one of his plants was continuing to decrease employment.
One director noted less foreign competition in the construction material market, in part due to the surcharge, in part to a new

buy-American feeling Inspired by the President, and in part due to
expectations of a tariff increase on these items.

The director also

felt that exchange revaluation had helped his export sales of machinery.
None of our directors had experienced any price increases during the freeze from their suppliers other than steel. Only one director expected to raise a product's price imminently, and that was
in a line where the market has been so depressed that even with the
price increase, the price will be below its May level. One director
noted that his company's profits were hurt by the price freeze because new labor contracts and higher steel prices had gone into
effect, but the company had been waiting until this autumn to raise
prices.

This director mentioned that he expected price guidelines

of 3 percent, and he felt that he could get along with that.
On the wage front, one firm had a strike which was three to
four days old.

The issues were not completely dear, but among the

demands was a 300 percent increase in pension benefits.

Another di-

rector had signed new wage agreements in depressed markets which
called for 5 to 7 percent increases, and in some cases even less,
which were to go into effect if and when permitted.

Another director

noted that one of his non-union plants should have received a wage
increase in October, but did not.
All five of our academic respondents were available this
month.

Samuelson and Tobin pointed out that, since the NEP was an-

nounced, the economy, in general, seems to have weakened.

Eckstein

and Shapiro, however, both project 1972 GNP just under $1,150 billion,

with a real growth rate just under 6 percent, but the unemployment
rate well above 5 percent at the end of 1972. Wallich's expectation
that long-term rates will be falling throughout most of 1972 is
based upon a GNP gain of about $90 billion.
Phase II wage policy is the biggest risk in the outlook at
the moment according to Eckstein.

To stop the previously negotiated

increases would constitute a "sharp break with the previous pattern."
Wallich felt some sacrifices, such as a partial cut or a stretching
out in the deferred wage increases, will be necessary in order to
avoid a spillover effect, which would upset a 5 percent wage standard.
The Federal Reserve System was explicitly excluded as a cause
for the recent declines in Interest rates.
monetary policy has not been all that easy.

Eckstein and Tobin said
Monetary policy has been

"less easy than was thought," Wallich stated, because the recent behavior of velocity has been overlooked. Wallich now considers a 6
to 7 percent monetary growth rate as "modest" and feels a 7 to 8
percent growth more appropriate for the present circumstances.

He

would scale this rate down only if it proved so high as to provoke
a rise in long-term market interest rates, or if the rate of inflation
continues to subside.
Tobin stressed that the economy is plagued by confusion and
uncertainty and is in some danger of a downward spiral.

Since fiscal

stimulus has not yet been enacted and disagreement about Phase II
persists, Tobin urges monetary authority to "get some expansion right
now."

Specifically, he advocated pushing the federal funds rate

down to 4 1/2 percent.

Shapiro thinks short rates have fallen so

sharply that there are going to be some rises; he feels a monetary
growth rate of 4 to 5 percent in the next quarter or two and rising
to attain a 6 percent rate in 1972 is appropriate.
Only Tobin questioned lowering the discount rate; his reservation was that the signal might be "misinterpreted," i.e., interpreted as evidence that the economic situation is a precarious one.
Wallich would favor a reduction in the discount rate only if it were
to be allowed to go up again in the future.

If the lowest level

reached is to become the ceiling level, Wallich thinks it unwise to
reduce either the discount rate, the prime rate, or ceiling rates
under Regulation Q.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
On the basis of opinions expressed by the directors of the
New York bank and of the Buffalo branch, the mood of rising optimism
regarding the economy that appeared to be emerging last month has new
been replaced by a significantly more subdued outlook. Much of the
current assessment of the business situation is heavily conditioned
by the uncertainties surrounding Phase II and, to a certain extent,
by developments in the foreign exchange markets.

Most felt that

business activity would pick up in 1972, but, on balance, the sentiments expressed in this connection were cautious, and most looked
for only a moderate increase.
Regarding consumer spending, the retailers that were contacted reported that business was better than last year but not very
much so. They looked for a good Christinas season, but were only "conservatively optimistic" regarding sales over the coming months.
Virtually all the directors of the New York bank and of the
Buffalo branch, moreover, saw no significant change in business capital
spending plans. Among the New York bank directors, the chairman of
the board of a large manufacturing concern felt that, at most, there
migjht have been "some minor upward revisions."
Another director, a Rochester businessman, basing his comment
on conversations with major manufacturers in the Rochester area, noted
that the plans made in 1970 for 1972 had not been greatly changed.
Similar sentiments were expressed by other directors. The chairman

of the board of a large New York City bank felt that the 9 percent
increase in plant and equipment spending in 1972 indicated in the Edie
survey was "optimistic," while most of the Buffalo directors felt that
the 1972 increase would be closer to 6 or 7 percent than 9 percent.
The Buffalo directors pointed to the uncertainties surrounding wage
and price controls and the high rate of unutilized capacity as deterrents to capital spending.

These directors felt, however, that the

capital goods spending picture could be improved by congressional
action on an investment tax credit and/or liberalized depreciation
allowances, which would clear away some of the present uncertainties.
In general, most directors felt that, apart from some instances of stock piling, their own businesses had not been appreciably
affected by developments in the foreign exchange markets, the 10 percent surcharge and the dock strikes.
Several of the Buffalo directors noted that domestic automobile sales had been "unusually brisk," a development they attributed at least in part to the import surcharge.

The chairman of

the board of a large New York City bank, however, was more pessimistic: he reported growing evidence, including a decline in foreign
collections and in new import credits at his bank, that developments
affecting foreign exchange and trade are having a detrimental effect
on business and cited reports that some contracts have been held
up pending the clarification of the international financial situation.
Much uncertainty was expressed about the effectiveness of
Phase II (opinions expressed predate the Pay Board's 5.5 percent

decision).

In general, the directors had a "wait and see" attitude.

The president of an upstate bank characterized the situation as
"confusion compounded by concern." The Buffalo branch directors
expressed considerable uneasiness regarding labor union leadership's
apparent tough stand against effective wage controls, and its potential impact on any future wage control program.
Against this background, while most directors looked for some
increase in economic activity, sentiments as to the extent of the
recovery were mixed. Among the "bullish" minority, the vice president
of Rochester's largest firm predicted a growth in GNP of 9 to 9 1/2
percent in current dollars over the next six months, citing the end
of the inventory adjustment process and normal cyclical forces as
the reasons for his optimism.

The former chairman of the board of

a large oil corporation also thought there would be a significant
business upturn if the international financial situation is
straightened out.

The majority of the directors, however, were

more cautious and, in general, linked their opinion regarding the
potential advance to the extent of the success of Phase II.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The general outlook for conditions in the Third District
is one of cautious optimism.

Manufacturing activity still seems

somewhat sluggish although the prognosis for the next six months
is an expanding regional economy.

Consumer activity is on the

upswing, and bankers see loan demand holding its own over the next
few months. Most bankers are in favor of the floating prime in
principle, but disagree on the mechanics of its implementation.
The 4 percent guideline on dividends is generally well received.
District manufacturers seem optimistic about the level of
general business activity but remain more cautious about trends for
their own firms.

For example, of the firms polled, nearly 50 percent

report general business activity increasing in October and project
continued expansion in November.

But at the company level, although

nearly 50 percent indicated increases in new orders and shipments
for October, only 36 percent were willing to make such a forecast
for November.

In addition, a smaller percentage are planning to

build inventories and add workers during November than reported such
activity for October.
timistic.

The outlook for the longer term is more op-

Nearly 70 percent of the manufacturers foresee the re-

gional economy expanding a half year ahead. As a result of this
anticipated business expansion, close to 30 percent of the firms
plan to add employees over that time span.
Consumer activity seems to be picking up steam. One banker
noted that October had been one of their strongest auto loan months

ever.

Another felt that the strength of the housing market would

generate a strong demand for household durables In the next few
months. Members of the bank's board of directors also see a somewhat sluggish industrial sector and an active consumer sector. They
feel that the lack of optimism in the business comnunity is overstated, and may be the result of yet uncertain Phase II guidelines.
Area bankers report a gradual trend upward in loan demand,
with strength coming in the construction, textile, and retail sectors.
They expect demand to remain stable during the coming months but
consider that to be good, given the situation for the same period
in 1970.

Philadelphia banks lowered their prime rate in October,

and some did again recently. One banker was concerned that bankers
would get little credit for lowering prime now, but would be criticized later if demand pressures forced the rate back up. Most
bankers were in favor of the floating prime in principle but questioned
the timing and mechanics of the plans so far adopted.

One bank presi-

dent felt that the public would view the floating prime as an effort
to avoid controls.

Another thought it should be tied more closely

to the cost of bank funds (fed funds or CDs) than to other open market
rates.
The board of directors, in general, is pleased by the 4 percent guideline set for dividends since it recognizes the need for
dividend flexibility.

However, a few members wonder if the guideline

might not cause dividends to move higher than they otherwise would.
They argue that the 4 percent maximum may become an "expected" 4 percent so that corporations feel compelled to give their stockholders
as much as possible under the guideline.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Output, employment, and unemployment In the district are
all showing some improvement.

Steel industry economists, however,

say the recovery in their industry is proceeding more slowly than
they expected a month earlier.

Preliminary results of our survey

of manufacturers' capital spending Indicate that substantial increases are planned for 1972 in the Cleveland and Cincinnati metropolitan areas.

Recently, some of our directors have also reported

signs of strengthening in a number of areas, but signs of sluggishness
in certain capital goods areas persist.
Our index of manufacturing activity turned up in September,
following sharp declines in July and August.

On the other hand,

the nationwide coal strike that began on October 1, which involved
80,000 workers, is having a severe impact in mining activity in the
district.

(The Fourth District accounts for more than one-third

of the nation's bituminous coal production.) Nonfarm payroll employment also rose in September, following three consecutive monthly
declines.

The district's insured unemployment rate rose noticeably

from June to September, and then started to decline in October.

How-

ever, unemployment is still high in some metropolitan areas, particularly steel centers.
Economists from four major steel companies in the district
all reported an improvement in new orders last month, but they
emphasized that the orders were well below normal October levels.
Steel orders from the auto industry continue to be sparse.

The auto

companies are talking about resumption of normal ordering in December
for January delivery, but they will not say how much.

("Normal"

depends on the schedule for auto production.) Apparently, the auto
companies are being cautious because of uncertainty about the course
of new car sales after the price freeze ends.

The economists noted

that steel consumption, in general, has been running below their
earlier expectations, and that the economy has to show more improvement than it has recently exhibited to get the steel industry back
to a reasonable level of operations.

A heavier than expected volume

of imported steel is retarding customer inventory liquidation and
prolonging sluggishness in domestic orders.

The consensus is that

it will be February or March before we can expect to have "normal"
steel output.
Preliminary results of our semi-annual capital spending
survey show that in the Cleveland area, more manufacturing firms
have reduced than raised their spending plans for 1971 since our
spring survey, and manufacturing firms are planning a significant
rise in the dollar volume of spending for 1972.
Reports from some of our directors indicate some recent
strengthening in business activity in a number of areas, while
others involved with certain types of capital goods report continued sluggishness.

One report of a strong increase in new orders

in recent weeks came from a director associated with a large computer and business equipment manufacturer.

The improvement was in

a number of the firms1 product lines and came from a wide variety
of customers.

There was some indication that some of the improvement

may have come at the expense of foreign competition.

Another director

from a highly-diversified manufacturing firm reported a recent widespread improvement in new orders for a number of the firms' divisions,
but he also noted continued weakness in government-related business
and aerospace activity.

Another director reported that the situation

in the machine tool industry remains extremely depressed and that
there are no signs of an improvement over the near term.

This same

director noted a growing amount of skepticism among business associates
about the likelihood of success in holding down wage increases under
the administrative structure set up to direct Phase II of the President's
new economic program.

Persistent sluggishness was also reported by

a director whose firm manufactures a number of specialty gear items;
this director noted that a recent "stretch-out" in the production
of rapid transit equipment had an adverse effect on the firm's
sales.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

The moderate uptrend noted in district business activity
over the last several months has apparently been slowed by the
prolonged coal and dock, strikes.

Our latest survey of manufacturers

suggests a substantial reduction in the pace of shipments and declines in new orders and backlogs.

Other survey respondents continue

to report strong retail sales, although the number reporting increases
declined from the previous period.

District bankers report some

tapering in the recent strong surge of consumer and mortgage loans,
and only moderate increases in business loan demand are indicated.
District crops have suffered severe damage from Hurricane Ginger and
heavy October rains.
The diffusion of responses from district manufacturers suggests a distinct slowing of activity, although most of the slowing
appears to be centered in lines affected by the coal and dock strikes.
Metals producers, especially in the Baltimore area, report substantial reductions in shipments, new orders, and backlogs.

A number

of manufacturers in other lines also commented that the strikes are
adversely affecting their business.

Furniture manufacturers continue

to report a strong orders picture and are generally optimistic
regarding the near-term future.

Except for hosiery manufacturers,

textile producers are also beginning to exhibit a cautious optimism
about the future.

Our survey indicates that retail sales have been seriously
affected, especially in West Virginia, by the coal strike. Sales
of new cars are strong in all areas except those immediately affected
by strikes.

Retailers generally appear to be anticipating a record

or near-record holiday season.
Manufacturing inventories reportedly have declined further,
and while nearly one-third of our manufacturing respondents report
inventory levels higher than desired, the overall inventory situation appears much improved over three months ago.

Trade respondents

indicate further increases in inventories, but all of this appears
to be voluntary.

Employment in the district has apparently declined

somewhat in recent weeks, but this seems to be due mainly to strikes.
More than one-third of our banker respondents reported employment
declines in their areas.

On the other hand, nearly one—third of

manufacturing respondents reported an increase in the number of
hours worked per week.

No significant change in prices received

were reported by manufacturing or trade respondents.
Responses from banks in the district suggest that both
residential and nonresidential construction activity may have
slackened some in recent weeks.

Bankers report only moderate

strength in business loan demand, and the number of banks reporting
increases in demand for consumer,and mortgage loans were down from
the previous month.

In strike-affected areas, bankers report a

sizable increase in automobile repossessions and, in general, loan
delinquencies.

Through November 4, the season's gross returns from fluecured tobacco marketings were up 5 percent over last year, as 7
percent higher average prices offset a 2 percent decline in sales
volume.

Virginia and North Carolina crop losses resulting from

Hurricane Ginger and heavy October rains have been estimated as
$83 million.

Damage to the peanut crop alone is estimated to be

$49 million, or 48 percent of the total cash receipts from last
year's record crop.

Losses in corn, soybeans, and cotton account

for the remaining $34 million.
Looking ahead, most banking respondents believe that economic
activity in their areas will either stabilize at present levels or
increase.

Most manufacturing respondents indicated that plant and

equipment capacity relative to desired capacity is about right.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Based on a recent Research Department survey of 21 business leaders and other contacts, support for the new economic program remains strong among businessmen and labor rank and file.
However, there are doubts about the efficacy of Phase II because
top labor officials may not cooperate.

The surveyed businessmen

believe that prices will increase moderately after November 13.
They further indicated that the President's program has not yet
resulted in any significant changes in capital spending plans and
that consumer sentiment has improved only slightly since August.
Evidently, no switching from foreign to domestic suppliers has
yet occurred because of foreign exchange developments.
Survey respondents report nearly universal support among
businessmen for the President's program.

However, many business-

men feel that the program will be undermined by an inability of
the Pay Board to control wage increases.

Some businessmen expect

price controls to be more effective than wage controls; many
others are uncertain about how they will be affected by Phase II
controls.

The freeze has evidently caused considerable inequities

that will be very difficult for Phase II controllers to rectify.
A fear was expressed that a new bureaucracy may result from the
program.
Price expectations differ considerably among businessmen,
but, on average, price increases after November are expected to
be more moderate than before the freeze.

A few respondents expect

inflation to take up where it left off, mainly because they do
not expect the Pay Board to be effective. More respondents expect
scattered price increases and a definite reduction in inflation.
A paper company executive reports that a scheduled $8 a ton increase in newsprint prices has been postponed until at least
January 1, and that the increase will then probably be less than
$8.

A sales executive for a steel firm reports that some producers

with a high percentage of flat rolled steel in their product mix
will be in trouble if scheduled price increases on these products
are not allowed to go into effect after the freeze.

The cotton

textile industry is reportedly not accepting new orders because
increases in the price of cotton during the freeze have increased
costs that, temporarily at least, cannot be passed along to buyers.
Apparently, the President's program has as yet had little
effect on capital spending plans. Most respondents report no
change in investment plans since the beginning of Phase I. However, a telephone company has increased its estimates of business
activity in 1972 and 1973, and increased its capital spending
plans accordingly.

An electric utility stepped up its purchases

of needed autos and trucks just to take advantage of the freeze.
An auto dealer reports that he is going ahead with a previously
postponed facility, evidently because of the surge in auto sales.
A majority of those surveyed report little change in consumer attitudes since the freeze. However, production of consumer
appliances has reportedly been increased in anticipation of

improved sales, and consumer demand for textile products has increased.

Textile inventories have been reduced substantially at

mills and at the wholesale and retail levels, and a good expansion
of sales is anticipated "after uncertainties are removed."
Foreign exchange developments apparently have not as yet
caused much switching from foreign to domestic suppliers. The
price spread between foreign and domestic steel has decreased,
but no actual switching has occurred yet.

Cotton exports have

been encouraged by foreign exchange developments, and this has
added to upward pressure on the price domestically.

A port

official reports that the floating exchange rates have caused
only moderate difficulties.

A jewelry store executive reports

that diamond importers are temporarily holding current stocks
off the market in anticipation of price increases later.

An

importer has reportedly shelved plans for a major expansion of
facilities because of the 10 percent import surcharge.

The

director of a state board of industry and trade reports that
foreign firms have increased inquiries about plant sites and
joint ventures, as a result of foreign exchange developments
and the import surcharge.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The economic picture in the Seventh District continues to
be characterized by strength in consumer durable goods and in
residential construction; contrasted by weakness in producer goods,
nonresidential construction, and inventory investment.

Uncertainty

over Phase II may be dampening and delaying a restoration of business
confidence, and, therefore, of expansionary business policies.
District labor markets are soft and, overall, do not appear to be
improving.

Credit is readily available in all categories, but,

except for consumer auto loans, demand for credit is not vigorous,
and, in the case of residential mortgages, has weakened recently.
Manufacturers of appliances, color television sets, and
furniture have increased output in response to larger retail sales.
In part, these developments reflect the rise in newly completed
residences, and the continued high level of output of mobile homes,
which are shipped furnished.

But retailers, generally, express

optimism on prospects for sales in the oncoming Christmas season.
Auto output schedules are being raised modestly, indicating that
producers do not view the surge of auto sales merely as a temporary
phenomenon associated with the price freeze and the import surcharge.
Although businessmen typically offer public endorsements
for the optimistic general forecasts made by professional forecasters,
there is widespread skepticism.

Current trends in investment policy—

both for inventories and for fixed capital—and in hirings and other
decisions requiring ca6h outlays, suggest lack of confidence in the

general forecasts.

(This may, of course, make the upsurge all the

more vigorous once momentum is gained.)
Uncertainty over Phase II will not be resolved simply by
promulgation of broad guidelines.

Questions relate to the relation-

ship of price increases and wage increases which, in large degree,
will determine profits; to the methods of enforcement and the machinery
for adjudication of disputes.

The poor performance of the stock

market is cited as evidence of this uneasiness.

In addition, some

influential bankers and businessmen are listening to, and repeating,
forecasts of a general decline in activity offered by consultants
and commentators.
Part of the current uncertainty could be relieved by favorable action by Congress on pending NEP legislation.

But the effect

of the tax credit and depreciation reform is emphasized by sellers
rather than buyers of equipment.
Steel orders are said to be slow, unsteady, and disappointing,
but, nevertheless, basically on the uptrend.

Total orders for

producer goods (finished goods and components) are, at best, holding
steady.

Sales of trucks, in contrast, have been excellent, re-

flecting some of the same factors encouraging auto sales.

Pro-

ducers of both farm and construction machinery report a sharp decline in sales abroad in recent months—a trend that predated
August 15.

(A large part of these sales are from European factories.)

Softness in markets for producer equipment is cited as evidence that
prices would not have been raised even if it were not for the freeze.

From the buying side, planned investments of many manufacturing
firms are well below peaks of past years. Work in hand by plant
design firms is at a very low ebb.

Utilities are moving ahead

with expansion programs that are far from complete.
Reports from real estate brokers, mortgage lenders, and
title insurance firms indicate a more-than-seasonal slowing in
demand for residential mortgage loans, starting in late September.
Sales of housing units, especially existing units, have weakened,
and some builders have reduced plans for starts in 1972.

Credit

is said to be readily available at stable rates, so the situation
reflects some easing in demand for housing.

Increased vacancies

had been noted earlier in luxury apartments, but the recent development includes all types of housing.
In the farm sector, income of livestock feeders is up because of higher prices for animals coupled with reduced feed costs.
But crop income is down sharply because of plummeting corn prices.
Harvesting is well-advanced in most areas, and crops are excellent.
Meat packers find the freeze burdensome because of varying seasonals
and other complications associated with joint products.

The ceiling

price on hides is causing shortages because of increased foreign
demand.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Following a moderate expansion throughout most of the year,
business activity has tended to level off in recent weeks according
to a survey of some leading businessmen.

Confusion and greater

caution tend to dominate the thinking of business leaders as plans
relative to Phase II of the Administration's new economic program
are discussed.

Construction has apparently stabilized at a rel-

atively high level and, as a result, sales of the construction supply
industries and new home furnishings have likewise stabilized.

Retail

sales of the larger department stores have remained unchanged in
recent weeks, but store managers remain optimistic.

Output of

major manufacturers in the district continues to expand moderately,
and some new investment plans were mentioned.

Both savings flows

into financial firms and loan commitments continue up.
Most of the businessmen interviewed expressed confusion
and doubt as Phase II plans of the Administration's new economic
program unfold.

Typical of the expressions was the view of an

official of a major manufacturing firm who stated "I am somewhat
negative at the moment. We would have been better off without the
freeze."

Several expressed the view that the proposed investment

tax credit will help, but at the same time expressed doubts that
wages will be maintained at levels consistent with high investment
incentive.

Those interviewed are especially concerned with the

confusion relative to existing labor union contracts and current
labor-management negotiations.
Construction continues to provide the major stimulus to
the Eighth District economy. However, after rising sharply during
the first part of the year, it has tended to level off recently.
Demand growth for building supplies has also slowed.

The trend is

similar for new home furnishings, such as built-in appliances and
synthetic fibers for carpets.
Major manufacturing firms report a continuing moderate uptrend in output and sales.

Plastics and fibers for the transporta-

tion and home building industries are well above year-ago levels.
Factory sales of soft goods are likewise higher.

Steel is in a

slump as a result of excessive inventories, accumulated in preparation for an expected strike.

Leather goods factory sales are also

low as a result of rising imports, and the turnaround for such
goods is expected to be slow, despite the surtax on imports.
Most officials interviewed would like to see more definite
economic policies before making major changes in their investment
plans.

Some reawakening, however, was noted.

Two major manufactur

ing firms reported expansion projects, and one large retailer,
whose outlets are concentrated in the inner city, reported plans
for major expansion in the outlying area.
The uptrend of savings flows into financial firms and loan
demand continues.

Despite the announced decline in the prime rate,

mortgage rates generally remain firm at 7 to 7 3/4 percent.

Other

credit terms, such as downpayment requirements, however, are
apparently easing.
The Eighth District agricultural situation is generally
favorable. Weather conditions were good throughout the production
and harvesting season.

Large crops have been produced and har-

vested, but storage facilities are reported to be short in some
areas.

This larger volume of farm products has already been

reflected in a sizable decline of wholesale prices of farm products, and in a slight decline in the wholesale price of all commodities .

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The consensus response Co our monthly phone survey of
Federal Reserve bank directors is that district consumers have not
yet reduced their savings rate or begun to spend accumulated savings.
The district's strong increase in housing construction has stimulated sales of furniture, home furnishings, and appliances, and
these retailers are quite optimistic about the future.

Directors

are unaware of any pressure for large pay increases after November 12,
but generally feel that previously negotiated pay hikes will have
to be granted.

District manufacturers foresee their sales improving

in the fourth quarter and during the first half of 1972.
Although one director detected some decline, the consensus
was that the savings rate of district consumers has not yet been
reduced.

Most directors reported that savings deposits have con-

tinued to rise, and one director disclosed that his bank had just
concluded its most successful promotion to attract new savings accounts.

Skepticism was also expressed as to whether or not district

consumers would start to spend accumulated savings.

However, one

director did indicate that he expected the savings rate would come
down and that consumers would start liquidating accrued savings.
District housing unit authorizations in the four-month
period ending in September were 29 percent above a year ago, and
bank directors report that this has stimulated district sales of
furniture, home furnishings, and appliances.

One director revealed

that furniture dealers in his area have a backlog of deliveries, and

thac furniture manufacturers are having some difficulty filling orders.
Several directors also indicated that retailers expect furniture
and hone furnishing sales to continue to improve.
Bank directors detected no pressure in their areas for large
pay increases after November 12. One stated that workers in his
area were just anxious to retain their present jobs and maintain
their current incomes. Two directors felt that union members would
be willing to settle for smaller pay increases than labor leaders
are demanding, while another indicated that a union he deals with
is not too concerned about pay board guidelines as it feels it has
the political clout to eventually surpass them.
Directors generally believed that after November 12 workers
would be reluctant to sacrifice any previously negotiated wage increases which were foregone during the freeze. According to one,
workers in his area might be willing to give up retroactively-paid
increases but would expect to receive the higher wages after the
freeze.

Another stated that differences between pay board guide-

lines and negotiated wage increases would eventually have to be
given to workers.

Previously negotiated wage increases were con-

sidered to be legal commitments which have to be honored by another
director.
According to the preliminary results of our fourth-quarter
industrial expectations survey, district manufacturers continue to
expect that their sales growth will improve in the fourth quarter
and,during the first half of 1972. After surpassing year-earlier

levels by 5.2 percent during the third quarter, district manufacturing sales are expected to be up 9.7 percent from a year ago in
the current quarter before advancing 8.2 percent during the first
half of 1972.

The current sales predictions are very close to those

made for their respective quarters in the third-quarter survey.
The optimistic outlook for district manufacturing sales
can be attributed to a rejuvenation in durable goods sales.

In

the third quarter, district durable goods sales surpassed yearearlier levels for the first time in a year and are expected to
strengthen during the forecast period.

Much of this expected im-

provement can be traced to the district's lumber and wood products,
electric and nonelectric machinery, and scientific instrument industries.

No significant increase in the rate of sales gain is

foreseen by district nondurable goods manufacturers.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Economic activity seems to be picking up a bit in the Tenth
District, although most firms are being conservative in expanding
employment and inventory levels.

Capital spending intentions in

various types of businesses across the district suggest a slight increase, on balance, over last year.

Investment plans are said to be

virtually unaffected by the promise of a tax credit.

Business loan

demand remains generally soft, and deposits are reported as steady.
Interviewed bankers and other businessmen are guardedly optimistic
about the economy in 1972, but few really expect a boom year. Many
executives are apprehensive about Phase II and the wage increases
that may be allowed.
Judging from the businesses contacted, economic conditions
are improving somewhat.

Construction contractors report increased

activity and have been doing some hiring. A manufacturer of small
aircraft has recalled some employees. Other firms, however—
including a manufacturer who has recently suffered a strike by his
steelwoxkers, a major airline, and oil companies—are doing increased business with fewer workers. With only one exception, reported plans for expansion held little promise for adding jobs once
capital additions are put in place. And while production activity
is increasing, inventories still are being held down.
A survey of major utility companies shows continuing expansion in this industry.

Plans for capital outlays vary from

maintaining last year's pace to substantial increases over recent

rates of growth.

Prospects for tax relief are said to make no dif-

ference in investment intentions.

As in the past, employment is

expected to grow less rapidly than total services.
Firms in other industries also are expecting to make new
capital outlays.

A large manufacturer of rubber products plans a

multimillion dollar plant expansion next year.

A major agricultural

supplier reports new plant and equipment expenditures for next year
will be below those in the recent past because of project completions,
but still will total several millions.

Two large sugar corporations,

two big oil refineries, and three steel-using companies all are
planning modest additions to plant and equipment at about last year's
pace.

None of the reporting executives of these firms feel that

the investment tax credit has influenced their plans in more than
a very small way.

Businessmen feel that Phase I has been a success,

and they expect 1972 to be better than 1971.

Uncertainty about

Phase II—"waiting for the other shoe to drop"—is complicating
decision-making right now.

For example, one manufacturer, who nor-

mally sets standards for production costs a full year in advance,
is finding it difficult to do so because suppliers are unwilling to
quote full-year prices.
Loan demand at district commercial banks varies considerably
from area to area, but generally continues to follow the pattern of
recent months.

Real estate and consumer instalment (especially auto)

loans remain the stronger categories.

Several bankers, moreover,

noted an improvement in the quality of consumer credit—delinquencies

in some cases are at record lows.

Construction loans and a few calls

on national account lines are the only bright spots in an otherwise
bleak business loan picture.

Some bankers look for a seasonal up-

swing in business loans over the next two months.

One respondent

mentioned the possibility of an increase in transportation business
loans in response to the proposed investment tax credit.
District bankers report steady deposit figures in the past
month.

Rates offered for CD money have, in several cases, been set

above money center levels by one-eighth to one-fourth point, but
response has been only moderate.

One banker observed that consumers

seem to be financing purchases out of savings rather than by borrowing.
The "floating" of the prime rate was widely applauded as a
further step toward deemphasizing that rate.

Most district banks

are quoting a 5 1/2 percent prime rate, but they will charge their
national prime borrowers whatever those firms are paying to money
center banks.

The district's largest bank has just introduced a

new policy of not announcing its prime rate.

The bank's policy

is " . . . to be very competitive and in fine tune with money market
rates." Judging from responses, the rate structure for local nonprime borrowers has probably not declined in line with national
prime rate reductions.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The announcement of Phase II of President Nixon's new
economic program apparently had little effect upon the thinking
of the directors of this bank in terms of leading them to make
substantial alterations in their outlook for economic activity
in the region and nation.

Of the 26 head office and branch di-

rectors surveyed, an overwhelming majority now expect economic
activity in the nation to increase moderately over the next nine
months.

This was essentially the opinion of these businessmen,

bankers, and educators prior to the President's outline of the
control apparatus to be established under Phase II.

The direc-

tors believe that these improving economic conditions in the
nation will produce a moderate decline in the unemployment rate
and be accompanied by moderately rising prices.

Banking direc-

tors are now expecting a moderate fall in interest rates, while
industrial directors anticipate no real growth in employment,
plant and equipment expenditures, or inventory investment for
their firms over the near term.
With respect to the national economy, almost three-fourths
of the directors currently foresee a moderate gain in activity.
Prior to the disclosure of Phase II, this view was held by slightly more than two-thirds of the directors.

The announcement of

the Phase II outline also produced little change in the directors'
assessment of the unemployment rate. Nearly 60 percent of the
directors are still of the opinion that the unemployment rate will

fall moderately.

As for the present outlook for prices, about

two-thirds of the directors expect that moderate increases will
occur, and the balance anticipate that prices will remain essentially unchanged.

Until the Phase II program was made public,

about one-fourth of the directors were expecting substantial increases in prices, half were anticipating moderate increases, and
the rest were looking for little change. Thus, the consensus of
directors, by a small majority, is that the creation of the Pay
and Price Boards enhances the prospect for greater price stability.
The outlook for the regional economy was also largely unchanged by announcement of the Phase II outline.

Eighteen of the

directors currently foresee a moderate increase in activity in
their local areas, as compared with 14 earlier.

The announcement

caused no alteration in the directors' assessment of the prospects
for the unemployment rate in their local areas. Just over half
were (and still are) anticipating a moderate decline in the unemployment rate.

The directors believe that prices will edge up-

ward slightly in the district.

Earlier, directors were somewhat

less optimistic about prices.
Commercial banking directors were also surveyed on their
outlook for money and capital market rates and the commercial bank
prime lending rate. Nine of the 14 commercial bankers now believe
that short-term rates will decline moderately.

Prior to the an-

nouncement of Phase II, ten of the respondents thought rates would
remain essentially unchanged or increase moderately.

Their evalu-

ation of the prospects for long-term interest rates has also im-

proved slightly.

A clear majority now anticipate that capital

market rates will either remain unchanged or decline moderately
over the next nine months.

Over the same period, half of the

banking directors believe the prime lending rate at their banks
will decrease moderately, 43 percent forecast no change, and 7
percent think that a moderate increase is in the offing.
Directors associated with nonbanking businesses were surveyed with respect to the outlook for their firms and industries.
The announcement of Phase II caused virtually no change in the
assessments of eight businessmen-directors as to their outlook
for employment, prices, plant and equipment expenditures, and
inventories over the next nine months. A majority believe that
employment, plant and equipment expenditures, and inventories
for their firms will remain unchanged, and that the prices of
output of their firms will increase moderately.

Three believe

that Phase II will have no impact on their profits, four are of
the opinion that profits will decline moderately, and only one
anticipates that profits will be improved.
Other directors were asked to assess the reception of
Phase II in their respective areas.

Three out of the four direc-

tors in this category indicated that the program was very well
received.

With respect to the relative impact of the stabili-

zation programs, two of the directors feel that Phase II favors
labor, one director believes that the program benefits consumers,
and one is of the opinion that business is favored.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
According to our directors' reports, economic activity in
the Twelfth District is continuing to grow at a steady pace. Most
of the strength continues to come from the consumer sector and construction, particularly residential building.

The end of the West

Coast dock strike is another favorable factor for many businesses'
prospects.

On the other hand, there is no sign of any vigorous

upswing in business capital expenditures beyond recent levels.
Significant increases in consumer spending occurred in
October.

In some cases, retailers reported increases 15 percent

over the previous year's sales, including consumer durables, whose
sales had been slow. Auto sales are also stronger.

Much of the in-

crease reported occurred in September, and sales seem to be somewhat
slower in October.

Domestic car dealers expect a good year, and

their principal concern seems to be slowness in deliveries from
the factory.

Foreign car dealers, in contrast, are less optimistic

because of the effects of the import surcharge and the disruption caused by the dock strike in delaying shipments of new
cars.
Construction activity is the other important source of
strength.

Activity is centered on single-family building, while

construction of multifamily units is slowing because of higher
vacancy rates.

The continued inflow of funds, particularly into

savings institutions, has insured a steady flow of finance to
builders at somewhat lower interest rates.

One director in southern

California reported that this ready availability of funds is encouraging further building of multifamily units, despite a local
surplus.
Unemployment rates continued near 12 percent in the SeattleTacoma area. According to some of our Seattle directors there is
no evidence that unemployment will be reduced in the immediate future, and it is expected to increase seasonally during the coming
winter months.

The area has a considerable surplus of warehouse

and office space. Although some businesses, particularly those
which are medium-sized and serving national rather than regional
markets, are doing well, they are not able by themselves to bring
about any major reduction in local unemployment.
Our directors were asked to assess the prospects for increased capital expenditures in the light of recent changes in
economic policy.

The general consensus was that there would be no

immediate increase; current projects were being carried through,
but few revisions of plans have occurred.

The explanation was that

uncertainty about the policies to be followed in the so-called
Phase 11 has led businesses to be cautious until the direction of
policy is known.

Once the wage and price guidelines are established,

they should be more willing to undertake increased investment.
Only one director reported actual examples of increases, but both
of these projects were contingent upon the passage of the tax benefits
proposed by the President, and in any event both projects are
scheduled for a 12-month completion date.

District agriculture has been experiencing a good year in
terms of market prices and yields.

The exclusion of agricultural

prices from the price freeze has not resulted in any jump in market
prices.

In practice, the inability of buyers of farm products to

pass along price increases has limited the prices they are willing
to pay.

One director reports that livestock prices have been held

to 3 to 5 percent below the ceilings for dressed meat.
Banks' deposits have been gradually rising.

On the loan

side, the greatest demand has been for consumer instalment credit
and real estate mortgages.

Commercial loans have not been showing

any strength in most parts of the district. With the exception of
minor reductions in interest rates, the lending and investment
policies of the district banks have been basically unchanged during
the past month.

