CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 9, 1971

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page 1
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 18
Eighth District - St. Louis page 21
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 23
Tenth District - Kansas City page 26
Eleventh District - Dallas page 29
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 32

SUMMARY*

There is substantial agreement among bankers, businessmen, and
economists that the recovery now underway is of moderate proportions and
is clearly not strong enough to have a significant impact on the employment-unemployment situation over the near term.

Despite the persistence

of underlying slack in the economy, the Reserve Banks note little retardation
of the rise in both industrial and consumer prices.

In view of the sluggish

demand conditions in the capital goods sector and disappointing retail sales,
it appears that cost-push influences continue to fuel the inflationary
momentum.

Some recent financial developments mirror the sluggishness in the

real sector.

Bankers report that loan demand is relatively weak.

They are

concerned over the decline in short term interest rates, and there is
widespread agreement that the System should not move toward further monetary
ease at this time.
With few exceptions, the Reserve Banks report that retail trade
in January and February was not particularly strong.

The post-strike rebound

in auto sales thus far appears to be less robust than expected.

Both

San Francisco and Kansas City commented on the cost-conscious auto buyer.
Sales of small cars (foreign and domestic compacts) are providing the major
impetus to an otherwise lackluster auto picture.

A number of Reserve Banks

mentioned, in one form or another, that restoration of consumer confidence
is the key element in the business picture.

According to the Boston Bank,

retail credit men in Rhode Island attribute cautious consumer spending to
unemployment and the fear of layoffs.

[Asterisk:Prepared

Dallas comments that bankers in their

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]

district feel continued inflation has tended to dampen consumer confidence
and spending.
The Banks uniformly report that current and prospective capital
spending remains weak, except for the push stemming from the utilities.
Businessmen want to see concrete evidence of a solid upturn in economic
activity before they begin to increase capital outlays.

Cleveland

mentioned that recovery in computers and machine tools is not expected
until yearend or early 1972, while Boston notes that prospects are now
better for a pickup in machine tools by yearend.
The only areas consistently mentioned by the Reserve Banks as
exhibiting strength were capital expenditures by utilities, steel
production, and residential construction.

Boston, however, commented that

improvement in housing related industries has been disappointing.

As

mentioned by Cleveland in the last Red Book, Chicago and Kansas City this
time attribute part of the strength in the steel industry to buying in
anticipation of expected price increases.
Concerning the outlook for employment and unemployment, there
are widespread indications that businesses plan to continue with cautious
hiring policies (and in some instances plan further layoffs).

As is the

case for capital spending, there is a reluctance to hire additional
employees until the recovery gathers momentum.
On the financial front, the Reserve Banks generally report weak
loan demand from consumers and businesses.

The exceptions are a pickup

in mortgage demand and in loans to finance steel stockpiling.

Bankers

are generally concerned about the decline in short-term interest rates
and a developing profit squeeze.

Atlanta mentioned that reductions in

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Reports of moderate to disappointing conditions continue to
predominate among our respondents in nearly every field.

Area

financial institutions show no material change over last month, with
the earlier spate of mortgage rate cuts tapering off, at least
temporarily.

The pickup in orders in housing-related industry has

thus far been disappointing and much less than commensurate with the
level of starts expected later this year.

Similarly, auto industry

suppliers report order levels below earlier expectations for the
post-strike period.

In summary, the economic pickup continues to

elude us.
The winter recreational industry in New England has had a
poor season, with sales of both equipment and services below last
year.

The traditional automobile sales held on Washington's birthday

failed to attract the normal interest this year, and dealers report
only a marginal improvement in sales over earlier in the winter.

A

survey of Rhode Island Retail Credit Grantors Association taken last
week provides additional evidence of the gloom in retailing.

Asked to

characterize current sales volume with that of six months ago, 63
percent replied that it was lower, and 10 percent stated it was much
lower.

Fear of unemployment and layoffs was identified by this same

group as the major deterrent to higher consumer expenditures.
One of our directors, heading a highly diversified manufacturing
corporation, reports that price shading has broken out in a number of
his divisions over the last three months.

Order backlogs are continuing

to shrink at most tool companies, although hopes now seem slightly higher

for some pickup in new orders by the end of this year.

The aerospace

industry continues to present a very mixed picture, with some firms
adjusting well to the decline in defense procurements and others
suffering severely.
Professor Eckstein reports a slight retrenchment in the DRI
model forecast of 1971 GNP, with the figure revised to $1,045 billion.
He expressed disappointment with the First Quarter GNP results as
they seem to be developing.

On the matter of strength in the housing

sector, he noted a very poor conversion rate of permits into starts in the
late months of 1970 and suggested that our January and February start
figures may be artificially high as a result.
Reiterating testimony given to the JEC last week, Eckstein
once again warned against excessive monetary stimulus.

He continues

to endorse a 5 to 6 percent growth target for Ml, but urges the system
to push hard enough to achieve it.

Eckstein expressed the hope that

fears of a "snapback" effect will not deter the FOMC in its pursuit
of stated targets, as this theory has little basis in fact.

No

significant snapback can be found in past recoveries once you take out
inventory adjustements, a procedure that seems particularly appropriate
in the current slowdown, since no major inventory changes have accompanied it.
Professor Eli Shapiro expressed general satisfaction with the
current mix of fiscal and monetary policy, cautioning only that we do
not fall below 5 to 6 percent in monetary growth.

Shapiro sees the

recent turnaround in long rates as largely an "indigestion" problem,
stemming from the flood of offerings that emerged when long rates declined
to the 7 percent vicinity.

He is confident that long rates will decline

to that level again by late summer.

Citing the escalating cost of

construction, Shapiro expects starts over 1971 to reach no more
than 1.75 to 1.8 million.

Industrial and commercial construction

should decline 4 to 5 percent in real terms from 1970 levels.
Shapiro further expects cuts to break out soon in passbook rates at
thrift institutions and feels they are justified.
Professors Tobin and Samuelson expressed nearly identical
views, with both focusing primarily on the discrepancy between
desirable growth rates of real output and what we're likely to achieve.
Both endorsed a monetary target in the 7 to 9 percent range, attaching
particular urgency to this, as we are largely locked into a budget
that is only mildly stimulative, at best.

Samuelson specifically

discussed the notion that the system is now "pushing on a string,"
suggesting instead that we're in a period where the linkages between
monetary stimulus and real activity are very mushy, but still effective.
Professor Wallich added nothing new to his comments of earlier
months and continues to feel that it would be ineffective now (and
harmful later) to push any harder with monetary policy than we have
been doing.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The overall impression of the economic outlook that emerged from
opinions expressed by Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and of the Buffalo Branch and by other business leaders continued to be
one of uncertainty, with little indication that a strong recovery is in
the offing.

Sentiments were mixed regarding consumer spending.

It was

generally agreed that no significant pickup in plant and equipment outlays
was likely over the coming months.

A strike in the steel industry was

widely expected and evidence of stockpiling was mounting.

Business loan

demand was reported to be holding up well in Western New York (Buffalo),
but to be relatively weak in the New York City area.

As in previous months,

concern over inflation was evident with several respondents calling for
more direct government action in this area.
With respect to retail sales, the treasurer of a large chain of
department stores reported that business over the Christmas season and
during the January sales had been "reasonably good," but that sales in
February had been sluggish and that his firm was budgeting for only a
gradual increase over the coming months.

The vice president of a large

photographic equipment firm stated that his company saw evidence of a
lack of strength in consumer spending in the fact that retailers seemed
to be living off their inventories.

The chairman of the board of a large

New York City bank stated that consumer spending has not "blossomed" as
might have been expected, while the president of a large finance company
felt that, on the basis of consumer loans extended by his firm, the
consumer is still "hanging on to his dollars."
On the other hand, the executive vice president of a large New
York City department store, with branches in the suburbs, reported that

business had been excellent from the week before Christmas through the
third week of February (10 to 15 percent above last year), although it
subsequently slowed; he looked for "good solid" business in the months
ahead, but expected that "hard work" in the form of promotional sales
and good values would be required.

Similarly, the president of a

Rochester department store reported that sales--notably promotional
sales—were better than last year.

Finally, several other respondents

felt that retail business was good, and the president of a chain of
variety stores was very optimistic with respect to 1971 sales.
With respect to outlays for plant and equipment, respondents
expressing an opinion on the subject generally saw no strengthening in
such outlays as compared to a month ago, i.e., 1971 outlays would
probably remain at about 1970 levels.

In this context, the respondents

did not feel that liberalization of depreciation allowances would result
in a significant upgrading of capital spending plans.
Several bankers and other business leaders looked for an
increase in inventory investment in the form of strike-hedging stockpiling of steel.

A strike in the steel industry appeared to be widely

expected, although opinions differed as to its probable length.
One director felt it would be short-lived, with the settlement
in the automobile industry setting the pattern for the steel settlements.
Others felt it would be longer, with this expectation showing up in
inventory policies.

Thus, two directors of the Buffalo Branch, who are

associated with firms using large quantities of steel, reported their
firms planned to have a 90-day supply on hand by August 1, as against
normal inventories for about 30 days, while the large photographic concern
looked for a long strike and plans to build its steel inventories to six

to eight weeks above normal levels.

In addition, several bankers

reported making arrangements to finance a substantial buildup in steel
inventories.

Another director, the president of a large manufacturing

concern, felt there would be a long strike if the economy is strong,
"but none if it goes down."
Views regarding the demand for business loans at commercial
banks varied according to locality.

The Buffalo Branch binker directors

reported that loan demand at their banks was holding up well.

The

chairman of a large New York City bank, on the other hand, saw the loan
picture as weaVer than a year ago.

The chairman of another, smaller,

New York City bank characterized loan demand as "sluggish" and reported
that his bank had not experienced any increase in demand following the
prime rate cuts.
As in previous months, deep concern was expressed over inflation.
A director characterized the recent government action in the construction
industry as a step in the right direction.

Several other business

leaders, however, felt the need for stronger direct government action on
the wage and price front.

One business leader felt that, with the 1972

election ahead, the President was caught between "fire and drowning" and
would probably make concessions in the fight against inflation to reduce
unemployment.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Area executives expect the mild business expansion to continue.
Nevertheless, the outlook is still mixed.
as paper, see no improvements.
consumer demand this spring.

Thus, some industries, such

Retailers are not expecting strong
Bankers are caught in a profit squeeze

and several of those we contacted saw no early pick-up in loan demand.
On the other hand, there are some hopeful signs.

For example, the

number of manufacturers experiencing increases in sales and new orders
far outweighs those realizing decreases.

But, the evidence is still

not convincing that a substantial recovery is underway.
Area executives expect the mild business expansion, which got
underway in January, to continue.

Thus, our latest business outlook

survey shows that for February more than five times as many manufacturers
polled in the Third Federal Reserve District are registering increases in
sales and new orders as are realizing decreases.
outlook is still mixed.

However, the business

Thus, one of our Directors reports that

prospects for the paper industry are unchanged and gloomy.

Another

Director, whose company makes fabricated metal products, reports his own
firm is doing well because of orders from the power industry, but that
reports from other industries with which he has contact are uniformily
gloomy.

Nevertheless, a number of regional executives are mildly

optimistic about March.

But part of their optimism reflects an expected

rebound from the business depressing effects of the GM strike rather than
a major shift in economic trends.

Consequently, area businessmen are

reluctant to hire additional employees until more solid evidence of a
recovery is apparent.

District retailers report that in February consumer purchasing
fell back to the level of last year.

One pointed out that considering

that sales were flat all last spring, this is not very comforting.
Durable sales are still running behind a year ago, but not by as much
as they were a few months ago.

Some of the current weakness may be

because of the apprehension and uncertainty about the size of the
Pennsylvania state income tax.
A number of retailers are concerned that not much more is in
the works for spring.

Another filip to demand through special sales

is less likely in the months ahead because no additional discounts are
likely to be forthcoming from manufacturers.

They are watching very

closely so as not to become overstocked again.
On the financial side, a majority of the city banks report
loan demand is soggy.

One bank, however, does report a noticeable

strengthening of loan demand, and several are optimistic about developments in the spring.

All of the banks are concerned with the decline

in short-term rates and the developing profit squeeze.

As they see

it, they are limited in what they can do about the squeeze which some
of them expect to get worse.

Labor costs are rising, loan demand is

too weak to justify increases in lending rates, and cost of some sources
of funds still

is relatively high.

of credit continues to be a problem.

Some of the banks say that quality
None of the banks, however, reports

any progressive deterioration in credit quality is discernible now,
although a number of soured loans have yet to be worked out.
Several of the banks report continuing concern with the
inflation problem; some volunteered comments on their concern about
the potential inflation impact of the administration's economic goals
for 1971.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The consensus view of an informal survey of several of our
directors is that there is a considerable amount of optimistic talk
about the economic outlook at the senior management level in major
firms in the Fourth District and elsewhere.

The optimism, however, is

tempered with caution resulting from a lack of specific evidence
signalling an upturn in overall activity or at the individual firm
level.

As a result, many firms, especially capital goods producers,

are pessimistic about a quick resurgence in economic activity, but
expectations of improvement near the end of 1971 or in early 1972 are
reported to be widespread.
One director, the president of a large manufacturer of
computers and business machines, reported that the ready availability
of credit, declining interest rates, and expectation of stimulative
fiscal policy in fiscal 1972 have generated some optimism, although
many businessmen remain uncertain about the time paths of the
expected recovery.

The key element in the business picture, according

to this director, is the consumer.

Once consumer spending picks up

and utilization of existing plant and equipment returns to near-capacity
levels, business spending for additional plant and equipment will increase
and the recovery process will be underway.

This director indicated that

sales of cash register equipment have held up relatively well, in spite
of numerous postponements of new store locations by major retail chains.
Computer sales, on the other hand, have been severely depressed and are
not expected to recover until yearend or early 1972.

A second director, who is the chairman of a large diversified
manufacturing firm (major divisions include auto components, defense
and space products, and electronics), expressed the view that economic
activity will probably improve during 1971.

He also reported that

there are a number of favorable "straws in the wind" from his firm's
point of view:

consumer-oriented products (radio and TV parts and auto

components) have picked up; orders for offshore oil drilling equipment
have risen; sales of automated supervisory control equipment have edged
up slightly; and Government related business has increased modestly.
Furthermore, this director expressed continued concern about inflation
and indicated that he has expressed directly to senior Administration
officials strong support for the Government's actions in the construction
industry.

He is convinced that the persistent innation is the result

of cost-push pressures.

Some prices have declined and he believes that

excess capacity and competition would force businessmen to be more
responsive in pricing policies in the absence of continued excessive
wage demands.

This director also expressed the view that consumer

confidence is precariously balanced and that further "bad news" or
unexpected shocks could further undermine consumer confidence and,
thus, hamper the expected recovery in economic activity.
A third director, the president of a major glassware and glass
container firm, reported that their new order backlog for consumer
glassware is slightly higher than the year-ago level, reflecting an
increase in orders from retail chains.
equal to the early 1970 level.

Glass container orders are about

Orders for and shipments of industrial

glassware, especially home lighting equipment, are significantly above
last year's level, as a result of the "boom" in housing.

This director

also referred to the "apparent optimism," but indicated that his own
situtation is very quiet, "we're waiting" and "there is nothing
stirring."
A fourth director, the president of a medium-sized machine
tool manufacturing firm, reported that industry leaders are more
optimistic about the chances of a recovery in business and in demand
for machine tools by the end of 1971 or early 1972 than they were two
or three months ago.

The renewed optimism is based, in part, on

current and expected stabilization policies and also on a recent
sharp increase in requests from customers to see salesmen.

So far,

however, the flurry of activity has not been translated into an
increase in new orders.

At the present time, order backlogs for the

industry are at the lowest level in several years, incoming orders are
dismal, and as a result, employment has been sharply curtailed.
On the financial side, two bank directors have expressed
strong sentiments to the effect that the System has gone "far enough"
in reducing interest rates and they are prepared to oppose any further
reductions in the discount rate.

One banker-director, the chairman

of one of the largest banks in the District, expressed grave concern
about the international repercussions of any further easing in
monetary policy, indicating that foreign central bankers will "...not
fool around with us."
demand.

This banker reported no pickup in business loan

This director also serves as a member of the Board of Directors

of several national firms, and he reports that the management of these
firms has no expectations of a quick turnaround in activity in the
immediate future, especially in the manufacturing area.

The second banker-director, the chairman of a medium-sized
bank in the District, was opposed to any further easing of monetary
policy in psychological grounds.

He reported strongly held

convictions that consumer spending will not surge upward as long as
there is a feeling that "...everything is going down."

Banks have

more than enough funds, interest rates keep falling, and individuals
in his area are very concerned about reaching some sort of "bottom"
from which a recovery can start.

This director would like the

System to hold steady on its present course (as he perceives it) and
permit the recovery to unfold.

In his view, consumers could react in

an adverse way to any further signs of monetary ease.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Surveys of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District
indicate general agreement on the following points:

(1) some improve-

ment in manufacturers' shipments, volume of new orders, and backlogs
of orders; (2) significant further improvement in retail sales,
including automobiles; (3) stability in the employment situation,
but no clear evidence of improvement; (4) further reductions of prices
in manufacturing, but not in retail goods and services; (5) sharp
improvement in residential construction, and some increase in nonresidential construction; (6) substantial increases in mortgage loan
demand, and slight increases in consumer loan demand, but no significant
improvement in business loan demand; and (7) a generally more optimistic
outlook regarding future business conditions.
District manufacturers report an improvement during February
in their shipments, volume of new orders, and backlog of orders.
This is the first significant improvement in the sentiment of District
manufacturers since September.

Improvement is reported by important

producers in ferrous metals, metal products, furniture, hosiery, and
synthetic fibers.
Retail sales improved further during February according to
District bankers and businessmen in trade and services.

Automobile

sales continued the sharp upswing begun in January.
Manufacturers report that inventories have declined somewhat
in recent weeks, while retailers' inventories have tended to increase
in line with seasonal expectations.

While some further declines in employment are reported by
District bankers for their respective areas, some improvement is
reported by District manufacturers.

Also, manufacturers report no

significant change recently in the length of the workweek.

On

balance, the District employment situation appears to have stabilized,
although definite improvement is not yet clearly in evidence.
Some further reductions in prices are reported by
manufacturers in textiles, electrical equipment, nonferrous metals,
and coal.

Builders materials producers, however, report price advances,

and retailers indicate that prices of consumer goods and services are
continuing to rise on balance.

Continued upward pressure on wages is

reported by respondents across the Board.
Considerable improvement in residential construction activity
is reported for February by District bankers in South Carolina, North
Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland.

Nonresidential building activity is

also reported significantly improved.

Comments received from survey

respondents indicate a recovery in progress in the construction field.
Mortgage loan demand in District banks is reported to have
improved sharply during February.
slightly, according to bankers.

Consumer loan demand also increased
Business loan demand, however, still

is reported down in February, but not as depressed as it had been for
the previous three months.
The general outlook of survey respondents improved substantially
in recent weeks.

Comments received from respondents indicate growing

optimism concerning consumer spending, residential construction,
employment, and prices.

Some continuing strikes and the prospects

of the strikes during the current year, however, contribute some

caution to respondents' outlooks.

Manufacturers, who have pared

down capital expansion plans rather sharply in recent months, continue
to indicate no significant desire to increase spending in this area in
the near future.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Reports from business leaders reveal that 1971 is off to a
slower start than even they had predicted, especially in the area of
retail sales nevertheless, most businessmen and bankers think there is
some reason for cautious optimism.

Inflation is still causing concern.

Retailers report that 1971 sales are off to a disappointing
start.

For example, an auto dealer describes his sales as up one

week down the next.

A major department store concern indicates slow

January and February sales and that prices are still rising.
customer delinquencies are twice their year-ago level.

Also,

The President

of a luxury jewelry firm says high-priced merchandise is still selling
slowly, but that moderate-priced lines are moving well.
watch and diamond prices have not been going up.

He added that

A representative of

a major appliance manufacturer reports that his company has not noticed
a turnaround in consumer spending.

Added evidence of weakness in

retail sales is indicated by the behavior of sales tax receipts, which
have risen only slightly in some areas.
There are other signs that business is only stabilizing rather
than expanding strongly.

Telephone revenues from commercial and

corporate accounts, especially for long distance calling, have been
rising slugglishly although residential demand has remained strong.

A

diversified electrical manufacturer reports that the only area of his
business with a substantial backlog is electric generating equipment.
According to a paper producer, newsprint sales were weak in January.
Also, aerospace-related layoffs have occurred in a few areas.

A firm

that fabricates metal for aircraft parts is reported to be cutting its
overhead by $30,000 per month.

A leading apparel manufacturer in

Tennessee, previously a very steady employer, recently laid off
workers.
Nevertheless, reports from businessmen and bankers throughout the District indicate that confidence is building.

Some optimism

is being generated by reductions in interest rates and increases in
the availability of financing.

An auto dealer is encouraged by

reductions in his interest expenses, which he expects will permit
greater merchandising efforts that, in turn, should help improve the
retail market.

Construction activity is strong in several areas, with

interest rate reductions expected to encourage further revival.
However, there have been rumors of vacancies in some apartments
catering to singles.
Price increases continue, especially in utility rates, and
inflation remains a concern.

Construction industry representatives

do not think the repeal of the Davis-Bacon Act will have much impact.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The $1065 billion GNP "goal" for 1971, announced by the CEA
a month ago, has been regarded with skepticism by observers in this
District.
billion.

The consensus appears to continue to center on $1050
Nevertheless, the controversy appears to have an impact on

psychology.

The high figure for GNP, coupled with pressures for a

more expansive monetary policy from various sectors (including
Administration circles), is commonly taken to mean that "the government" is determined to get spending rising rapidly, even at the risk
of a renewed acceleration of price inflation.
Demand for workers of all degrees of skill and experience
remains very slow.

Unemployment compensation claims in February

continued to run well above last year's levels in all areas of the
District, except Michigan, where cutbacks in auto production schedules
were underway a year ago.
Strikes are hampering output in many industries, although
the overall impact is much less than during the GM dispute.

At last

reports, labor disputes had closed a laundry appliance manufacturer
in Iowa, a machine tool producer in Illinois, an auto assembly plant
in Wisconsin, and ready-mix concrete facilities in Indianapolis.

Labor

militancy is causing many employers to offer large increases in
compensation in initial stages of negotiations, despite an ample supply
of potential workers.
Evidence available in this District does not support Rinfret's
recent statement that total capital expenditures by business firms will
rise 11 percent in 1971.

Orders for both capital goods components and

finished equipment remain slow.

In the case of machine tools and steel

mill equipment, the situation is extremely depressed.

There is no

prospect for an early recovery for commercial or manufacturing
construction activity.

The airlines are reducing or postponing

acquisitions of new equipment wherever possible.

Railroads and

truckers would like to buy new equipment, but their financial resources
are limited.

However, capital outlays of utilities will be very strong

and the petroleum industry expects to spend about 8 percent more in 1971.
Demand for steel is at a very high level, but it is impossible
to determine what share of current demand represents a desire to build
inventories for strike protection.

Orders are also stimulated by a

desire to anticipate price increases in mid-April and on June 1, when
price moratoriums expire.

A Chicago steel producer describes current

orders as "fantastic," with no recent slackening from the high January
level, as reported by some Eastern mills.

This firm's order backlog is

well above the backlog of the similar period of 1968.
Some observers of auto industry trends are puzzled by the
apparent discrepancy between the 1 percent decline from a year earlier
in retail sales of the automotive group in the January 1-February 20
period, as published by the Bureau of the Census, and the 13-percent
increase in dealer deliveries of passenger cars (at higher prices),
reported by the auto manufacturers.

We are told that some GM dealers

are falsely claiming that some of the new cars they order are already
sold, in order to profit from contest incentives.
size of car is less than a year ago.

Also, the average

These factors appear insufficient,

however, to explain the apparent discrepancy between retail sales and
deliveries.
Some capital expenditures by auto firms are being postponed
indefinitely, awaiting firm decisions on the standards to be adopted
to curb pollution.

Residential construction activity will rise sharply in this
District in the spring season.
ample quantity.

Men and materials are available in

Multi-family units will be especially strong.

Unfortunately, the program to build modular units in the City of
Chicago, started in 1968, has "flopped," according to a recent
evaluation, with only a few units completed and no prospects for a
revival.

There is a push to rehabilitate low-income housing in the

large cities, some of which had been rehabilitated only a few years
ago.

Business of title firms has been 10 to 30 percent higher than

a year earlier in recent months.
The continued heavy calendar of new corporate security issues
continues to surprise informed individuals.

Short-term rates continue

to decline, but there is no consensus on the trend of long-term rates.
Business loan demand at commercial banks is said to be "about
seasonal."

New commitments have increased, but lines are not being

taken down as rapidly.

Large banks are offering to make term loans

more readily—up to seven years in maturity—but usually want to
include interest rate escalators.
rates, so the bargaining continues.

Business firms usually prefer fixed

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The trend of business conditions in the Eighth Federal Reserve
District is generally unchanged from the moderate uptrend reported a
month ago according to a number of businessmen that were interviewed.
Although most reporters indicate that recent levels of activity are
insufficient to support much optimism, all expect substantial gains before
the close of the year.

Retail sales are running slightly ahead of a year

ago on a dollar basis.

Homebuilding is likewise stronger.

The employ-

ment situation, however, is generally stable with few hirings and a
relatively high level of unemployment.

No early improvement is seen in

capital investment, despite lower credit costs.

Financial agencies

report rising availability of both short- and long-term credit.
Some large retailers report that post-Christmas sales continued
ahead of year-ago levels through February, but that the increase was
somewhat less than anticipated on the basis of the sharp pre-Christmas
gains.

The increase from a year ago was only sufficient to offset price

increases.

Sales in real terms, however, are believed to be higher on a

seasonally adjusted basis than during the autumn months.
Most manufacturers made their major retrenchment moves in late
1970 or in January of this year, but further moderate employment reductions
were announced in February.

These layoffs, however, were probably offset

by employment gains in the services, trade, and construction industries.
Most of those interviewed expect unemployment to continue relatively high
through the spring and summer months, reflecting both the conservative
attitude of businessmen in hiring and an increase in the labor force.
Homebuilding continues to be the brightest feature on the
business horizon.

All phases of this industry, including lumber, plywood,

and especially the construction of lower priced homes, report more than

seasonal gains from levels of last summer.
Despite the generally increased optimism by businessmen
since the turn of the year, no early improvement in capital spending
is foreseen.

Few manufacturers appear willing to risk investment in

major expansion projects at this stage.

Exceptions include one

retailer who reported a moderate increase in investment plans, and
the utilities, which were not seriously affected by the slowdown.
Utilities continue to expand to meet longer run demand projections.
Otherwise, the investment slowdown continues, and little optimism
is found for an early resumption of capital spending at levels
existing before the slowdown.
Financial corporations reported further increases in liquidity
during recent weeks.

Mortgage rate reductions have so far been

relatively small, but some agencies state that excessive quantities
of credit are available at the quoted rates, pointing to further
rate reductions.

A number of savings and loan associations are now

advertising for borrowers, and one commercial bank indicated that net
income this year will be well below 1970 levels because of the sharp
decline in bank lending rates.
Respondents, in general, expect the rate of inflation to
continue to subside through 1971.

The agriculture and food sectors

may tend to push prices up in the second half of the year, in contrast
to the downward influence of these sectors in late 1970.

Farm commodity

prices fell sharply late last year, but meat and other livestock
product prices have already turned upward.

With reduced supplies in

prospect in the Third and Fourth Quarters, further increases in such
prices are expected.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Unemployment, seasonally adjusted, in the Ninth Federal Reserve
District has tended to remain at around 5 percent of the labor force
since last fall, and there are no strong indications that it will change
significantly over the next few months.

Although businessmen have

generally become a little more optimistic in their sales and profits
expectations.

This is not reflected in their planned capital

expenditures or hiring policies.

The directors of this bank were

generally disappointed in President Nixon's decision to suspend the
Davis-Bacon provisions regarding the payment of union wages on Federal
and Federally assisted construction projects, preferring somewhat
stronger actions to reduce the rate of inflation.
Although there are some notable exceptions, the directors
of this bank feel that businessmen in the Ninth District are slightly
more optimistic than they were a few months ago.

Businessmen in

general, however, have postponed the expected turnaround date and now
feel that the pickup in activity will not come until the second half
of the year, and then only gradually.

As a result, they are still very

cautious in both their capital expenditure and hiring policies.
Businessmen who are not anticipating a pickup in sales this year are
primarily located in the extreme eastern and western portions of the
District.

In addition, one large Twin Cities manufacturer, who had

large layoffs in 1970, is concerned enough about the outlook to be
predicting further layoffs if business does not improve.
The cautious hiring policies of area businessmen is evident
from activity at State Employment Service offices.

A telephone survey

of 22 nonmetropolitan Minnesota State Employment Office managers
disclosed that employers in their areas generally have no plans to do

any other-than-seasonal hiring in the next few weeks.

Also, 17 of

these managers indicated that some unemployed workers had returned
to their home areas from the Twin Cities.
The results of our latest quarterly industrial expectations
survey, taken early in February, tend to confirm the observations of
the bank directors.

The survey's manufacturing respondents do not

foresee any significant sales improvements in the early months of
this year.

But sales should *ise later this spring and continue to

improve throughout the third quarter.

Although sales are expected to

match last year's levels in the current quarter, they are anticipated
to be 3.6 percent higher than a year earlier in the second quarter,
before advancing 8.8 percent in the third.
The expected improvement in district industrial sales later
this year can be traced to durable goods manufacturers, primarily
those in the electrical and nonelectrical machinery industries.

Both

of these industries have had severe drops in sales over the last year,
but expect to rebound quite sharply by the third quarter of this year.
In addition, manufacturers in the primary metals, fabricated metals,
transportation equipment, and scientific instrument industries
expected strong increases in third quarter sales.
Sales gains in the nondurable goods industries are not
expected to be as dramatic as in durable goods industries, but these
manufacturers also foresee definite improvements by the third quarter.
For the most part, the directors of this bank expressed
disappointment with President Nixon's recent suspension of the DavisBacon Act provisions and felt that substantially stronger action was
needed.

One director felt that the unions "called his bluff, and that

(President Nixon's) action was a weak-kneed backdown after all that

conversation."

Construction people privately feel that suspension

of the Davis-Bacon Act will have no effect on the rise in construction
costs.

One director, while disillusioned with the president's specific

action, did feel that further steps could be taken in the future if
construction costs continue to rise.

Another director, who is

opposed to wage and price controls in principle, favored the
Administration's action to suspend the Davis-Bacon provisions.

According

to him, the Davis-Bacon Act supported artificially high construction
wages in his area, and wages will not return to normal levels.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

The qualifiedly optimistic cast to Tenth District economic
activity reported on last month would again seem to be borne out on the
basis of reports from Directors and conversations with nearly two dozen
purchasing agents representing manufacturing, wholesale, and retail
firms doing business both nationally and within the several District
states.

As was the case last month, construction activity was singled

out as being a sector of considerable strength.

In addition, steel

stockpiling is making a positive contribution to inventory investment
on the part of several steel-using producers among those queried.

At

the same time, retail trade thus far has failed to show any significant
signs of buoyancy.
In a number of the District metropolitan areas, construction
activity appears to be quite strong.

Retail trade, on the other hand,

appears to be merely holding its own over year-ago levels.

However,

the auto component is a soft spot in the overall sales picture, with
the major impetus to auto sales being provided by small cars.

In

Kansas City within recent weeks, Ford Motor Company has announced some
shaving of earlier first quarter scheduled production.

The General

Motors assembly plant in Kansas City, which turns out Buicks, Oldsmobiles,
and Pontiacs, has not made any such announcement and within the industry
it is acknowledged that the Pontiac Division is faced with the biggest
job of rebuilding its dealer stocks—a fact that supports high activity
levels for the Kansas City assembly plant.
Looking down the road to the outlook for the months ahead, one
Director in the steel fabricating business reported that work was backed

up and expressed optimism over the outlook for new orders.

However,

another Director voiced a good deal of concern over what he felt to
be a general lack of consumer confidence and expressed the view that,
unless a turn in confidence could be brought about, he was decidedly
pessimistic about the economic outlook.

Yet, this concern about

recession appeared to be a minority view on the part of most
respondents.

In terms of the responses of the purchasing agents, what

was left unsaid may well have been as significant as the information
they volunteered.

Last July, when these sources were queried, their

overall attitudes regarding the outlook were clearly pessimistic.
This time, none mentioned the danger of recession, and the consensus was
that moderate and continuing improvement in economic activity was
expected.
With respect to the price situation, both for the present and
the near term, the responses of purchasing agents suggested little
abatement of inflationary pressures.

As our sample included a large

number of steel users, expectations of price advances came as no
surprise—particularly since a number of these firms had purchased
steel under a one-year, no-price increase arrangement.

At its

expiration, the purchasing agents expect sizable price increases to be
posted.

However, even for those firms not heavily involved in steel

purchasing, they report that the cost of materials continues to rise
at about the same rate as in past months, with little price shaving
occurring.

Given this price picture, despite expectations of an

improved sales picture in the months ahead, inventory investment—with
the exception of steel as noted earlier—is quite conservative.

The

view of one purchasing agent, that "we are as low on inventories as

we can safely operate," would seem representative of the respondents
as a whole.

Cost consciousness is the overriding consideration in

inventory behavior and imports are utilized wherever cost advantages
dictate.

In terms of the prices which these firms charge for their

own outputs, cost increases of materials are cited as the basis for
present and future price increases to their customers.
On the banking scene, developments seem to corroborate events
in the real sectors discussed aboved.

Overall, loan demand remains

weak, and this is especially true for some of the large national
accounts.

While there has been little change in business loan

demand during the past month, an exception is those firms who are
borrowing to finance steel stockpiling.

Loan demand on the part of

locally based firms appears to be relatively stronger than from
national firms, and some slight pickup in loan inquiries is occurring.
Some of the slack in business loan demand is being taken up by other
loan categories.

For example, some bankers report a rather noticeable

increase in their participations from country correspondents.

Also,

the demand for construction loans is strong.
Deposit flows continue strong in both demand and time accounts,
considering seasonal factors.

The large banks have reduced rates on

large CDs in line with the national market.

In addition, the

beginning of some easing of rates on consumer CDs is appearing.

For

the most part, however, banks appear to be willing to encourage deposit
growth in anticipation of an improvement in business loan demand in
the coming months.

Some banks are now soliciting loans in an attempt

to generate loan volume.

In the meantime, excess funds are being

placed mainly in Federal funds and other short-term liquid assets.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Although bankers in the Eleventh District generally expect
economic activity in this area to improve over last year, weak loan
demand and continued inflation remain worrisome.

A recent survey of

bankers (some of whom are head office and branch directors) from
large- and intermediate-size banks reveal that, despite a general
lowering of interest rates, loan demand continues to be sluggish.

Real

estate lending has picked up slightly in some areas, but business and
consumer loan demands are generally weak.

Since December, demand

deposits (not seasonally adjusted) have declined, while time and
savings deposits have risen moderately, permitting banks to lower
rates paid on CDs.

Loan demand in the District remains sluggish and

nearly all respondents report no material change in recent weeks.
There has been some slight increase in real estate loans, especially
at the smaller institutions, but both business and consumer instalment
loans are reported to have declined.

Defense industry layoffs and some

uncertainty about the economic outlook probably account for much of the
weakness in loan demand.

In addition many bankers note that continued

inflation has tended to dampen consumer optimism and spending.

However,

pent-up demand for housing, coupled with lower mortgage rates, has led
to some increase in real estate loans.
All of the respondents reduced their prime rate recently,
with most of the larger banks now quoting the New York prime rate.
However, many of the smaller banks report prime rates 1 to 1 3/4
percentage points higher than those in New York.

Presently the larger

banks typically carry 10 percent of their loans at the prime rate, while
smaller banks report carrying anywhere from 2 to 30 percent of their
loans at prime.

Nearly all of the banks surveyed do make mortgage loans;

however, the smaller banks usually report holding a larger portion
of their loan portfolio in mortgages.

Current policy towards

investment as well as loan portfolio management differs widely
between the institutions surveyed.

In general, the respondents

currently hold 60 percent of their investment portfolios in U. S.
Government securities.
municipal holdings.

However, a few banks lean heavily on

At present, large banks typically hold 40

percent of their investment portfolio in municipal securities with
an average maturity of eight years.

Smaller banks generally hold

a somewhat larger amount of municipals, with a six-year average
maturity.

Nearly all of the respondents report regular participation

in the Federal funds market; however, few have outstanding commitments with other banks for regular transactions.

Of those with

outstanding commitments, larger banks currently buy or sell from
$2 to $15 million daily, while smaller banks trade from $0.5 to
$3.5 million per day.
Probably reflecting sluggish economic activity as well as
seasonal factors, demand deposits at most of the respondents' banks
have declined since yearend.

Demand deposit levels have generally

fallen (5 to 10 percent annual rate)—with some of the larger banks
showing even a more substantial decline (15 to 25 percent).

Total

time and savings deposits are up at most banks, as passbook savings
deposits have shown a moderate increase since December.

Although

many of the smaller institutions do not issue large CDs ($100,000
plus), those that do report a sizable volume of new issues since yearend.
Although market interest rates have fallen across-the-board,
nearly all of the banks surveyed are paying the ceiling rate on

passbook savings deposits.

In the light of recent declines in money

market rates, some of the respondents recommend that the Regulation Q
ceiling on savings deposits be lowered to 4 percent, although not
until ceiling rates payable by savings and loan associations are
lowered.
Recent figures on economic conditions in the District seem
to indicate continued slow growth.

Although actual nonagricultural

employment for the District was down slightly in January, seasonal
expectations had suggested a much sharper drop.

Retail sales for

January and early February are up 9 percent over last year—a possible
sign of some slight improvement in the consumer sector.
Industrial production has remained essentially unchanged with
some small increase in manufacturing of both durable and nondurable
goods.
Texas oils allowable for March are unchanged from February,
which makes them more than 5 percent lower than the record levels of
last November.

However, all other District states are now producing

at record levels.
to be improving.

In addition, District agricultural conditions appear
Expected acreage to be planted with sorghum and other

grains is up 10 to 14 percent over last year.

Placements into Texas

feedlots during January increased 45 percent over the same period a
year ago—resulting in a new record number of cattle on feed.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

There has been no basic change in the attitudes of businessmen
in the Twelfth District.

They see little sign of further declines in

economic activity, but they also see little sign of an immediate
recovery.

To some extent, this situation is a reflection of continued

cautious spending by consumers.

Banks report continued increases in

deposits, but no equivalent rise in loan demand.
Most of the businesses contacted in the District report no
change in their spending plans.

They are awaiting further increases in

orders before instituting expansion plans.
from this general picture.

There are regional variations

In Arizona, new orders were up in February

after two months of declines, and production is at the highest level
since last March.

In Utah, mining and manufacturing are doing well,

but in Southern California, the problems of Lockheed axe causing some
concern and adding to feelings of uncertainty.

Many vacant industrial

properties in Southern California are on the market without much interest
being expressed at this time by prospective tenants.

On the District

level, business inventories have stabilized at present levels and further
declines are unlikely.
The level of unemployment has stopped rising in most areas.

Small

employment increases are reported in Arizona and Southern California, but
Washington continues to have problems as the rate of registered unemployment was higher again February.
One industry that is expecting a mild recovery is lumber and
plywood manufacturing.

Production is rising and some mills have reopened

in Oregon and Washington.

Although lumber prices have risen, some

manufacturers feel that the upward pressure may diminish somewhat between
now and the spring building season.

Consumer spending has been cautious.

Retailers have reported

some successful post-Christmas sales, but the volume was approximately
the same as in 1970.

Consumers are not making greater purchases of

big-ticket items, such as refrigerators and furniture, and they are
very price-conscious in their buying attitudes.
durables are sluggish.

Generally, sales of

Another aspect of this same situation is a

higher rate of repayments on consumer credit.

Overall, retail sales

are only slightly higher than in the same period last year, but
retailers expect the sales picture to improve later in the year.
Automobile sales reflect this greater caution on the part of
consumers.

In most areas, sales are described as slow and this is

true even in such otherwise buoyant areas as Arizona, where auto
sales are at approximately the same level as last year.

The one

category generally singled out as registering increasing sales is that
of foreign-made cars, there are also some reports that sales of
domestic compact cars and used cars are relatively strong.
Banks continue to experience rising deposits but little change
in loan demand.

Business loan demand is stable, despite efforts of

individual bulks to generate more loan activity.

There has been no

marked increased in mortgage demand, despite lower interest rates.
In particular, savings and loan associations have had difficulty in
generating sufficient loans to utilize their heavy inflow of savings.
The savings and loans are attracting some funds because they have not
lowered their interest rates, while banks have cut their CD and
consumer-type deposit rates.

Some banks report that they are

considering the possibility of lowering the passbook savings rate,
but none has done so yet.

There are some banks, however, that have not

cut their CD and time deposits rates.

Most of these are smaller banks,

with the exception of one large California bank that is actively
promoting its higher rates on consumer-type time deposit.

In

summary, the banks have sufficient funds to meet an increase in loan
demand, and in the meantime, there is downward pressure on interest
rates.

