CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 15, 1971

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 14
Seventh District - Chicago page 16
Eighth District - St. Louis page 19
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 21
Tenth District - Kansas City page 24
Eleventh District - Dallas page 27
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 30

SUMMARY*

The latest Red Book reports from the District Banks are on the whole
more bullish regarding the economic outlook than the reports of recent months.
The President's new economic program has been, in general, very well received
throughout the country.

To be sure, with the possible exception of the temporary

"freeze", which appears to have been almost fully accepted by all segments of
the economy, the actual impact of the program on economic activity is as yet
barely discernible.

Consumer spending was already on the rise during the first

half of August, before the announcement of the program, and it was generally
felt that, apart from some marginal situations, the proposed business investment
tax credit is not likely to significantly stimulate capital outlays so long
as the rate of utilization of existing capacity remains low.

Nevertheless,

the program seems, at the very least, to have had a beneficial psychological
impact, halting the erosion in confidence that had been developing in previous
months.

Reports of the effect of the program on domestic business firms'

demand for bank credit were mixed.
A rise in consumer spending during August was reported by most
District Banks.

The St. Louis Bank noted a continued moderate upward movement

in retail sales in most major centers of that District, with sales in Memphis
rising sharply in recent days.

In the Chicago District, sales of domestically

produced major appliances were running above last year's level, with the
margin of gain widening.

A pickup in retail sales was also reported by the

Richmond and New York Banks, and retailers in the latter District are looking
forward to the Christmas season with optimism.

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]

Residential construction has been continuing at a high level in a
number of Districts.
industries.

This development is having a favorable effect on several

The San Francisco Bank mentioned the lumber industry in particular,

while the Chicago and St. Louis Banks pointed to home furnishing and appliance
manufacturers as well as building supply industries.
Near-term prospects for increased business outlays for plant and
equipment, however, are not regarded as particularly bright, although respondents
in several Districts look for some improvement in the long run.

The main

deterrent to a pickup in such outlays at this time is, of course, the relatively
low rate of utilization of existing facilities.

The Richmond Bank, for example,

reports that the overwhelming majority of manufacturers contacted believe that
their current plant and equipment is adequate, or more than adequate.

Most

respondent firms in the St. Louis District indicate they are operating at less
than capacity and have no immediate plans for plant expansion.

In the New

York District there are also doubts about any near-term stimulus from the
proposed investment tax credit.

Businessmen may, in general, be more optimistic

than previously, but they seem to be adopting a "wait-and-see" attitude.
While they are perhaps reexamining marginal investment projects more closely,
they also seem to be waiting for projected sale increases to materialize.
Three Districts reported some pickup in loan demand by domestic
business firms that may not have been directly attributable to recent
international developments.

Some of the bankers contacted in a special System

survey by the New York and Minneapolis Banks attributed the increase partly to
inventory building.

The other seven Federal Reserve Banks that reported on their

survey results indicated domestic demand for business loans had remained
"weak" or "unchanged".

Indeed, Kansas City commented that "the deterioration

noted in July appears to have continued into late August", and Richmond observed

that not only has there been "no evidence of unusual strength in business
loan demand" but "pressure for business loan commitments appears to have
abated" since the wage-price freeze.

Four Districts commented on bankers'

expectations regarding business loan demands over the next few months, noting
that these expectations were generally on the "hopeful" side.

Interestingly,

two of these Districts, Philadelphia and Minneapolis, were among those
reporting some recent strengthening.

The other two were St. Louis and Dallas.

FIRST DISTRICT—BOSTON

While there is no firm evidence of a strengthening in business
activity, expectations are more bullish and there are tentative signs of a
quickening in business investment spending.
A special survey of the District's eight largest commercial banks
disclosed no pickup in domestic business loans during August and early September.
Domestic business loan demand continued sluggish in this period, with only a few
banks expecting a revival in the coming months.

Five of the banks reported an

expansion of credit resulting from the unsettled international monetary situation.
These banks reported that outstanding lines ofcredit to Japanese banks were drawn
to their full, and there were reports

that some banks were unable to satisfy the

demand for foreign credit due to the banks' participation in the voluntary credit
restraint program.

One bank reported participating in Japanese loans while one

or two other banks reached their guideline ceilings.
Most of our directors were on vacation this week and could not be reached.
Both directors contacted indicated that President Nixon's economic policies have
dramatically changed attitudes in the business community.

The directors summarized

the response as "a 180-degree shift in regard to prospects".

While there is no

firm evidence of a pickup in business activity, there are tentative signs of a
revival in business capital spending, tied to the passage of the investment tax
credit.

A large machine tool manufacturer is finding increased interest, but no

increase in orders yet.

A district railroad is reported to have speeded up the

introduction of automatic signaling equipment as a result of the investment tax
credit.

The processed engineering division of a large conglomerate is now increasing

its order backlogs, as is a division manufacturing heavy industrial engines.

No problems were reported by bank directors arising from implementing
the wage-price freeze.
All our academic respondents were concerned about the slow pace of the
business recovery, despite the President's new economic policies.

Professor

Wallich was skeptical about the short-term impact of the President's announcement that the freeze would definitely end November 13.

He felt that continuance

of the freeze was the President's biggest weapon—that too much was given away
too quickly.

Nevertheless, Professor Eckstein believes improved price performance

is a political necessity, and thus is confident that "the necessary steps will be
taken after the freeze.

Professor Samuelson and Tobin both expressed agreement

with the Okun proposal for Phase Two.

Tobin is philosophically disposed toward

limiting the power of a wage-price review board to publicity and not giving it
compulsory powers.
Eckstein's preferred fiscal package would include an increase in the
minimum standard deduction, a "permanent" 10 percent investment tax credit accompanied with elimination of the accelerated depreciation allowance, and a
"stabilization" surcharge on corporate profits; i.e., raising the corporate
income tax rate by 5 to 10 percentage points.

He feels that the proposed step-

down from 10 to 5 percent in the investment tax credit rate is too disruptive
and must be changed in one of several ways:

(1) exact a (smaller) permanent

credit, (2) make the transition more gradual, or (3) give the President discretion
on the date for cutting or eliminating the 10 percent rate.

Professor Samuelson

felt the 10 to 5 percent step-down in the investment tax credit rate would have
good intertemporal effects.

He agreed that combining the tax credit with the

asset depreciation range (ADR) system was "too much"; Professor Tobin feels ADR

should be abandoned in any case.

Opposing permanent losses in Federal

revenues, Tobin advocates a one-year suspension of the auto excise tax and a
one year 7 percent investment tax credit or, alternatively, a net investment
credit.
There was some degree of agreement on the appropriate course of
monetary policy among three of the professors.

To Tobin, "this is not the

time for running a restrictive monetary policy."

He fears a repetition of

1968 in reverse; i.e., the authorities must avoid overestimation of the fiscal
stimulus package.

Tobin urges getting interest rates down to the levels of last

March and would not be distressed if that entailed a 10 percent rate of growth
in the money supply.

Although Samuelson wants attention focused on the rate of

the business expansion, not on any particular rate of growth of the money supply,
when pressed, he said that he would be disappointed by a rate of less than 6 percent.

According to Eckstein, the primary responsibility of monetary policy at

present is to prevent long-term interest rates from rising.

Similarly, short-term

rates should be held "relatively easy" to "let the program have its effect".

The

secondary responsibility of monetary policy during this period of "watchful waiting"
is to avoid a rate of growth of the money supply of 10 to 12 percent.

If there

have not been more tangible signs of improvement in the economy by the time of the
next open market committee meeting, Eckstein concluded that monetary policy would
have to accept more of the burden of stimulating the economy's performance.
Professor Wallich, on the other hand, felt that monetary policy should focus on
getting back to a 6 percent rate of money supply, as long as this did not yield
"fabulous" short-term interest rates.
of the money supply risks

He cautioned that continued rapid growth

building in future inflation.

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

Comments by the directors of the New York Bank and the Buffalo
branch and conversations with some large retailers indicate that initial
reaction to the President's new economic program has been favorable and that
there is cautious optimism regarding the future.

An improvement in consumer

spending, which had started to manifest itself even before August 15, was
reported as the brightest current development, but doubts were expressed about
any near-term stimulus from the proposed investment tax credit.

Most directors

thought there would be good compliance with the wage-price freeze during Phase
One, but some anticipated there would be problems if the freeze were extended.
Consumer spending reportedly has shown definite improvement compared
with previous months.

One of the directors, associated with a Rochester

department store, "sensed" that consumers approved of the President's program;
he noted that since August 15 the pickup in August retail sales had become
more pronounced.

The chairman of the board of a large New York City bank and

the president of an upstate bank also thought consumer confidence had improved,
but the latter director commented that it remained to be seen to what extent,
and when, this improvement would be reflected in increased consumer outlays.
The two retailers who were contacted by telephone, who have stores nationwide,
reported that business had been quite good throughout August and that the
President's announcement seemed to have had only little effect in increasing
consumer demand further. They, observed that other department store officials
with whom they had discussed the matter had had this same experience.

The

retailers indicated they were quite optimistic about the forthcoming holiday
season.
The directors thought that although business confidence may have
been strengthened somewhat by the President's new program, there was little
likelihood that the investment tax credit would bring a significant spurt in capital

outlays over the near term, primarily because of the current low rates of
utilization of existing plant and equipment.

Directors in Buffalo thought that

for those businesses that had already made capital spending plans, "the
reinstatement of the tax credit would be a windfall", while for those who
"had been on the fence" concerning a projectt passage of the proposed legislation
"might trigger a decision to move ahead".

One of the New York Bank directors

noted that "much of the American-made machinery and equipment affected by
the tax credit uses foreign-made parts".

However, the chairman of the board

of a large New York City bank believed the tax credit would promote capital
spending "ultimately", and another director thought the proposed credit would
stimulate those investments that would "save labor costs and cut operating
expenditures".
Most directors thought there would be little, if any, erosion of
compliance with the wage-price freeze over the ninety-*-day period.

Buffalo branch

directors observed that the short period involved and the fact that noncompliance
would stand out made the current freeze self-enforcing.

Several of these

directors, however, looked for enforcement problems if the freeze were extended,
while the chairman of the board of a large New York City bank felt that "a myriad
of administrative problems would appear" even during Phase One.

Another director,

the president of a nationwide manufacturing concern, expects an erosion in
compliance "as time goes on", and the president of an upstate bank said he
believes some people are "trying to find ways to secure exceptions to the
freeze".
Most respondents to a survey of six large New York City banks
indicated that some unexpected growth in demand for business credit had
developed at their institutions in recent weeks over and above the increases

that clearly reflected post-August 15 developments in the foreign exchange
markets, but the majority had no explanation for this apparent strength or
declared their particular bank's experience was related to something unique.
The few explanations that were offered focused primarily on inventory building.
"Prudent businessmen feel they should get in their stocks while the freeze is
on."

"Distributors are expecting a very strong Christmas."

"Perhaps there is

some inventorying in anticipation of a longshoremen's strike on the East and
Gulf Coasts."

Nonetheless, probably a major part of the huge increase in

loans to wholesalers, which constituted the biggest rise, was attributable to
borrowings made immediately prior to the flotation of the yen by Japanese
trading concerns resident in the United States.

THIRD DISTRICT —

PHILADELPHIA

The increase in optimism about the economic outlook in general that
followed President Nixon's speech in mid-August has had little effect on the
specific plans of individual firms in the Third District.

Most are still taking

a "wait-and-see" attitude about how the new economic policies will affect their
own firms.

Area bankers are generally hopeful of a further pickup in loan demand

on a wide front.

Several of them also look for higher interest rates near the end

of the year and into 1972.
Most businessmen in the Third District are hopefully optimistic about
the economy.

Before the President's speech, the prevailing view was that business

was recovering from last year's recession but that inflation would remain a serious
problem because of rising labor costs.

The President's new economic policies have

been greeted favorably, and did increase the general level of optimism about the
economic outlook.

However, it is difficult to detect much of a change in the out-

look businesses now have for their own firms.
For example, in terms of such key indicators as new orders, shipments, and
unfilled orders, District manufacturers are no more optimistic now than they were
a month ago.
outlay

As for capital expenditures, there seems to be a slight boost in

plans, but most manufacturers want to wait until the incentives for new

plant and equipment are more certain and projected sales actually materialize.
There is no noticeable increase in hiring plans since early August.

On the price

front, area manufacturers are a little less pessimistic than before the President's
speech.

Loan demand at Philadelphia banks has shown some pickup in recent
weeks, but the increase has been modest for most banks.

Most of the increase

in loan demand reflects rising business demand for credit.
is flat at all but one large bank,

Consumer borrowing

and in that one only up slightly.

Only one

of the banks we contacted was willing to attribute much of the increased loan
demand to foreign sources, although weekly reporting statistics indicate a strong
counterseasonal upsurge in the foreign loan picture.
Looking ahead, local bankers are generally hopeful of a further pickup
in loan demand.
demand.

One banker looked to inventory building as a source of loan

Another said that an expanding economy in general would lead to more

loan demand.

Another thought construction might provide additional stimulus.

As for interest rates, the consensus among bankers is that the Federal
funds rate is out of line with other short-term rates and will likely drop in the
near future.

Looking toward the end of the year, however, several bankers thought

rates would start climbing.

One banker said as the economy picks up steam,

"rates are bound to rise".

Another thought the inflation premium would probably

increase after the freeze on wages and prices.

Still another indicated that the

cost of money for banks would likely go up and this would in turn push up bank
rates.

FOURTH DISTRICT —

CLEVELAND

Business and bank economists attending the meeting of the Fourth
District Business Economists Roundtable on September 10 at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland expect an acceleration in real growth next year, with limited
additional stimulus expected as a result of the President's new program.

The

economists viewed the need to improve confidence as a key element in the
domestic part of the program which, hopefully, will be translated into higher
consumer and business spending.
activity appearing in

Our directors reported signs of increased

various market areas, but the economists, our directors,

and other businessmen contacted are waiting to see what the Congress will do
with respect to the Administration's legislative proposals.
The concensus of about forty economists who attended the roundtable
meeting at this Bank was that the President's program will add somewhat to the
overall strengthening of the business expansion in 1972, and reduce the rate of
inflation temporarily.

Unemployment is expected to remain high

gradually during the year.

but move down

Beginning with the fourth quarter of 1971 and con-

tinuing throughout 1972, the economists projected current-dollar gains in GNP
averaging $25 billion per quarter.

The group's median forecast called for real

growth next year of 5.6 percent, a rise in the GNP price deflator of 3.2 percent
(but accelerating to about a 4 percent rate by the end of next year), and unemployment averaging 5.5 percent for the year (but declining to 5.2 percent by the year-end).
In general, the economists reported that it was too early to determine what effect
the proposed investment tax credit would have on the magnitude and timing of their
firms' capital expenditures in 1972.

In most cases, capital spending plans are still in the formative
stages and have yet to be presented to boards of directors for approval.
Furthermore, many firms are waiting to see what the Congress will do about
the tax credit; there was some uncertainty about whether or not the Congress
will legislate the full 10 percent tax credit, and then lower it to 5 percent
next August.
Steel industry economists reported that the current inventory liquidation
is proceeding more rapidly than usual, and should be completed by the year-end.
Compared with previous labor-contract years, the liquidation is faster this year
not because steel consumption is any faster, but because customers are not placing
their usual orders after the contract settlements.
Business economists whose firms and industries are dependent on the
automotive market agreed that a reasonable forecast for new car sales next year
is 10.5 million units, with imports accounting for 1.7 million units.

These

economists estimated that about 200,000 cars were added to 1971 sales as a result
of last year's General Motor's strike, which should bring this year's total to
about 10 million units.

A normal auto year in 1972, according to these economists,

would have called for sales of 10.2 million.

Thus, the proposed repeal of the

7 percent excise tax credit on new cars is expected to stimulate next year's new
car sales by roughly 3 percent.
Most of the economists attending the meeting were somewhat dubious
about the likelihood of limiting wage-price increases after the "freeze" expires,
and thought that any guidelines established would eventually be eroded.

In that

connection, Professor Richard Selden, University of Virginia, who attended the

meeting as a guest speaker, was critical of incomes policies (citing the
usual arguments) and noted that such policies were not particularly successful
in many European countries.

His view was that inflation could be eliminated

only if the central bank maintained the money supply growth at a rate consistent
with the nation's rate of potential real economic expansion.
Our industrial directors commented at meetings held in early September
that the President's program had not yet had visible impact on their firms'
sales or production.

One director, the president of a machine tool company,

expects a short-run depressing effect in his industry until the Congress acts
on the investment tax credit.

If it is approved, he believes small companies

will be the first to place orders for machine tools, and large companies the
last to react.

A long lag is likely on the part of large companies because the

ordering of machine tools starts in the engineering deparment and works its way
up to the board of directors for approval.

The directors did not think it likely

that the machine tool industry would begin to benefit from the tax credit until
about mid-1972.
On the financial side, our Bank directors commented that they would be
willing to keep interest rates down on the asset side of their balance sheet
but they were concerned over how to keep interest rates from rising on the
liability side.

Other bankers in the District recently contacted said the only

real strength during August was a "phenomenal" rise in bankers' acceptances from
foreign customers.

FIFTH DISTRICT —

RICHMOND

Latest survey data, coupled with informal reports from this Bank's
directors, indicate that economic conditions in the Fifth District continue in
a moderate uptrend.

The manufacturing sector has apparently registered some

further improvement over the past four weeks, while retail sales continue to
expand at the recent moderate pace.
District states.

Construction activity remains strong in all

Banking respondents report strong demand for consumer loans

but no unusual strength in demand for other classes of loans.

All of our con-

tacts indicate that confidence among both businessmen and bankers has been
sharply improved since announcement of the President's new economic program.
Manufacturers in our latest survey report further increases in new
orders and shipments and a small increase in backlogs.

A reduction in inventories

is also indicated, although many manufacturers continue to view their inventory
levels as high relative to sales prospects.

Employment is down in some industries,

notably steel, electronics, paper, and chemicals, and a number of manufacturers
report a small reduction in the length of the workweek.

The overwhelming majority

of manufacturing respondents beli-eve that current plant and equipment is adequate
or more than adequate.
In the trade and services area, respondents report that retail sales
continue to rise at about the same pace as in the preceding reporting period.
Banking respondents report further gains in automobile sales and sizable increases
in consumer loan demand.

Trade respondents believe that their inventories, which

have risen somewhat over the past four weeks, are high relative to current and
prospective sales.

No change is indicated in trade and services employment.

Construction spending continues strong in all District states,
although the number of respondents reporting increases in residential building
is down from the preceding survey.

Bankers report some slackening in the demand

for mortgage loans but demands for such loans have been unusually heavy in recent
months.
The diffusion of responses from bankers suggests little more than
seasonal increases in business loan demand.

A special telephone survey of

senior officers of large District banks turned up no evidence of unusual
strength in business loan demand since announcement of the President's new
economic program. These bankers indicated, as a matter of fact, that pressure
for business loan commitments appears to have abated since the wage-price freeze
was instituted.
Cash receipts from farm marketings in the District in the first half
of 1971 were 2 percent below the comparable period a year earlier, with reductions
in livestock receipts accounting for all the decline.

The season's gross returns

from flue-cured tobacco marketings through September were up 12 percent, as prices
were 4 percent higher and volume of sales were up 7 percent.
Both businessmen and bankers have reacted favorably to the wage-price
freeze, although both groups remain concerned about the shape of the program
for Phase Two.

Our latest survey showed a sizable jump in the number of respondents

expecting improvement in general economic conditions in the near future.
than half the banking respondents now fall into this category.

More

SIXTH DISTRICT —

ATLANTA

There has been a favorable reaction among businessmen and bankers
in the District to the President's program, and it is hoped that some sort
of controls will be continued at the end of the freeze.

There appears to be

an anticipation of increased consumer confidence that will eventually increase
consumer spending, but there is skepticism about the overall effectiveness
of wage and price controls in Phase Two unless wage increases can be effectively
controlled.
outlook.

Agriculture and tourism are bright spots in the region's economic

Construction is showing evidence of strength in some areas and

overbuilding in others.
Residential construction continues to pace the economic recovery
in the Southeast.

Activity is particularly strong in much of Florida.

Large condominium projects have been announced for the Jacksonville and Ocala
areas.

A retirement community and a city for 7,000 have been announced for

central Florida.

A large condominium is also being constructed in the

Nashville area.
Nonresidential construction is highlighted by the start-up of work
on the Louisiana domed stadium.
the New Orleans economy.
in north Florida.

This project, it is hoped, will revitalize

Two bridges are to be built along the Gulf Coast

Plans for two nuclear generating plants have been announced.

One is to be built in Tennessee and the other in Georgia.
center is planned for the Orlando area.

A new convention

Ground will be broken in the fall

on a $100 million office park and distribution center located in the Miami
area.

However, there is also evidence of overexpansion, at least in the Atlanta

area.

It has been reported that nearly 25 percent of the space in Atlanta

office parks is vacant and that total available space is expected to increase
by more than one third by next summer.

The market for apartments and warehouses

in the Atlanta area has also been saturated.

The vacancy rate for apartments

and unused warehouse space is rising rapidly.

With construction still under

way, it may take several years for demand to catch up with supply.
The agriculture outlook is very promising.
benefitting from large crops and firm prices.

Tobacco farmers are

Cotton, corn, soybean, peanut,

and sugar cane crops are all expected to be good to excellent.

The movement

of frozen orange concentrate is holding up extremely well.
The recreation and tourist industries are enjoying prosperous
conditions and prospects are good.

Disney World will open on October 1, and

the estimated first-year attendance has been increased to 11 million.
Employment at this project will total about 6,500.
around the project continued to advance.

Moreover, land prices

Disney Enterprises have reportedly

purchased a large tract of land along the Atlantic Ocean for development as
a beach resort.
season.

Most major resort areas in the District report a good summer

Hotel and motel occupancy on Florida's Gold Coast is running well

ahead of last year.

Auto racing events are having a favorable impact on

income in central Alabama.

Attendance at the annual Walking Horse Celebration

in Shelbyville, Tennessee, increased to 120,000 this year.
The depressed airline industry in the Miami area is reportedly
bottoming out and headed for improvement.

A textile mill that recently closed

in Alabama may be reopened by another firm.

Plant announcements include

a conveying equipment plant in Mississippi, a stove manufacturing plant in
Georgia, and a plant to manufacture campers in Tennessee.
The retail sales outlook is mixed.

An improvement in consumer

sentiment is reported in some areas, but no substantial or widespread
pickup in consumer spending is reported.

SEVENTH DISTRICT —

CHICAGO

Observers in this District are in general agreement that 1972 will
see a substantial 5 to 6 percent rise in real output, with some abatement of
the rate of price inflation.
President's program.

These views have been strengthened by the

All evidence available to us indicates that business

firms, labor unions, and state and local governments are cooperating with the
"letter and spirit" of the wage-price freeze.

Limited information provided

by retailers indicates that sales picked up after mid-August.

New hirings

have not accelerated, but layoffs are less frequent than was the case last
spring.
Many employees have been promised increases in compensation to be
effective as soon as the control is removed.

Moreover, there is strong

dissatisfaction with the price freeze on the part of manufacturers that had
planned price increases, after having previously granted wage increases.
The proposed reenactment of the investment tax credit is very popular
with both producers and purchasers of capital goods.

There was no immediate,

discernible impact, however, on orders for new equipment.

Large firms that

always have a "shelf" of investment projects are reexamining marginal situations.
But there is concern that the Congress will cancel the Treasury's liberalized
depreciation rules, which are believed to be about as important as the investment
tax credit as a stimulus to capital outlays.
The import surcharge, and devaluation of the dollar, may deter
imports of finished capital goods.

However, some foreign components (such as

ball bearings from Japan) have been selling at prices 30 to 40 percent below
prices of domestic counterparts.

The deterrent to auto imports will be minimized

because the two principal domestic subcompacts are now being produced at capacity.
Imports from the Orient now hold virtually the entire domestic market for smaller

consumer electronic products, including TV sets with screens under 16 inches.
These markets are not expected to be recaptured, but inroads in other product
lines may be slowed.

Imports of small washers and refrigerators, which have

become significant this year, face no domestic competition at present.
Employers hope that a guideline framework will help hold down
increases in worker compensation in post-freeze negotiations, from the recent
standard of 10 percent or more annually, to perhaps 6 percent.

The continuing

ample supply of people seeking work will tend to aid such negotiations.
One result of the wage-price freeze has been a near blackout on
publicity on price developments—up or down.

Some businesses suggest that

price discounting will be restricted to compensate for inability to raise prices
of other products.
Sales of domestically produced major appliances are running about 5
percent above last year with the margin of gain widening.

Purchases of these

items appear to be related to the rising number of house completions.

Demand

for furniture has been excellent in recent months.
Steel producers are experiencing a somewhat more rapid pickup in
orders than had been expected a month ago.

Auto firms now expect to be ordering

steel on a normal basis in November, rather than in early 1972.
of steel are "unbalanced" in some cases.

Inventories

About two thirds of the strike-hedge

steel inventory is expected to be used up by the end of September.
Residential construction continues to boom, with the Chicago area
especially strong.
readily.

Mobile home output is at capacity.

Existing homes are selling

Contracts for new commercial and industrial structures, however, are

down sharply with no revival in sight.

Public construction activity is rising.

Work has started again on a large Federal office building in Chicago.

Foundations

of this building were completed in 1968.
Inflows of savings to commercial banks continue at a reduced level.

Checks with large District banks show no significant pickup in business loan
demand following the rise in commitments noted in recent months.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

A moderate uptrend of business activity continues in the Eighth
Federal Reserve District.

Businessmen report some improvement in the economic

atmosphere as a result of the President's new economic program.
Most manufacturing industries in the District have gradually increased
their rate of operations in recent weeks.

One box board company reports that

it is operating with some overtime now, whereas in the early summer months overtime was eliminated altogether.

A number of other firms which were operating

at less than full time are now back on a forty-hour week.

Most firms, however,

indicate that they are operating at less than plant capacity and have no immediate
plans for plant expansion.
All industries associated with home building generally remain strong.
Housing starts continue at a high rate, and such activity is having a favorable
effect on both the industries that manufacture building supplies and those that
manufacture refrigerators, stoves, and other appliances for furnishing new homes.
Despite the general uptrend, layoffs and rising unemployment were reported
in some scattered geographic areas.

For example, one plant which produces flash

bulbs in a small Eighth District community reports a 50 percent reduction in its
work force, which had a major impact on the community's economy.

In contrast,

another small community reported an unemployment rate in excess of 20 percent in
April as a result of a major reduction in the work force at two specialized firms,
but at the most recent reporting date the rate had declined to about 14 percent.
Retail sales continue to move moderately upward in most major centers
in the Eighth District.
the past ten days.

Memphis reports a significant increase in sales during

Major retailers in St. Louis report little change in sales,

but quickly add that there has been a rising number of competitors in the area
and that individual firm data are a poor indicator of total sales.

Bank loan demand remains almost unchanged after adjustment for seasonal
factors.

Increases in loans to primary metals produced in recent weeks were

offset by net repayments by commodity dealers.

Most banks interviewed expect

a moderate strengthening in loan demand during the next few months.

Bank

deposits of large member banks have declined slightly in recent weeks, but
savings and loan associations report savings inflows are again at a high rate
following a dip in July.
Most firms interviewed expressed a favorable attitude toward the
President's new economic program.

Representative comments were that it was long

overdue, it should not be placed on a voluntary basis, and there will be a
surge in prices once the freeze is lifted.

Some expect to benefit over the

longer run from the higher tariff on imports.

It was pointed out that such

gains will not come immediately because of the established channels of trade and
the numerous contracts which have already been placed with foreign firms for
goods.

American manufacturers will thus require several months to recapture

these markets.
All the firms which commented on the program are well pleased with
the investment tax credit and excise tax reduction proposals.

An official

of one manufacturing establishment reports that his company has already started
plans for the installation of some new equipment in anticipation of the more
favorable tax treatment.

NINTH DISTRICT —

MINNEAPOLIS

Although bank directors have noticed very little change in District
business activity since President Nixon announced his new economic policy,
they do feel that the new program has acted to build consumer confidence.
The directors consider it still too early, however, to assess the impact
on investment spending.

At the same time, the recent changes instituted by

the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) are not expected to have a significant
effect on housing in this District.
Several directors reported a modest pickup in consumer spending in
their areas since August 16, but no consensus exists as to how the President's
program has affected District automobile sales.

Three directors reported

poor car sales due to consumer uncertainty over whether or not the excise
tax will be eliminated, while two others reported a strengthening in automobile
sales in their areas since August 16.

A newspaper survey of Minneapolis/St.

Paul automobile dealers revealed that car sales improved during the last two
weeks of August.
In assessing the impact of the President's program on business
investment spending, directors' replies varied from it would have "no effect"
to it was "too early to assess its impact".

In addition, responses to an

informal telephone survey of ten Twin Cities manufacturing firms agreed with
the directors' observations.
When asked what would be an appropriate follow-up to the wage-price
freeze after November 12, the directors advocated everything from a continuation
of the freeze to a strong "jawboning" program.

In general they felt that

jawboning alone would not be sufficient to restrain inflationary pressures,
but they opposed the imposition of an elaborate set of wage-price controls.
Several directors favored a program that would allow major industries to grant

wage increases in line with productivity gains.

They realized that such a

program would be difficult to administer and would require some type of
bureaucracy.

One director felt that people expect more controls and bureaucracy,

while another stated that "such controls would be easier to administer today
than during World War II and the Korean war because goods are not as scarce
as they were and purchasers have more than one supplier from whom to obtain
goods and services".

Still another director said that dividends should be

frozen for some time in the future, and something should be done at least to
give the appearance that interest rates are being controlled.

These steps

would make wage-price controls more palatable to the man on the street.
A freeze on taxes, especially property taxes, was advocated by one bank director,
and another recommended the elimination of the 10 percent surtax on imports.
Indications are that the unsettled foreign exchange rate situation
of recent weeks has had little effect on business loan demand among large
Ninth District banks.

At several banks, inactive lines of credit extended

to Japanese banks have been reactivated since mid-August.

The amounts

involved were relatively small, however, and did not cause an unusually
large increase in business loan demand.
Some strengthening in business loan demand has developed for inventory
buildups and public nonresidential construction.

No Reserve city banks, however,

have experienced unusually strong demand for business loans recently, and
most have revised downward their expectations for the next several months.
While not anticipating greater-than-seasonal expansion, about half of the
bankers sense underlying strength in business loan demand and expect to see
positive results of policy changes.
Contrary to the opinions expressed by FHLBB officials, the general
feeling among industry people in the Twin Cities is that recent changes by
the FHLBB will have only a marginal effect on housing in this area.

The

lower liquidity requirements will have no effect, as local savings and loan

associations had higher-than-required liquidity ratios and savings and loan
associations in this area have not been selling mortgages to the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corporation to any great extent.

The change to 95 percent for

mortgage loans, however, is expected to result in higher loan activity.

Savings

and loan associations prefer to make conventional loans, and the lower downpayment
requirements will make this type of borrowing more attractive to potential
homeowners.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Support for the President's new economic program in the Tenth District
is widespread among businessmen.and consumers.

At least one labor group has

postponed bargaining sessions, and one union has taken a case to the United
States District Court asking that employers be ordered to comply with a bargaining
agreement reached last year calling for a wage increase on September 1.
bankers report no moves to increase interest rates.

District

Aside from special factors,

business loan demand remains weak.
The results of a survey of members of the boards of directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and its branches, and of other business in
the Tenth District, indicate that the President's new economic program has been
favorably received by both business and consumers.

The psychological impact on

both groups was described as excellent, and most parts of the program are generally
receiving strong public support.

In several instances, respondents voiced the view

that they would have preferred to see the wage-price freeze instituted earlier, by
from six months to two years.
There was wide agreement that the time period since the new program's
beginning has been too short to permit an accurate overall assessment of its impact
on economic activity.

An important Omaha-based mechanical contractor noted that

companies are apparently holding off on new plant and equipment spending until they
see Congressional disposition of the proposed investment tax credit.

If the Congress

approves the credit, he expects increased activity in commercial and industrial
construction in the Tenth District.

Increased consumer confidence, as a result of the new program, was
cited by persons from several states as providing a stimulus to retail trade
with some increases already apparent.

Automobile sales are generally good.

A

survey of new car dealers in the Kansas City area showed that customers and
dealers alike are confident that the Federal excise tax on new cars will be
repealed on a retroactive basis.

Although the dealers, like other businesses,

were generally pleased with the wage-price freeze, some were apparently having
difficulty in providing an attractive price on leftover 1971 models.
A representative of a large airline company reported that domestic air
transport business on east-west routes continues to be weak.

With revenues not

reaching expectations, this airline is making further employment reductions in an
attempt to keep its costs down.

As a result of the wage-price freeze, the company's

bargaining sessions with its 20,000 mechanics have been postponed.

One special case

of interest concerns a Kansas City International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
Local which filed suit in United States District Court asking that electrical contractors be ordered to comply with a collective bargaining agreement reached last
year, under which the electricians were to have received on September 1 wage and
fringe benefit increases totaling $1.00 per hour.

The union maintains that the

contractors will be receiving windfall gains, due to their bidding of contracts at
prices which included the expected wage increase, and that this is an inequity that
will not be righted after the freeze ends.

The contract involved was settled by

compulsory arbitration, without a strike and at wage increases described by the
local's business manager as substantially below those received by other construction
industry unions here.

There has been no court decision yet in this case.

Deposit flows into Tenth District banks in the last half of August
have shown greater strength than the moderate pattern that characterized July
and early August.

This was true for both demand deposits and time deposits.

Although a moderate increase occurred at the larger banks in consumer type time
and savings deposits in late August, these accounts have shown virtually no net
change at large banks since midyear.

Bankers queried on this point do not appear

concerned with this development, although some expressed relief that market interest
rates have declined since mid-August.

As in July, Tenth District banks increased

their holdings of large CDs in August.
With regard to loan demand, residential mortgage and construction loans
along with consumer instalment loans remain the areas of strength in the Tenth
District.

Bankers contacted have detected no unusual increase in applications for

consumer loans since mid-August.

However, some are anticipating an increase and

have stepped up their promotional activities since the announcement of the new
economic program.

Aside from special factors related to the international situation,

business loan demand remains weak.

The deterioration noted in the July report ap-

pears to have continued into late August.

Respondents profess to anticipate some

improvement, but are not overly optimistic.
Bankers in the Tenth District appear to support the new economic policies.
There are no moves to increase interest charges on any loans.
there appears to be no rush to lower interest charges.

On the other hand,

Most respondents are adopting

a "wait-and-see" attitude toward the changed economic and financial situation.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

DALLAS

President Nixon's new program for economic stabilization improves the
prospects for the economy of the Southwest, in the opinion of past and present
nonbank directors of this Bank and its branches.

Most expect moderate increases

in economic activity and employment for the remainder of this year and the first
half of 1972, coupled with a lower rate of increase in retail prices.

However,

some believe that greater price stability will be attained only if some kind of
guidelines program follows the ninety-day freeze on wages and prices.

Most felt

that planned plant and equipment expenditures, inventory investment, and employment
in their firms would not be greatly influenced by the President's program within
the next nine months.

The floating of the dollar is expected to have a small

favorable impact on the export sales of the firms of these directors, while the
cost of imported materials and supplies used by the respondent's firms is
anticipated to increase moderately.
Although two thirds of the directors expect that the President's
program will increase demand for their firms' products over the next nine months,
only a minority feel that capital expenditures, inventory investment, and employment in their firms will be materially increased as a result.

About a third of

the respondents think that the proposed investment tax credit will increase planned
plant and equipment expenditures through mid-1972.

And about one half of those

expecting an increase indicate that the rise would be a net addition to already
planned expenditures.

Others state that the increase should be attributable

mainly to a moving ahead of expenditures planned for some later time.

Close

to two-thirds of the directors do not anticipate that the proposed economic
package will affect their planned inventory investment. Also only about a third
feel it will increase employment in their firms over this period.

The President's freeze is apparently having a significant impact on
both the wages and prices of the respondent's firms.

When the freeze was announced,

two thirds of the firms had planned wage increases, while half were anticipating
raising their prices.

These planned wage increases would have averaged almost

7 percent, while anticipated price advances would have totaled almost 4 percent.
If the wage-price freeze ends after the ninety-day period, and no other limitations
are imposed, nearly half believe that their firms would increase wages and prices.
On balance, President Nixon's economic package is expected to have little
impact on the profits of the firms of the directors through mid-1972.

Forty

percent feel there will be no impact on profits, while 30 percent expect profits
to rise as a result, and 30 percent anticipate they will fall.
The floating of the dollar in the international exchange markets
affected only about half of the respondents' firms.

For those that were affected,

only a few anticipate that their export sales and foreign investments will increase
over the next nine months.

On the other hand, most anticipate that the cost of

imported materials and supplies will rise moderately.

In the current situation

of the floating of the dollar, a majority of those directors' firms affected
indicate that their firms absorb the foreign exchange risk on both exports and
imports.

In a few cases, the foreign exchange risk is shifted to the trading

partner, and in one case the risk is shared by the director's firm and the trading
partner.
District data indicate that recent economic conditions were sluggish.
Preliminary estimates indicate that the seasonally adjusted Texas industrial
production index fell slightly in July, with all sectors sharing in the drop
except utilities, which remained unchanged.

Durable goods manufacturing was off

somewhat from the month before; the only industry group in durable goods showing
a significant increase over the previous month was that producing lumber and wood
products.

In nondurables manufacturing, textile mills showed the only significant

gain.

Registrations of new passenger automobiles in four major reporting areas

in Texas were 12 percent lower in July than in June.

Department store sales were

4 percent higher in the four-week period ended August 28 than in the corresponding
period a year before.

Total nonagricultural wage and salary employment fell slightly

in July, interrupting a fairly slow but continuous rise since January.
allowables for both Texas and Louisiana have been cut for September.
the fifth consecutive monthly drop for Texas.

Oil

This was

Agricultural conditions in the

Eleventh District are generally improved as rainfall has increased the production
outlook for several crops and offered relief to livestock.

However, the rains

now present some threat to crops, especially cotton and sorghum, as harvest is
being slowed and some quality damage noted.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors were asked to comment on the recent changes in domestic
and international policy by President Nixon.

The general reaction is favorable,

with most directors expressing the view that there would be beneficial effects
on the economy, especially in controlling inflation.

The impact on current

economic activity is small—except perhaps for automobile sales—for future
prospects are seen as being improved.
The wage-price freeze is thought to be helpful in reducing inflationary
expectations and in improving consumer attitudes to some degree.

On the other

hand, several directors commented on the need for continuing some form of restraint
after the ninety-day freeze is over, including provisions to prevent retroactive
wage increases.
Of the proposed tax changes, the removal of the automobile excise tax is
expected to have the greatest immediate impact.

Automobile sales already have in-

creased in some areas and are expected to do so in others.
will apply to foreign as well as domestic cars.

This sales increase

The tariff surcharge on imported

cars will be offset by the lower excise tax so that their prices may not change
very much even after allowing for exchange rate revaluations.

The investment tax

credit is expected to stimulate some more investment in the future when plans can
be revised.

One director whose firm produces heavy industrial machinery reported

that, although orders have not risen, requests for quotations have started to
increase, and he regards this as a sign of more capital spending.
The reaction to the international policy changes, although favorable
overall, was qualified by several directors who expressed concern over foreign
retaliation, especially if the surcharge is maintained for any period.

One

director reported that there is some evidence that oil exporting nations will be
pressing actively for price adjustments that will result in higher dollar prices
for oil.

The amount of benefits of the surcharge to domestic producers will vary

according to whether or not a full 10 percent surcharge could be applied.

A

producer of structural steel sees little benefit for his company's sales prospects;
foreign structural steel will be taxed only 2 percent more and he said Japanese
producers indicated that they would absorb any difference arising from the appreciation of the yen.
On the international side, the West Coast dock strike is perhaps of
greater concern at the moment than the possible effects of the surcharge and any
changes in the external value of the dollar.

This strike continues to hurt domestic

exporters (of wheat and rice, for example) and it may cause the loss of foreign
markets if it continues.
Construction, especially residential construction, continues to be a
source of strength.

The wage-price freeze is expected by some of our directors

to help further by reducing cost increases.

The only evidence of weakness consists

of high apartment vacancy rates in some areas—southern California, for example.
The lumber industry is benefitting from this level of construction activity, and
the wage-price freeze happened to result in a structure of prices favorable to
further activity.
Prospects in agriculture are improved both because of good crops and the
freezing of costs.

In particular, the outlook for fruit and cattle is good.

The

only major problems are faced by those producing for foreign markets because of
the dock strike, and some crops facing limited storage space.

Bankers reported

willingness to cooperate in keeping interest rates level over the longer period.
Loan demand, both by business and consumers, is expected to rise, but no major
adjustment will have to be made by bankers as a result of the new economic policies.

