CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 14, 1972

SUMMARY*

According to bank reports, economic activity is improving and
is expected to remain strong.

Retail sales have been increasing and

retailers expect Christmas spending to be heavy.

Order backlogs are

swelling in several areas as the tempo of manufacturing activity picks up;
inventory building is also anticipated.
construction activity.

Several districts report robust

Although problems are noted, the agricultural

situation is termed "strong."

Labor shortages are developing in some

areas as the demand for workers strengthens.

A moderate rate of inflation

and continued gains in loan demand are expected during coming months.
The consumer spending outlook can be termed "favorable."

Retailers

in the New York district are optimistic about Christmas spending and those
in the San Francisco district are looking for a 10 percent year-to-year
Christmas sales gain.

Recent increases in consumer spending are reported

by Richmond, Chicago, Dallas and St. Louis.

Automobile sales, however,

are being held down by inventory shortages in several districts.
Reports disclose improved manufacturing activity.

St. Louis

reports gains in manufacturing sales and reveals shortages developing in
the cement and paper industries.

Boston indicates that several of its

district manufacturers are operating at capacity.

Capital good sales are

expanding in the Chicago district and order backlogs are climbing.

Increased

inventories are planned by several Kansas City district manufacturers.
Richmond reports that manufacturing shipments, new orders and backlogs are
rising.

In the Atlanta district plant and equipment expenditures continue

to expand.

[Asterisk:Prepared

The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.]

experienced a sharp increase in September with all major industrial sectors
advancing.

Philadelphia, however, indicates some leveling off in manufacturing

activity.
Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco all report strong
construction activity.

In the Sixth District, several major commercial

projects and tourist attraction expansions are planned, and shortages of
building materials are evident in some areas.

Although national construction

activity appears to be strong, there is vacant commercial space in Seattle,
and very low commercial construction activity in St. Louis.

Richmond

suggests that the rate of increase in building appears to have slowed; and
Dallas reports that residential and nonbuilding construction awards in the
district have declined.
Agriculture continues strong.

It is, however, encountering some

apparently temporary difficulties in certain areas and for certain products.
In the Midwest, crop damage and harvesting problems were caused by unseasonally
wet weather.
the. Southeast.

Recent income from tobacco sales has been disappointing in
Prices for fattened livestock have weakened.

But Minneapolis

describes farmers, in general, as "cautiously optimistic" and cites strengthening loan demand for farm operating investments.

Dallas concurs with the

optimistic description, citing very high farm receipts, and Kansas City
mentions thriving agribusiness industries.
The employment picture continues to brighten, leading to increased
labor shortages in some parts of the nation.

Expanding demand for labor

is reported by Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City and Dallas while New York
indicates that the belt tightening period has ended and labor demand is
starting to build.

Labor shortages especially among skilled workmen,

evidenced by increased turnover and absenteeism are reported by Chicago

and St. Louis.

Availability of nonunion labor, however, prevented trucking

and building trade unions from pressing for large wage settlements in the
Chicago district.
The outlook for wage and price increases differs, to some extent,
in each district that reported on inflation.

With the exception of Atlanta,

where inflationary pressures remain strong, the expected rate of inflation
for next year is generally termed "moderate."
price regulations continue through 1973.

Tlis assumes that some wage-

Farm prices should, in coming

months, exert less upward pressure on consumer prices then they have recently.
There are mixed reports on both loan demands and deposit increases
throughout the nation.

A number of districts report relatively strong or

expanding loan growth particularly in the business, mortgage, and consumer
credit areas.

In the San Francisco district, strong loan demand is reported

for mortgage and consumer credit —
varied throughout the district.

although the strength of business loans

St. Louis reports expansion in business

and mortgage loans while in the Dallas and Kansas City districts, business
and consumer credit continues strong.

The availability of funds is

considered adequate in the Chicago and Boston districts with St. Louis,
Philadelphia and Kansas City reporting some moderation in deposit inflows.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 3
Third District - Philadelphia page 6
Fourth District - Cleveland page 8
Fifth District - Richmond page 11
Sixth District - Atlanta page 13
Seventh District - Chicago page 15
Eighth District - St. Louis page 18
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 20
Tenth District - Kansas City page 23
Eleventh District - Dallas page 26
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 29

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Reports from our directors indicate business is continuing
to expand at a rapid pace.
plant and equipment.

New orders are rising, as are expenditures for

A tight rein continues to be exercised over inventories,

and new hiring is spotty.
New orders were generally reported up substantially in both manufacturing and commercial construction.

One supplier of construction materials

for prestige buildings indicates the company now has a high level of backlog
work, a sharp change from six months ago.

Some disappointment in the rate

of new orders for can-making machinery has been expressed by two directors
in this field.

A supplier of white pigment, a widely used industrial material,

reports orders as very strong and that this plant is working at capacity.
Capacity level operation was also reported by a manufacturer of carbon black,
a material used in the maufacture of tires, and by a manufacturer of
specialty chemicals.
Large capital expenditures are being planned by a firm involved
in putting up a liquified natural gas facility.

Plant expansion is also

reported under way in some sectors now operating at capacity.
A director from a large commercial bank reports there has been
no recent change in business loan demand.

While loans are running 19 to 20

percent over a year ago, loans outstanding have not advanced in the past
six weeks.

The heavy increase in loans this year mainly represents business

from outside of New England.

This Bank director said pressure on interest

rates has subsided recently, due to a large supply of funds, a slackening
of demand (the seasonal demand for funds in October did not occur) and
political pressures to hold interest rates level.
stated, we now have rate controls.

In effect, the banker

Three academic correspondents available this month, Professors
Eckstein, Samuelson, and Wallich, agreed upon a 6 percent target for
monetary growth.

Eckstein expected a 6 percent rate of growth in nonborrowed

reserves in 1973 but preferred a 6 1/2 to 6 3/4 percent average rate.

The

primary danger in the current outlook, he felt, is for this rate to fall
below 5 percent for several consecutive months.

Wallich prescribed a 6 percent

rate of growth for Ml, under the assumption that velocity, will be rising at
a 2 to 3 percent rate.

He urged the Board to undertake a study of what rate

of growth of velocity can be expected to prevail in the future.
The three also agreed in their disapproval of the attempt, in
Samuelson's words, to "talk interest rates down."

Wallich said the current

7 1/2 percent level is too low for an economy with a 3 percent inflation
rate.

Granting there may be some psychological benefit in "talking down"

rates, Samuelson insisted the main effect is to increase rationing.
Eckstein argued it is impossible to go through an expansion without a rise
in interest rates.

Holding the prime rate below 6 percent would be an

unfortunate, early trigger.

He urged monetary authorities to reinforce the

trend toward flexible rates and not to back "administered prices."

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

In the view of most of this Bank's directors and other business
leaders recently contacted, the new federal revenue sharing program is
likely to result in increased state and local government outlays over the
near-term, rather than tax reductions.

A cease-fire in Vietnam was expected

to have little impact on the current business situation, since that outcome
was believed to have already been largely discounted.

Respondents in

general were optimistic over the retail sales outlook for the Christmas
season.

Business hiring practices remain on the conservative side, with

additions to payrolls still geared to current rather than expected future
needs.
In the view of most directors, the recently enacted measure
providing for substantial federal revenue sharing with state and local
authorities could be expected to quickly stimulate increased outlays by
these governmental units.

Buffalo branch directors felt the measure

would have a "bail out" effect, enabling state and local governments to
meet demands from organized employee groups and other civic pressure groups.
They also reported there were indications a number of localities intended
to use part of the payments to undertake capital expenditures that had
earlier been deferred for lack of funds.

One director felt the measure

would have a "substantial" spending impact that would be reinforced by
the current strong cyclical rise in local taxes.

Although some of the

directors did not rule out the possibility that the program would lead
initially to some local tax reduction —

or a moderation of increases

—

the general feeling was that the lion's share of the available funds
would be used to finance projects that had been postponed earlier due to
a lack of funds.

On the other hand, one New Jersey banker felt the

revenue sharing measure would neither contribute to increased spending nor
reduced taxes in the financially pressed cities in his area, but rather that
a good deal of the funds would be used to liquidate outstanding debt.
Most of the directors agreed that a cease-fire in Vietnam would
have little immediate impact on business and consumer spending, since that
eventuality had already been discounted.

A few of the directors, however,

did feel such a settlement would contribute to an aura of stability by
finally eliminating the major uncertainty that has adversely affected
business and consumer attitudes over the past several years.

The consumer

sector was viewed as the area where Vietnam agreement would have its major
impact.
Concerning consumer spending, respondents in general continued to
express an optimistic outlook.

A senior official of a New York City

department store, specializing in high-priced, high-quality goods and
having branches in the suburbs, reported that his firm's October sales had
been "very good" and that he expected a higher level of business during
this Christmas season than last year's.

The chairman of the board of

a Rochester department store, who previously had frequently been rather
skeptical over the consumer spending picture, reported that retailers in
his area were expecting holiday sales to run well ahead of a year ago.
Indeed, he felt that the consumer is likely to spend a larger share of his
income in the coming months.

The New Jersey banker reported that retailers

in his area were looking toward a good Christmas season.

The Buffalo

branch directors expressed views regarding the consumer spending outlook
that, while varying in degree, were unanimously optimistic.
The directors were unable to detect any trend toward more

aggressive hiring practices in private industry.

It was, however, noted

that the earlier "belt tightening" phase had come to an end and that, with
the continued upswing in business activity, the need for additional employees
was starting to build.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The latest survey of business conditions in the Third District
shows that some key indicators remain on the increase.

New orders and sales

increased at many firms responding to this month's questionnaire.
firms reported inventory increases than decreases.

More

Outlays for plant and

equipment are scheduled to increase at over one-third of the firms contacted.
And many firms expect to increase their inventories within six months.
general, most area businesses remain optimistic about the future.

In

On the

darker side, however, employment opportunities are flattening out a bit in
the Third District.

Expectations of increased inflation within six months

were reported by approximately one-third of the firms contacted.
This Bank's business survey respondents reported their manufacturing
activity continued to rise, but the number of increases dropped slightly this
month.

The vast majority of firms completing the survey's monthly questionnaire

report either no change or an increase in their new orders, new shipments
and the length of their delivery time.

However, a small but growing number

do report decreases in orders received, shipments and delivery times.
Employment opportunities in the area have leveled off somewhat.
Over half of the firms responding to the business survey expect no change
in the number of employees or the average number of hours worked during the
next six months.

Of those firms which are changing their employment schedules,

increases predominate on the six month planning horizon.

On the one month

planning horizon, as many firms reported increases as reported decreases.
About half of the responding firms report no plans to change the
size of their inventories for at least six months.

However, of those

firms which do anticipate inventory adjustments, twice as many foresee
increases as decreases.

Plant and equipment spending plans remain at the slightly higher
level reached last month.

The majority of firms are evenly divided between

those undertaking investment increases and those anticipating no change in
their present capital expenditure rate.

Very few firms are cutting their

investments in plant and equipment.
Most businessmen responding to this Bank's survey expect to pay
and receive the same prices next month as they do now.

However, a large

minority do foresee rising prices on the six month horizon.

This is

essentially the same price outlook reported last month.
Area banks report little or no growth in their demand and time
deposits.

Business loan demand is good from small firms but large national

businesses are hardly borrowing at all.
business loan category.

This holds back growth in the overall

Consumer and mortgage loans are expanding in the

Third District again this month.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The thrust of recent statistical evidence and information received
from economists, businessmen and directors indicates that economic expansion
is continuing at a strong pace in the district with few signs of weakness.
The manufacturing sector appears to be gaining momentum, and the near-term
outlook remains good.

Signs of strength are broadly based, including

improved orders and sales in defense and producers' goods and particularly
high levels of activity in consumer-related areas.

Our directors continue

to be optimistic about the prospects for business next year.

In addition,

there is sentiment among our board members for continuation of the controls
program in view of the crucial labor contracts up for renegotiation in 1973.
Bankers are experiencing strong loan demand, especially from consumers.
Some of the principal economic indicators that describe the
continued expansion in activity in the district are:

the unemployment

rate, which has continued to edge down; payroll employment, which has
shown strong gains in recent months (particularly in durable goods
manufacturing); our electric power indexes of manufacturing activity,
which began to post new highs during the past few months for all major
metropolitan areas of the district (after having recouped losses incurred
during the past recession); and residential construction contracts, which
remained close to a record high in August and September.
building, however, still appears to be sluggish.

Nonresidential

Our most recent survey

of district manufacturers shows evidence of strengthening in the pace of
the recovery.

Key indicators, such as new orders, shipments, backlogs,

employment, and the workweek, registered solid gains in October, and
firms expect business conditions to be even stronger in November.

Our

survey also indicates that prices continue to be held reasonably well in

check, with the diffusion index for prices paid having hovered around the
60 percent level since February.
The strong tone of business conditions in the district is also
apparent from comments from our directors.

Industrialists associated with

consumer-related activities reported excellent business conditions in areas
such as automotive parts, paints, glass and rubber.

Capital goods producers

indicated defense-related business is improving in several firms.

A

director in the machine tool business reported that new orders were up 50
percent from a year ago, and that his firm, along with others in the machine
tool industry, is experiencing difficulty in rehiring the skilled workers
they had to lay off when business was poor.

On the other hand, several

directors whose firms are experiencing sizable increases in orders plan to
meet the rising demand without significantly expanding employment.

Office

equipment business continues to be excellent, and backlogs are rising.
Several directors whose firms have had a significant recovery in business
reported that total profits had increased, but that profit margins were
comfortably under the ceilings of the control program.

An exception to the

favorable business reports from our directors was the remarks from one
director who noted that his firm's specialty construction business, which
is almost entirely related to the steel industry, has been poor this year;
he expects the steel industry to increase construction spending next year,
however.
Some directors are quite concerned about a possible reemergence
of inflationary pressures in 1973.

Although the directors were beginning

to note some complaints among industrialists because of what were described
as unfair rulings of the Price Commission, a number of them seemed to
favor continuation of wage-price controls in 1973.

The directors were

particularly concerned over the implications for wage increases and strike
activity if the controls were to be dropped in the face of forthcoming
labor negotiations.
Banking directors reported strong loan demand, especially from
consumers, and increasing demand and time deposits.

One director from a

large reserve city bank, however, noted that the savings and loan institutions
in his area were receiving a disproportionate share of the increased
savings flow.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Reports from businessmen and bankers indicate further business
expansion in the Fifth District.

Manufacturers report sharp increases in

shipments, new orders and backlogs.

Retail sales remain strong, although

delivery problems have apparently dampened automobile sales somewhat.

Reports

fail to show any sign of an inventory buildup on the part of district firms.
Improvements in employment and hours worked per week were reported.

Prices

received remained relatively stable while wages generally increased.

Con-

struction activity remains strong and a general mood of optimism prevails
in the district's business community.
There was a sharp rise in the number of manufacturers reporting
increases in shipments, new orders and backlogs.

Widespread increases were

reported by producers of steel, textiles, furniture and chemicals.

Some

producers are apparently experiencing a delay in shipments because of a shortage of box cards.

In our latest survey the number of manufacturing respondents

reporting higher than desired inventory levels declined substantially,
although a sizable number continue to view inventories as on the high side.
Following a slight decline last month, manufacturing employment
appears to have improved somewhat in the current period.

Manufacturers in

our latest survey report increases in both employment and hours worked and
banker respondents indicate general employment gains in their areas.

Prices

received by manufacturing are reported to have remained relatively stable
but both manufacturers and retailers indicate fairly widespread recent
increases in wages.
Trade respondents report further improvement in general retail
sales, with all geographic areas of the district now sharing in the improvement.
However, the number of respondents indicating an increase in automobile

sales declined over the previous reporting period.

Several respondents

referred to delivery and inventory problems, which have apparently dampened
sales of domestic models.
Loan demand continues to show strength although the rate of increase
in the demand for consumer and mortgage loans slowed somewhat over the previous
reporting period.

Even so, more than 50 percent of the banking respondents

reported an increase in the demand for all types of loans.
The pace of advance in the construction sector may have slowed
somewhat in recent weeks although both residential and commercial building
continue strong.

In our previous survey 50 percent of the banking respondents

indicated that construction activity in their areas had increases whereas
in the most recent month only 25 percent reported increases.
The situation in district agriculture is little changed since our
last report.

Weaker demand, declining prices, and poorer quality offerings

have marked flue-cured tobacco sales during the past several weeks.
The mood of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District remains
distinctly optimistic.

The majority of the banking respondents expect

further improvement in business activity in their areas in the immediate
future.

Several bankers reported growth and optimism among their customers.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

According to reports of businessmen and bankers, the region's
economy continues extremely prosperous and the outlook is optimistic.
number of new plant announcements has increased.
a hectic pace.

The

Construction continues at

There are scattered reports of building material shortages.

Inflationary pressures continue.
A pickup in announcements of new plants and plant expansions that
began earlier this year continues.

It was recently announced that four

synthetic gas plants will be built in Louisiana by 1975.

One of the plants,

representing an investment of nearly $350 million, will be the largest such
plant in the nation.
each.

The other three plants will cost about $160 million

An $80 million fertilizer plant will be built near Tampa.

A $60

million expansion is slated for a paper mill in north Alabama, and a $15
million weaving plant is planned for southwest Alabama.
will build a $5 million plant in Montgomery.

Western Electric

An aircraft assembly plant

in Tampa has been reopened to make subassemblies for small two-engine
planes.

In addition, there have been a number of announcements of smaller

plants or expansions.

However, 550 jobs will be lost in the Birmingham

area because two firms are phasing out pig-iron production.

Reasons

mentioned for this action include foreign competition, pollution problems
and rising cost of furnace repairs, freight and raw materials.
Three large residential communities have recently been announced
one near Atlanta, one on lakefront property near New Orleans and one in
south Florida.

Florida's residential construction boom may eventually be

slowed by a pollution board ban on new permits in areas with inadequate
sewer treatment.

However, effects will not be felt for at least several

months because builders have large backlogs of permits.
cement shortage in Florida, with no relief in sight.

There is a growing

A shortage of building

—

materials is also reported in Tennessee.

In addition, a retail food chain

executive reports a shortage of refrigeration equipment is delaying the
opening of seven new stores.
Construction will begin soon on a new plaza in downtown Jackson,
Mississippi.
the plaza.
Jackson.

A 22-story bank building and adjoining hotel will highlight

A seven-building warehouse complex has also been announced for

A 200-room motel will be built near Busch Gardens in Tampa.

Three

motels totaling over 300 rooms have been announced for Alexandria, Louisiana.
A multimillion dollar "Holy Land U.S.A." tourist attraction is planned on a
parcel of land between Mobile and Pensacola.
are planning major expansions.

Both Disney World and Opryland

Ground will be broken before the end of the

year for a $20 million hospital-medical complex near Pensacola.
Inflationary pressures remain.

An executive of a large airline

company says that industry is ready to lead a new round of inflation if
controls are lifted.

A retail food chain official claims his industry could

increase prices 7 to 9 percent and still not see the return of reasonable
profit margins.
of 1973.

TVA is expected to increase power rates in the first half

A steel company executive claims environmental controls alone may

push up the price of steel at a rate of 4.6 percent per year.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Business sentiment has improved further in the past month.

Labor

markets are tightening; retail trade is strong; order backlogs are building
in many industries and lead times on new orders are lengthening.

The up-

swing in capital goods appears to be gathering steam and is spreading to a
broader base.

More firms are planning on the general business expansion

to continue quarter-by-quarter through 1973, with no significant slowdown
in the second half.

Soybean and possibly corn harvests will be reduced

by adverse weather conditions.
More firms are finding skilled workers in short supply and
shortages of suitable trainees are reported.

Labor turnover and

absenteeism rates have increased, but remain below the high rates of the
late 1960s.

A larger volume of want ads and a steady reduction in claims

for unemployment compensation also suggest a stronger demand for workers.
Nevertheless, unions in some sectors, e.g., building trades and trucking,
are not pressing for large settlements.

They fear further losses of jobs

to nonunion operators.
Retailers are pleased with recent sales levels, especially of
seasonal merchandise, such as apparel and sporting goods.
output schedules have been increased again.

Color television

Output of some household

appliances was reduced in September and October, but sales since then
have been somewhat in excess of expectations and inventories have declined.
Trucks continue to lead the general expansion in capital goods.
Producers of engines and rear axles for heavy trucks are working three
shifts a day, seven days a week.
of most types of trucks.

Capacity restraints are limiting sales

Some orders are being booked for delivery next

March and April.

Most truck producers are in the midst of programs to

expand production.
Auto sales would be appreciably higher if inventories were
adequate.

Output has been hampered by a series of "quickie" strikes over

working conditions.

The union treasury is depleted, and strike benefits

are not paid for work stoppages that last less than a week.

Perhaps more

important than strikes in holding down output are the problems producers
have been having making body panels of new models fit together properly.
Many firms are reporting slower deliveries from vendors.

Half

of the Chicago and Milwaukee purchasing agents report higher backlogs,
compared to only 25 percent a year ago.

Twenty-five percent of the agents

report that production supplies must be ordered 90 days in advance,
compared to less than 10 percent in the first quarter.
Order backlogs are building for a variety of capital goods.
Some producers of components are reporting new orders up 30 or 40 percent
from last year, although an improvement was already under way at this
time in 1971.

Demand for hydraulic excavators, concrete mixers and

environmental control systems is especially strong.

Recently, orders

for overhead cranes, usually associated with major new plants, have
increased from a sluggish pace.
Order backlogs of one steel firm are the highest on record, in
tonnage terms, except for strike-hedge buildup periods.
lengthening for steel.
product lines.

Lead times are

The improvement in demand now includes all major

Steel shipments are forecast at 96 million tons for 1973,

up from 92 million tons in 1972.

Output of some products may be close

to capacity.
Significant stretchouts in order lead times are reported for
such items as plastic molds, metal fasteners and bearings.

Producers

of these items do not now have the effective capacity to achieve levels
of output reached in the late 1960s.

They must expand staff and add

facilities.
Crop yields are reported at record levels, but wet fields,
especially in Indiana and Illinois, are causing delays in harvesting.
Crops of some farmers, especially those raising soybeans, are already
damaged.

Higher prices associated with a shortfall in the harvest may

boost total farm income.

Delayed harvests will relieve some of the

burden on the transportation industry associated with grain shipments
for export.

Wholesale prices of cattle have weakened in recent weeks

as supplies of red meat have increased.
marketed.

Heavier weight cattle are being

Pork supplies are increasing seasonally.
Business firms are said to be easing restrictions on expense

accounts, including first class air travel.
being raised.

Advertising budgets are also

In part, these moves are said to reflect the fact that

some firms' profit margins are approaching the guideline ceiling.
Loan demand increased at most large banks in the past month.
Nevertheless, bankers are reducing their forecasts of the extent of the
probable rise in short-term rates next year.

In the long-term markets

a large volume of funds are available and most analysts expect level or
even declining rates for new corporate bonds in 1973.

The volume of

funds seeking investment in real estate, especially from S&Ls and
insurance companies, is very heavy.
"equity kickers."

Lenders are not able to obtain

Some S&Ls are taking advantage of their new powers

to make consumer installment loans, including loans on recreational
vehicles and mobile homes, but the movement has not yet gathered great
momentum.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District has
continued vigorously upward in recent weeks, according to a selected group
of businessmen.

There is a rising wave of business optimism.

continue to rise on a broad front.

Sales

Manufacturing activity continues to

expand, and more industries report their operations are approaching capacity
levels.

From the businessman's viewpoint, labor markets are tight in most

of the district.
is down.

Employment still trends upward, and the unemployment rate

Construction remains at the relatively high plateau attained more

than a year ago.

Financial institutions report a vigorous loan demand and

large savings inflows.

Long-term interest rates remain relatively stable,

but upward pressure on short-term rates continues.
Sales of goods and services in recent weeks have apparently
continued up at about the trend rate of the past year.

Retailers report

further moderate gains on a seasonally adjusted basis.

Manufacturers also

report further increases in sales during the third quarter.

Some items,

including cement and paper, are reported to be in short supply.

In addition

to developing paper shortages, the packaging industry reports the quality
of paper delivered is more varied and less dependable than earlier in
the year.
Vigorous expansion in manufacturing activity is reported throughout the district.

Paper, construction materials, metals, textiles, food

processing and chemical firms all report operations at a relatively high
rate of activity.

A representative of a large diversified cigarette

manufacturing company reported an increase of 17 percent in sales and 10
percent in employment from year ago levels.

Representatives of both paper

and cement industries report their industries are operating at capacity.
A representative of the packaging industry reported that unless expansion

of kraft paper output occurs, rationing will soon be necessary and that
there is no incentive to expand capacity at current price and profit levels.
Employment expansion continues and more communities report a
shortage of labor in all skill groups.

Additional workers have been added

to payrolls in recent weeks throughout the district.

An Arkansas

representative reports that the local labor force is fully employed,
employee turnover is becoming critical and most Arkansas plants are trying
to add to their labor force.

In a few areas of the district, such as

southern Indiana and St. Louis, where some unemployment pockets remain,
employment has picked up and the unemployment problem has become less severe.
Excluding the St. Louis area, both residential and commercial
construction continue at the relatively high rates of the past year.
Residential construction is at a high rate in the St. Louis area, but the
construction industry here remains somewhat depressed because of a very
low level of commercial building.
Commercial banks and savings and loan associations report
continued strong demand for loans, with some slackening in savings inflows
in recent weeks.

Demand for mortgage loans remains vigorous, but mortgage

interest rates remain about unchanged from midsummer levels.

Commercial

loan demand is expanding and upward pressure on commercial loan rates
continues.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Although Bank directors foresee no resurgence in inflation, they
generally feel wage-price controls should remain past April 30.

District

farm income is at a record high level and district farmers are cautiously
optimistic about the future.

Improved farm income has reduced the demand

for short-term agricultural credit, but has bolstered the demand for
intermediate- and long-term loans.

Rising interest rates are not expected

to impede the pace of district economic activity.
Although future price increases are anticipated, Bank directors
generally foresee no significant pickup in the rate of inflation.

One

director indicated that farm prices in coming months would not be exerting
as much upward pressure on consumer prices as they have recently.

Also,

according to another report, consumer resistence to price increases was
tending to dampen inflationary pressures in one director's area.

On the

other hand, another director stated that recent advances in wholesale prices
made future increases in consumer prices inevitable.

One director revealed

that some of his area's merchants view the prospect of more inflation as a
spur to their current business, as consumers purchase now to avoid future
price increases.
The consensus among Bank directors was that wage-price regulations
should be continued past April 30, even though they dislike controls.

Several

directors, however, would favor liberalizing Phase II guidelines and gradually
lifting controls.

One director indicated wage-price controls will become

ineffective if continued too long.

Another advocated terminating Phase II

and holding federal expenditures at $250 million.
Due to high grain and livestock prices, district farm income has
swelled to a record high and district farmers are cautiously optimistic about

the future.

Two directors stated that livestock prices should remain

generally high.

The grain price outlook is also considered favorable,

providing export demand continues strong.

A director from the South Dakota

cattle feeding and feed grain producing area, however, pointed out some
weak spots.

Corn prices remain relatively low and unseasonably wet weather

in South Dakota has caused problems, depressing local prices further.

Also,

fat cattle prices have recently declined, and currently the margin between
fat and feeder cattle prices will not allow cattle feeders to realize a
profit.

Canadians recently have been buying fat cattle in South Dakota and

this should help raise prices.

Furthermore, two directors indicated that

hog prices will drop as production increases next spring.
According to our recent Agricultural Credit Conditions Survey, a
strengthening farm income situation has produced a disparity between demands
for short-term credit and demands for longer-term loans.

Demand for short-

term loans fell as this year's stronger cash income from higher livestock
prices, larger grain marketing receipts and government farm program payments
decreased the need for short-term funds.

Stronger incomes, however, have

recently made farmers and ranchers more confident of investing in their
operations and this has bolstered the demands for intermediate- and long-term
loans.
The survey points toward a resurgence in farmer borrowing in the
fourth quarter at some district banks, which will be about evenly balanced
by further declines at others.

Farmers' and ranchers' incomes are expected

to continue strong, displacing needs for short-term funds.

Farmer spending

will increase as will investment, which will cause some increases in demands
for debt refinancings.

Comments from respondents indicate that investment

plans will lift overall demands for intermediate-term loans.

Still, however,

only a very small percentage of banks expect problems in meeting loan
requests during the next three months.
District businessmen and bankers generally foresee some advance in
interest rates, but don't consider these increases of sufficient magnitude
to affect district economic activity.

One director reports, for example,

that the prospect of higher interest rates doesn't bother his area's businessmen.
Also, two bankers believe jawboning efforts have and will dampen interest
rate increases.

Nevertheless, a director associated with the construction

industry reported that businessmen are currently lining up financing on future
projects in order to avoid expected interest rate boosts.

Although he doesn't

anticipate higher interest rates locally, one director indicated that money
in his area will become tighter as local bankers will allocate more funds
to investments in order to take advantage of Improved yields.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District business continues to improve, with manufacturers
planning to increase inventories further in anticipation of more sales
growth.

The breadth and strength of economic activity is indicated by

revenue gains and optimistic outlooks of almost all major district firms
contacted, a sample representing a wide variety of products sold across
the country and overseas.

With strong business and consumer loan demand

at commercial banks, and an indication of some flattening of deposit growth,
some interest rates have risen and district bankers expect further increases
in short rates.

Changes in Regulations D and J continue to concern bankers,

while businessmen are worrying about the upcoming heavy calendar of labor
contract negotiations and their impact on costs and prices.
Most Tenth District bankers report moderate growth in demand
deposits.

Trends in time and savings deposits are mixed, with some banks

experiencing strong growth and others reporting essentially no change.

Most

banks have increased rates on certificates of deposit, in some cases to the
Regulation Q maximum.

One bank has already noted a slight outflow of CD

money as a result of the recent rise in competing market issues.

Most

bankers anticipate a further rise in short-term interest rates over the
coming months, with some anticipating significant disintermediation as a
result.
Demand for loans in all major categories has been strong at most
district banks.

No leveling in construction loans is evident as yet,

though some bankers expect such leveling in coming months, particularly due
to seasonal factors.
strong.

Demand for business and consumer loans continues

District bankers express considerable uncertainty about the
effects of changes in Regulations D and J on deposit levels.

Officials at

several banks expect an adverse impact, but one large bank is sufficiently
confident of a 2 to 3 percent increase in deposits and is already extending
loans on the basis of the anticipated rise.

Even those bankers contacted

who anticipate an adverse effect on deposit levels expressed approval of
the changes in the regulations.
Several manufacturers plan to increase inventories.

Their

intentions reflect improved sales outlooks, desires to provide cushions
against lengthening lead times for raw materials, and efforts to improve
customer service.

Other manufacturers, including some who overestimated

sales in recent months, feel their current inventory levels will prove
adequate for expected sales increases.
Agribusiness is thriving, thanks to record farm income.

Firms

selling supplies to farmers report sales increases up to 20 percent over
last year.

The favorable high price and high production situation includes

the sugar beet industry, and two major sugar refineries expect substantial
revenue increases this year.
Reviving private demand and new government contracts have pulled
the cyclically sensitive Wichita economy up from an 8.1 percent unemployment
rate a year ago to its current 4.3 percent level.
airplane manufacturers —

Wichita's private

a key industry in the city —

report very good

business and expect 1973 to be equally strong or better.
The improvement in general business conditions nationwide is
also reflected in current sales and optimistic expectations of several
other types of Tenth District firms with extra-regional markets.

Consumer-

oriented firms include a manufacturer of luggage, a large nursery, two big

manufacturers of rubber products, a large manufacturer of small home
appliances, a leading greeting card company and a manufacturer closely
tied to the auto industry.
Producer-oriented manufacturers, including giant truck, steel
drum and water-cooling tower firms, generally have experienced a somewhat
less impressive sales increase over last year than have manufacturers of
consumer products.

But most are optimistic about sales prospects in the

months ahead.
Publications and contacts in the district report an excellent
summer tourist season.

A good winter sports season already has begun.

The recreational land boom continues.
While a discouraging word was seldom heard, a few respondents,
ranging from a machine tool manufacturer to a manufacturer of snack foods
and one of plastic bags, reported sales not much improved over last year.
The worst expected, however, was another year of the same.
Several nonbank businessmen also were asked about their
expectations regarding inflation and interest rates and their choice of a
continuation or end to wage and price controls.

The responses on interest

rates were too mixed to permit a conclusive prevailing opinion.

As to

the price level, most say the bargaining ahead, and the controls applied,
will determine the outcome.

While two want controls ended and replaced

with antitrust action against unions, the others feel some controls must
be maintained.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Most major indicators of economic activity in the Eleventh District
continue to show growing strength.

Both Texas industrial production index

and total employment in the five district states advanced to record levels
in September, and department store sales continued strong in October.

Never-

theless, construction contract awards eased slightly in September, and
registrations of new automobiles also slipped.

In a recent survey, the

directors of this Bank and its branches revealed considerable optimism over
the outlook for the first half of 1973.

The directors generally agreed that

the prospects were good for continued improvement in general business conditions,
employment, and profits.

However, they also expected increasing upward

pressures on prices and wages.
The responding directors overwhelmingly expected business conditions
to improve in the first half of 1973.

They were also optimistic about the

unemployment rate with almost all of the respondents expecting the rate to
be lower, or at worst no higher, than its present level.

The consensus was

that total construction activity would also be either equal to or above its
current level.

An unsettling finding, however, was that almost three-fourths

of the respondents expected the rate of inflation to increase in the first
six months of next year.
Directors representing district banks reported that demand for
business and consumer loans increased over the past three months.

Banking

respondents also felt that loan demand would continue to increase over the
next six months, with business and consumer loans continuing to show the
greatest strength.

Although the availability of funds to meet these loan

demands was generally described as either adequate or plentiful, there was
widespread agreement that short-term rates would be rising over the first

half of 1973.

Banking directors were about evenly divided, however, in their

expectations for long-term rates between those anticipating rates to remain
the same and those expecting them to rise.
Directors from the nonbanking sector were also confident about the
first half of next year.

About a quarter of these directors expected their

firms to increase employment and over half indicated that their companies
were planning to increase expenditures for plant and equipment.

Inventory

levels were generally not expected to fall any lower and a good many respondents
indicated plans to increase their level of inventories.

Almost half of the

nonbank directors expected their profit rates to be higher in the first half
of 1973 than in the most recent quarter.
about prices and wages, however.

These directors were not so optimistic

Over four-fifths expected prices and wages

in their industry to increase, with wages increasing faster.
Seasonally adjusted employment in the five southwestern states rose
again in September as both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors
recorded gains.

Monthly employment gains were reported in every sector except

mining, where employment levels were unchanged from August.

Despite the increase

in employment, the unemployment rate in the five district states remained at
4.4 percent in September as the expansion in the labor force matched the gains
in employment.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index rose
sharply in September to a record level as all major industrial sectors of the
index advanced.

Within manufacturing, the production indexes for both durables

and nondurables increased over August.

The largest gains were recorded in

petroleum refining and utilities.
Oil allowables were kept at their maximum rates for November in
the district's two largest producing states, Texas and Louisiana.

Nevertheless,

demand for petroleum continues to outpace domestic production and imports
are being depended upon to close the gap.
Recent indicators of consumer spending were mixed.

Sales of

department stores continued to show monthly and year-to-year gains through
October.

Among the four largest metropolitan areas of Texas, Dallas and

Houstin recorded the most substantial gains.

The rate of new automobile

registrations in these four centers, however, declined from the rate of a
year ago.

San Antonio was the only major area to post an increase over last

year.
The value of construction contracts awarded in the district fell
slightly in September as residential and nonbuilding construction awards
in the five-state area fell from their August levels while nonresidential
building increased slightly.
Prospects for farmers and ranchers in the five district states
remain bright.
year.

Total agricultural production continues well ahead of last

Much of the increase comes from a larger cotton crop and the steady

rise in cattle on feed.
a year ago.

Farm prices also remain considerably higher than

The gains in both production and prices have combined to boost

farm receipts in the first eight months of this year to a level 17 percent
higher than in the same period a year ago.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Directors in the Twelfth District were asked to assess wage and
price trends in their area or industry.

Their consensus is that increases

in both prices and wages would be moderate and consequently there would be
less inflation in the coming year.

For the economy in general, further

expansion is expected in most industries, with the possible exception of
construction where some leveling off is foreseen.
Wage increases in the 5 percent range are judged to be likely for
the coming year.

There are some exceptions, however.

For example, one

manufacturing firm expects a 6 1/2 to 7 percent increase for the year.
Unionization of farm workers is a factor that would add to wage pressures
in agriculture, and the expansion of aircraft production in Seattle will
create pressure on the wages of some classes of skilled and office workers.
Wage controls cause problems for some firms that lose key managers and
skilled personnel through their inability to match outside offers.

In the

view of most directors, maintenance of wage controls will be a major element
in keeping wage increases in line through 1973, a year when many major
contracts expire.
Associated with the lessening of wage increases will be slowing
of price increases.

In several industries the ceilings have stopped price

rises, while in others insufficient demand is a major reason for restraining
increases.

Therefore, a 5 percent increase in list prices may mean only

1 to 2 percent in effective prices due to competitive pressures forcing price
concessions.
Agricultural prices, which have been very good in 1972, are not
expected to be much higher according to directors in agricultural areas.
Several directors believe both wheat and cattle prices in particular are not

likely to climb much more.

On the other hand, smaller crops elsewhere in

the country will maintain prices for western potato growers.
One effect of price ceilings has been to narrow profit margins.
A large producer of processed foods reports that the inability of several
large firms to get approval for price increases on some product lines has
prevented others from raising prices.

The lower margins exist in such lines

as canned beef, fresh milk and ice cream.

Firms affected are continuing

to watch inventories and to reduce their labor force whenever possible.
Another problem, in one director's view, is that price cutting by one
major chain is cutting food retail margins to levels that may have a serious
financial impact on a number of quite substantial chains throughout the
country.
The overall performance of the economy remains satisfactory.
Retailers in the Twelfth District are expecting excellent Christmas sales
at levels about 10 percent above the previous year's sales.

As a result,

some stores have been increasing their sales force earlier than usual.
However, a hesitant attitude by wholesalers may lead to inventories
that are too thin to meet expected consumer demand for some products and
thereby keep sales to a lower level.
Construction activity, although high, is causing some concern.
In Seattle there remains considerable vacant space in commercial office
buildings and warehouses, and in Portland there is some evidence of overbuilding
of apartments.

A recent court decision in California requiring environmental

impact studies for large construction projects is singled out as another
factor causing uncertainty about future construction activity in the state.
Bankers in southern California report strong demand for mortgages
and for consumer credit.

Deposit inflows are also strong.

In Portland,

business loan demand Is described as disappointing, while in Utah and Idaho
it is described as very strong.
loan demand with minimal stress.

Generally, banks are able to meet foreseeable

