CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 11, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 14
Seventh District - Chicago page 17
Eighth District - St. Louis page 20
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 22
Tenth District - Kansas City page 25
Eleventh District - Dallas page 29
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 32

SUMMARY*

Comments from the District banks uniformly emphasize the strong
pace of the current economic expansion.

Near-term prospects for both

consumer spending and business investment continue to be excellent.
Strong income gains in the agricultural sector are bolstering retail
trade and outlays for farm machinery and equipment.
remains at a high level in most Districts.

Construction

Signs of overbuilding in

certain areas, however, suggest an adjustment in 1973.

Labor market

conditions generally continue to show improvement, and some Districts
are experiencing labor shortages.

Businessmen and economists

expressed concern over the possibility of renewed inflationary
pressures in 1973, and over what public policy measures might be taken
to counteract those pressures.

Reports were mixed on the effectiveness

of wage-price controls and their future prospects.

Commercial banks

are experiencing strong loan demand, especially from the consumer
sector.
Concern about the reemergence of inflation during 1973 was the
most frequently mentioned problem on the economic horizon.

Banks

specifically commenting on the problem of renewed inflation include
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis.

On the

subject of controls, Atlanta mentioned that businessmen are concerned
about the inadequacies of wage-price controls, while St. Louis
reported reservations among businessmen regarding the future

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]

effectiveness of controls.

A comment picked up by New York was

that continued wage controls (but presumably not price controls)
seem to be a "necessary evil" if the problem of cost-push inflation
is to be solved.

Chicago underscores the effectiveness of Price

Commission rulings in many industries, and business economists in
Cleveland maintain that sentiment among large firms is for a
continuation of controls next year.
Banks generally reported that retail sales continued to
register strong growth in recent weeks.

Higher livestock and

grain prices have contributed importantly to retail trade in
Minneapolis and have stimulated sales of farm equipment.

Chicago,

Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco also commented on bright
agricultural income conditions.

In Richmond, however, the gain in

agricultural income is below the national average.
There are signs that the upswing in business fixed investment
is gaining momentum.

Philadelphia reported businessmen's plans for

capital spending are being stepped up, while Richmond noted an
increased number of manufacturers whose current plant capacity is
too low relative to desired levels.

Atlanta mentioned heavy capital

spending on projects for pollution control and that investment is
being undertaken primarily to reduce costs rather than to increase
capacity.

In Chicago, excellent consumer demand for recreational

vehicles has spurred producers to expand capacity.

Farm machinery

producers in the Chicago District are pleased with domestic and
foreign demand and plan to operate at a higher level than normal
during the winter.

San Francisco sees plant and equipment spending

rising strongly in 1973, with heavy outlays required for pollution
control.

On the financial sides, commercial banks are experiencing
strong loan demand, particularly for mortgages and consumer credit.
Business economists in the Cleveland District do not expect a
credit crunch to materialize in 1973, although they anticipate
some edging up of interest rates.

In Kansas City, bankers are

concerned about the possibility of disintermediation.

San

Francisco reports that banks are reasonably liquid and in a
position to meet increased loan demand without major increases in
interest rates.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

For the first time in a long while, all our directors from
manufacturing and construction firms reported that business was very good.
New orders were reported rising in all sectors, and there were scattered
reports of new hirings.

No strong inventory building, however, was noted.

The local fishing industry, which has been badly hurt by the red tide
scare, is an exception to the generally improving pace of economic activity.
Our business directors had no bad news to report.

Orders were up

in all areas for consumer goods, industrial materials, capital goods,
and aerospace.

While capital goods and machinery orders are rising and

backlogs improving, one broad-based manufacturer noted that the gains
are much more moderate than the national statistics on capital spending
would indicate.

Our directors' firms are themselves, however, trying to

expand capacity now, although they still have ample capacity in most lines.
One director mentioned that his firm is building two new plants to
manufacture campers, a product line where demand is very high. Another
announced the construction of a $100 million facility to handle imported
liquified natural gas.

Capital spending to more fully automate plants

was also mentioned.
All our directors mentioned that they were increasing their work
force.

Workers who were laid off in the machine tool division of one company

have all been recalled.

A bank director from Martha's Vineyard noted that

young women were finding employment in new occupations like fishing and
carpentry.

The red tide scare has severely depressed the entire New England
fishing industry, not just firms selling infected shellfish.
fish sales are reported 75 percent below normal levels.

New England

Our director

from Martha's Vineyard reports that the island, Which usually exports
its fish heavily at this time of year, can find no market for its
uncontaminated catch.
Our directors continue to show concern about a reemergence of
inflation.

They seem to be equally worried, however, that anti-inflationary

measures taken by a reelected Nixon administration would clamp down hard
on profits or cut spending to the point of bringing another recession.
They noted that these fears are very widespread on Wall Street.
show concern over the large budget deficit.

They also

In anticipation of higher

interest rates, one of our directors has already undertaken his long-term
financing needs now.

One director mentioned that he felt more relaxed

about inflation than he has in a long time because controls have worked so
well.

However, he strongly expressed the opinion that controls should not

be removed before the end of next year, if inflationary expectations are to
be effectively dampened.
Our four academic correspondents, Eckstein, Samuelson, Shapiro, and
Wallich, agreed that the economic outlook, both domestic and international,
is good.

The latter, according to Shapiro "has never looked better."

Professor Wallich expressed concern over the current rate of money growth
in light of the 5.9 percent trend which prevailed over the inflationary
period from late 1966 to late 1971.

He granted that there may be a tendency

for velocity to diminish along with inflationary expectations. Wallich
and Shapiro would like to have monetary growth taper off to a 6 to 7
percent annual rate; Samuelson hoped for 7 percent for the rest of the year.

There was a general anticipation that neither the proposed budget
ceiling nor the refunding of overwithholding would have a strong economic
impact.

On the other hand, Shapiro believed that the ceiling would have

a favorable psychological impact on the financial markets.

He felt that

failure to enact the ceiling could add as much as 50 basis points to the
7 1/2 percent corporate new issue rate he expects to prevail by the end
of 1973.

He foresaw no credit crunch in 1973—a bill rate of 5 1/2 and

a long-term government rate of 6 1/4 by year end.
Eckstein did not think there would be a budget ceiling.

He regarded

the proposal as only pre-election political maneuvering, although he
granted that there is a budget problem.

Eckstein was less concerned

about the budget than about the future course of bank reserves.

He

advocated a "modest 6 to 8" percent rate of growth of RPDs. He argued
that it would be dangerous at present for the monetary authorities to
go outside of this range, regardless of the perceived degree of fiscal
restraint or stimulus.
There were no strong opinions on discount rate policy, although
Samuel son and Eckstein stressed the need for flexibility.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The relatively optimistic mood of this Bank's directors regarding
the current general business outlook remained in evidence this month. The
Directors felt that residential construction activity would remain at a
high level in 1973 and that consumers' outlays would continue on the upswing.
The consensus was that there had been little change in the rather conservative
inventory buying practices, but this was largely attributed to more efficient
management, with the help of computers.

Concern, however, continued to be

expressed over the inflationary implications of the Federal budget and
labor unions' large wage demands.
Regarding the overall current economic outlook, the directors in
general felt that the current and prospective business situation had
undergone little change recently and reported a generally optimistic mood
among themselves and their associates.

Indeed, the president of an upstate

bank reported some heightening of optimism in his area as a result of a
reduction in local unemployment.

And another upstate director noted that,

apart from certain segments in agriculture and tourism that had been
adversely affected by poor weather, all other economic sectors in his area
looked "very strong." Concern, however, continued to be expressed over the
inflationary implication of the fiscal and wage situation.

A Rochester

retailer thus noted the necessity for additional taxes to finance even
current government expenditures, and another director referred to the urgent
need to develop new federal budget controls.

An upstate manufacturer remarked

that continued wage controls seemed to be a "necessary evil" if the problem
of c*st-mish inflation were to be solved.

Concerning residential construction, the directors expressing an
opinion on the topic all felt that homebuilding would continue to be
relatively strong in 1973.

Some of the directors forecast a continuation of

the popularity of multiple-dwelling units and strength in apartment building
activity.

One director noted that the damage caused earlier this year in

his area by a hurricane and floods was generating an unusually large amount
of construction of new homes and of reconstruction of existing structures.
Another director reported that homebuilders in the Rochester Area felt that
expected ample availability of mortgage funds would contribute sustained
strength to home construction next year.
Regarding consumer outlays, most respondents characterized the
picture as good but not spectacular, and about in line with expectations.
One director—the president of a large container manufacturing firm—felt
the situation was "very good." A senior official of a large upstate firm
also felt that a boom in consumer spending, while not as yet evident,
might materialize next spring.
The directors, however, in general saw little if any strengthening
in the current inventory picture, in either trade or manufacturing.

An

upstate director associated with the automotive parts business did state
he detected an upward trend, and the Rochester retailer also felt the
overall pace of inventory spending looked a bit stronger.

The latter

director, however, suggested that some of the accumulation in the retail
sector in the Rochester Area might be involuntary.

Another director

suggested that recent published statistics pointing to a climb in inventory
spending might be misleading because such increases may, in part at least,
reflect the impact on the book value of inventories of rising prices.

Another director stated that the high cost of carrying inventories was
tempering the demand for additional stocks.

Also, a number of directors

noted that computer-based control systems enabled businesses to carry
inventories at lower levels.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Third District businessmen report that the regional economy is
continuing its upward course.

The latest business outlook survey of

large manufacturers in the area shows that over half of those surveyed
are chalking up advances in new orders and shipments.
holding up well again this month.

Retail sales are

Banks are experiencing good load demand.

Inventories are rising, and plant and equipment spending is on the increase.
However, employment is almost flat, and expectations of rising prices
continue.

Industrial activity continues upward with just over half the

firms contacted reporting increases in new orders and shipments. This
expansion is expected to last at least the next six months for a majority
of the firms canvassed.

Employment in the Third District is practically

level. Over three-fourths of the firms responding to our survey of large
manufacturers report no change in the number of the employees or the
length of the average workweek.
Of the remaining firms, about twice as many are experiencing increases
and decreases in the number of employees.
only modestly more optimistic.
September.

The six-month labor outlook is

Retail sales continue strong again in

Area retailers report sportswear and home furnishings were

experiencing stronger than average gains.

Auto dealers report another

good month as well. Major banks in the Third District report continued
strong loan demand from most of their departments. Mortgage and consumer
credit plus loans to small businesses set the pace. Most major corporate
borrowers, however, are not utilizing their lines of credit very heavily.

Business inventory investment is contributing a little strength to the
economic advance in the Third District. Almost half the firms report
no change in their inventories.

But, among those reporting inventory

changes, almost twice as many report gains as decreases.
Plant and equipment spending is turning up among those firms reporting
changes in their capital expenditure programs.

There were six times as

many reporting increases as decreases, an improvement over last month.
Over three-fourths of the firms responding to the Business Outlook
Survey report no change in the prices they pay and the prices they
receive this month.

But, during the next six months the picture does not

appear as favorable.

Eight times as many manufacturers expect to receive

higher prices as expect to receive lower prices for their products.
And, over two-thirds of the respondents expect to be paying higher
prices six months from now, while almost none expect their input costs
to drop.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The consensus view of the business economists who attended the
Fourth District Economists Round Table meeting held at the Bank on
October 6 was that few signs of maturity are apparent in the current
business expansion.

There was general agreement among the Roundtable

participants that there is sufficient upward momentum in the economy to
sustain a real growth rate in GNP in the area of 6 percent or more through
the first quarter of 1973.

Thereafter, the pace of the economic expansion

is expected to slow somewhat and move back toward the economy's potential
rate of growth and more sharply below that by year end. Most of the
economists expected a generally accommodative credit environment next
year, but with some edging-up of interest rates.
The median forecast of the group of about 40 business economists calls
for a $110 billion increase in GNP for 1973, with real growth of 5.8 percent
and a price increase of 3.6 percent.

According to this forecast, unemployment

is expected to register only slight improvement during 1973, with the rate
forecast at 5.2 percent for the first quarter and 5.0 percent for the fourth
quarter.

The pace of the economic expansion is projected to moderate

beginning with the second quarter, primarily reflecting smaller gains in
consumer spending and diminishing stimulus from business fixed investment
and inventory building.

The change in business inventories is expected to

be about $10 billion per quarter in 1973.

One bank economist noted that the

forecasters have consistently been expecting inventory growth to accelerate
because of low inventory-sales ratios.

He believes the secular trend toward

lower inventory-sales ratios is still with us, and, accordingly, he

cautioned against overly optimistic forecasts of inventory accumulation
for next year.
By the fourth quarter of 1973, the group projects real GNP to
be rising at a rate of 3.1 percent and prices rising at a rate of 4.3
percent. Most of the economists assume that some form of wage-price
controls will be maintained after April.

Indeed, the sentiment of the

group was that Tier I firms want controls to continue in view of the
heavy schedule of labor negotiations for next year.

One economist with

a major retailing firm said management was nervous about the prospects for
consumer spending in the second half of 1973 if the rate of inflation
accelerates.
Among other reports submitted by the business economists, the
median forecast of nine economists whose firms depend heavily on the auto
market calls for new car sales of 10.8 million units in 1973, with
imports of 1,575,000 units.

One auto economists predicted a price

increase for new cars in January, "probably not more than 3 percent."
The effect of the current price freeze is estimated to add about 100,000
units to sales during the remainder of this year.
An economist from a major steel company predicted a price increase
in his industry when the current self-imposed price freeze ends in January.
The steel industry is expected to have a better year in 1973, with
shipments estimated to rise from 92 million tons this year to a range of
94 to 100 million tons next year (depending on the intensity of the capital
goods upswing).
An economist from the Federal Home Loan Bank reported that housing
in at least a dozen major metropolitan areas is now overbuilt or is heading
toward an overbuilt situation.

An increase in multi-family vacancy

rates next year is expected to trigger a decline in total new housing
units, from an estimated 2.8 million in 1972 (including mobile homes)
to 2.3 million in 1973.
There was considerable discussion by the business economists about
their expectations with respect to monetary and financial conditions in
1973.

Emphasis was on the concern being raised by some financial economists

that credit conditions are likely to be considerably tighter and interest
rates sharply higher in 1973.

The Roundtable group, however, generally

expects a better credit environment in 1973 than what was thought to be
the commonly held view.

As one economist put it, "we are not likely to

experience a credit crunch in an underemployed economy in 1973." Another
added that, "the probability of even a mini credit crunch in 1973 is
extremely low." Although the Fed is expected to accommodate a substantial
portion of the demand for funds in 1973, the economists still anticipate
some edging up of interest rates.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Our most recent survey of District businessmen indicates that economic
conditions in the Fifth Federal Reserve District continue to improve.
Manufacturers report increases in shipments, new orders, and backlogs.
No change was reported in manufacturing employment, but there was an
increase in hours worked per week.

The demand for all types of loans

remains strong, with consumer loan demand especially strong. Further
increases in construction activity were reported.

Businessmen and bankers

continue to be optimistic about the Fifth District economy.
Responses from District manufacturers indicate increases in shipments,
volume of new orders, and backlogs.

On balance, manufacturing inventory

levels were reported to have decreased, although inventories relative to
desired levels remain high.

There are indications that production is

beginning to press on capacity in some industries as an increased number
of manufacturers report that current plant and equipment capacity relative
to desired capacity is too low.
A strong upward trend in retail sales continues to be reflected in
reports from bankers and trade and services respondents.

Increases in

retail sales excluding automobiles and in automobile sales were reported
by more than three-fourths of the banking respondents.
Manufacturers reported no change in employment, While hours worked
per week increased somewhat.

Industry reports indicate pronounced

shortages of labor and growing overtime in the important furniture
industry.

Trade and service respondents indicated an increase in both

employment and hours worked per week.

On balance, both manufacturing and

trade and service respondents reported an increase in wages paid, but
no change in prices received.
According to reports from District bankers, residential and nonresidential construction activity continues strong.

Nearly one-half of

the banking respondents indicated that construction activity has increased
in their areas since the last reporting period.
Bankers report strong demand for all types of loans.

The demand for

consumer loans appears to be especially strong with more than 70 percent
of the banking respondents indicating an increase in the demand for this
type of loan.
District crop conditions improved slightly during August, but
production prospects in early September were generally below those a year
ago.

Output of only three of the chief money crops—peanuts, soybeans,

and corn—is expected to be sizably larger than in 1971.

January-July

cash receipts from farm marketings were 5 percent above a year ago, but
the increase was below the national gain.

Demand remains strong, and

record breaking prices for better quality grades continue to prevail on
flue-cured tobacco markets.
Businessmen and bankers in the District continue to be optimistic
about the economic outlook. More than three-fourths of the banking
respondents believe that business activity in their areas will increase
in the next 90 days.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The economic mood of businessmen and bankers is one of solid
optimism.

One Tennessee director actually described the prosperity in his

area as "almost unbelievable."
Florida.

Boom conditions are reported throughout

Nevertheless, many businessmen have grave doubts about the

long-term economic health of the nation because of the Federal deficit and
labor problems.

The only weak spots in the District are areas of aerospace

layoffs or work stoppages.
Construction continues to highlight economic prosperity in the District.
Shopping center construction is strong in many areas.

In Nashville, plans

for two savings and loan buildings and for three major motels have recently
been announced, and an existing hotel will undergo a $5-million renovation.
Construction will also start shortly in Nashville on a $25-million Federal
building.

Final plans are being formulated for a $25-million convention

center on the Mississippi Gulf Coast.

In Atlanta, still another large hotel

will be built, this one rising 70 stories.

In South Florida, an unprecedented

boom in residential construction may be slowed by a decision of the Florida
Pollution Control Board to reject all sewer hookup applications in areas
of Florida that do not provide adequate waste treatment.

One Florida real

estate economist has predicted that some areas of South Florida are overbuilding and due for a serious shakeout in 1973.

Brick is in short supply

in several areas of the District, with delivery taking at least two months.
A survey of three New Orleans savings and loan associations indicates a
shortage of mortgage funds in that city in the face of strong demands.

Manufacturing employment is increasing in many areas, and capable
labor is scarce.

A major electronics firm has increased its East

Tennessee labor force from 7,000 to 12,000 in the past year.

Numerous

plant announcements and expansions should continue pressure on tight labor
markets.

However, aerospace layoffs are causing softness in the Huntsville,

Alabama Area.

Huntsville businessmen, however, are confident about their

long-term economic prospects.

Labor stoppages have slowed construction

and depressed the economy in the Lake Charles, Louisiana Area.

It has been

reported that work on a large chemical plant addition in Lake Charles has
been slowed intentionally because of uncertainty concerning the expiration
of 17 separate construction-related labor contracts in the coming months.
The huge tufted carpet industry in North Georgia is enjoying record
production and shipments.
Business leaders attending a meeting in Birmingham expressed considerable
concern about inadequacies of wage and price controls.

One nonunion firm

claims that it is experiencing a labor shortage because it can only raise
wages 5.5 percent when union settlements have been negotiated at higher
rates than permitted under the guidelines.

A manufacturer of coal and coke

reported being caught in a profit squeeze because raw material cost increases
could not be passed through.

This executive stated that, although the

market for his product was taxing capacity, he did not anticipate opening
any new coal mines since, under the present cost and price control structure,
they would not be economically justified.

This apparently was the opinion

of bankers and others from whom the company had sought funds to finance
expansion.
Plant and equipment expenditures are being undertaken by some firms
predominantly to reduce costs rather than increase output.

A representative

of one firm manufacturing electrical equipment emphasized that his
firm was engaging in capital expenditure programs specifically to
improve costs, and these programs went to the extent of closing some
plants and relocating production in lower cost areas.

Capital

expenditures are also heavy for projects to reduce pollution.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The strong momentum of the business expansion and the improved
psychology of businessmen, lenders, and the public are increasingly
evident in the Seventh District.

The job market continues to improve

gradually, consumers are spending and using credit more freely, order
backlogs are rising, and output of some industries will not show the usual
seasonal decline in the winter months.
further.

Capital expenditures are advancing

Inventories continue under tight control, but apparently are

increasing at a faster pace.
Employment has not increased as fast in the District as in the
nation. Moreover, employment in the Chicago Area, almost 30 percent of
the District total, is estimated by state agencies to be no higher than
a year ago, while the manufacturing sector is below last year.

In this

expansion, some smaller plants have been closed in the central or near
suburban areas of large cities.

Commonly, output is expanded, and new

facilities are located in remote suburbs or smaller centers far from the
headquarters.

The implication for the future of the large cities is ominous.

Despite slower than average growth in employment, unemployment in
most areas is estimated to be below last year.

Local employment service

offices frequently refer to withdrawals from the labor force since last
year.

But these views may not be based on adequate evidence.
Demand for appliances, furniture, television sets, motor homes,

snowmobiles, and other "recreational vehicles" has been excellent.

A

number of producers of these items have announced plans to expand
capacity in new, or existing, facilities.

Consumers are continuing to

use instalment credit freely.

Nevertheless, savings inflows, especially

at S§Ls, continue at a high level.
Sales of mobile homes remain very strong, and local experts
contradict reports that the market is softening.

HUD acquired thousands

of mobile homes for disaster relief following floods in South Dakota and
Pennsylvania.

As a result, mobile home producers, who customarily keep

abreast of demand, now have order backlogs.

(Some smaller mobile home

producers are not sharing in this prosperity, however.) Modular housing,
on the other hand, is doing poorly, and some District plants have been
closed.
Huge new shopping centers are accounting for a substantial share of
the increase in retail sales, particularly in the Chicago Area.

In recent

months, many stores have lengthened their hours to include Sundays and/or
evening operations to 9 or 12 P.M.

They report widespread use of these

extended hours, especially on Sundays.
In the capital goods sector, farm machinery producers are very pleased
with demand, here and abroad, and are planning to continue output at a
higher level than normal in the winter months.

Producers of components for

capital goods—including dies, forgings, electrical apparatus, drives and
couplings, and controls—report orders up 20 to 50 percent from last year's
level, which was still quite depressed in some sectors.
reflects the need to build inventories.

In part, this

Other strong areas include

forklift trucks, used machinery, solid waste disposal systems, and safety
equipment.

Capital goods producers are hampered in expanding output by

shortages of skilled workers, especially for second shifts.
The strength of the auto and truck markets is well publicized.
Shortages of truck engines and other components have spurred expansion plans.

Steel orders are proceeding at a good pace, with demand for sheets
especially good.

Lighter structural steels also are showing strength.

Ford is expanding its steel capacity at Dearborn.
Among the weaker capital goods sectors are coal mining equipment
(which had been excellent), railroad equipment, the oil industry, and
pipelines.

Paradoxically, these are among the sectors where needs are

the greatest.
Prospects for another record year in construction in 1973 are
excellent, although the pace of residential construction is expected to be
down—perhaps by 10 percent.

Housing permits surged again in the Chicago

Area in August after slowing earlier in the year.

Commercial construction

(other than office buildings), manufacturing buildings, and water and
sanitary facilities are expected to provide strength.
Price Commission rulings are quite effective in many industries.
Firms unable to justify price increases commonly notify suppliers that they
must also hold the line.

In some major industries where the leading firm

cannot justify price increases because of the profit margin rule, competitors
Who could justify increases must also hold back.
Private forecasters now estimate midwest soybean and com production
at somewhat higher levels than the recent government estimates.

These

private estimates take into account heavy rains that have damaged some
crops and delayed harvesting.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Businessmen in the Eighth Federal Reserve District report vigorous
economic growth.
adjusted basis.

Retail sales at major stores continue up on a seasonally
The construction industry maintains its high rate of

activity established late last year. All types of manufacturing are
expanding.

Employment continues to expand, and shortages of qualified

labor are reported on a wide front throughout most of the District.
However, fears that inflation is likely to accelerate in the near future
have increased. Demand for credit is rising rapidly, causing upward
pressure on interest rates.

A larger number of firms are now planning

for additional capital investments.

However, there appears to be less

optimism than during the summer that the inflation is under control.
Major stores report a sharp increase in sales during recent weeks.
Part of the gain is attributed to cooler weather, but part is attributed
to generally rising consumer demand.

Stores in the central cities were

losing sales and operating at a loss last year and early this year, but
reports indicate that sales in these stores have now stabilized and they
are operating at a profit.
Construction continues at a high rate throughout the District with
the exception of the St. Louis Area, where excessive labor costs and
numerous labor disputes have been a significant retarding factor.

In

most of the District, construction activity and output in the lumber
industry is at 100 percent capacity. Directors of the Little Rock
Branch report that in a recent week there were 110 job openings in
Stuttgart for unskilled laborers and only four jobs were filled. They

further reported that excess demand for building materials is causing
prices to rise to the top of the permissible range.

Suppliers of building

materials are unable to keep pace with demand, and allocation by rationing
has resulted.

Current brick orders are for spring delivery.

Prices in

the future market for plywood and lumber have jumped the permissible
percentage on opening trade in recent months.
Manufacturing in the District continues to expand vigorously on a
wide front.

Production of capital goods such as machinery, big motors,

and power transmission is picking up.

Production of plastics, fibers,

and agricultural supply manufactures is also higher in recent weeks
than heretofore.
Employment expanded further in recent weeks at most reporting firms.
A shortage of qualified labor is developing on a wide front throughout the
District.

Department stores in St. Louis report that good labor is hard

to get despite the fact that the City still shows a relatively high rate
of unemployment.
Lending agencies report that demand for loans is rising, while
the rate of savings remains unchanged.

Negotiated CD rates have moved

up in recent weeks, but inflows of savings are still at a lower rate than
credit extension.

Large St. Louis banks recently announced a prime rate

increase, but upward pressure on most rates continues.
Concern for inflation, which had subsided somewhat earlier in the
year, is beginning to revive.

A larger proportion of repondents expressed

reservations as to the future of wage-price controls in view of the rising
demand for and higher prices of goods and services in the uncontrolled
sector.

In many instances, the increased prices in the uncontrolled

sector become higher input costs to the larger firms in the controlled
sector of the economy.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Higher livestock and grain prices this year have stimulated District
economic activity and helped spur third quarter retail sales. However,
no significant reduction is expected in District unemployment.
According to Bank directors, this year's higher livestock and grain
prices are stimulating District economic activity.

A Montana director

revealed that recent high wheat prices will increase Montana farm income by
$16 million and result in greater farmer spending.

In a North Dakota

director's opinion, almost every businessman in his state will benefit from
this year's high grain prices, and a South Dakota director was optimistic
about the prospects for retail spending in his state. Furthermore, Bank
directors unanimously expect an increase in farm machinery sales. A Twin
Cities banker also believes that this year's improved farm income will
increase the cash inflow to country banks this fall and increase
correspondent balances at his bank.

Although the Port of Duluth did not

benefit from the recent wheat sales, a Duluth director believes additional
sales to Russians would aid his area.
Partially reflecting the improved farm income situation, District
consumer spending advanced in the third quarter, and District retailers
look for further gains in the fourth quarter.

Four out of five Twin Cities

Area retailers revealed that their third quarter sales were quite good,
two noted a definite pickup in August and September.

In addition, Gamble

Skogmo's business economist indicated that their business in the District's
rural areas had improved in the third quarter.

These retailers revealed

that their third quarter sales had generally matched earlier expectations,
although one Twin Cities discounter stated that his third quarter sales
only matched last year's level.

These retailers unanimously expected

good to excellent business in the fourth quarter.
The anticipated stimulus from farm spending, however, is not expected
to significantly reduce District unemployment.

A survey of State Employment

Security Offices in 16 of the District's largest labor areas revealed that,
although employment growth is expected to improve in many areas, no
substantial reduction in unemployment is anticipated.

When asked to

characterize the outlook for employment growth during the next 90 days,
two respondents termed it "excellent," seven called it "good," six considered
it "fair," and one referred to it as "poor." Nine of the respondents
foresee job openings in their areas to be up from a year ago—seven said
only "slightly, "—while five respondents expect employment opportunities
to match last year's level and two anticipate drops.

Since most respondents

also look for normal to above normal labor force growth in the fourth quarter,
no significant reduction in unemployment is expected.

Seven respondents

look for fourth quarter unemployment to be down slightly from a year ago,
three foresee no change, and six anticipate some increase in joblessness.
In the Minneapolis/St. Paul Metropolitan Area, which accounts for a
third of District employment, job openings are expected to be up from a year
ago, and a modest fourth quarter increase in employment is anticipated.
However, unemployment is only expected to be down nominally from a year
earlier.
Bank directors' opinions varied with regard to the labor market
outlook in their respective areas.

In Northeastern Minnesota, unemployment

is up, and no significant reduction in joblessness is foreseen.

Lacrosse,

Wisconsin's unemployment rate, however, is at its lowest level since
September 1969, and further improvement is expected.

And in the Upper

Peninsula of Michigan, the construction of an iron mining facility is
expected to stimulate employment growth next spring.

Furthermore, a

South Dakota director anticipates a modest gain in his area's employment,
and a Montana director attributes more jobs in his area to a pickup in
construction activity.

In North Dakota, meanwhile, the employment

situation was characterized as "pretty good," with few married men out
of work.

One director revealed that his firm is finding common laborers

plentiful, but not skilled workers.

Another director indicated that

employers are advertising for additional workers but are being very
selective in hiring them.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Vigorous economic acitivity in the District is being bolstered
by strength in the agricultural and construction sectors and in automobile
sales.

Overall activity is being supported by strong demands in all

major loan categories at commercial banks. At the same time, growth in
savings inflows and in mortgage loans and commitments is sustaining a
high level of residential construction.

Recent developments surrounding

the export of farm products are also contributing to an improved income
situation in the important agricultural sector of the District's economy.
Loan demand continues strong at District banks, with heavy demands
being experienced in all major loan categories. Most District banks
surveyed increased their prime rate to 5 3/4 percent during the first
week of October reflecting both heavy business loan demand and national
financial developments.

The recent run-up of short-term interest rates,

which has increased the cost of short-term funds, has also put upward
pressure on the prime rate at District Banks. Despite the upward
adjustment of offering rates on CD's, the volume of CD's has declined
substantially at District banks since the end of August.
Several District bankers expressed concern about the possibility
of disintermediation, even though present inflows of time and savings
deposits have been strong.

Rates on consumer-type time deposits are

generally at ceiling levels.

No consensus has developed regarding

market rate levels that will trigger deposit outflows, but many bankers
feel that both consumer-type time deposits and large CD's will be

affected if present trends continue.

In anticipation of this prospect,

several banks are actively attempting to extend deposit maturities.
Savings inflows to District savings and loan institutions were
reported to be down a bit from last year by respondents in Kansas City
and Oklahoma City, but from "surprisingly steady" to "coming in strong"
by institutions in Wichita, Topeka, Omaha, and Denver.

On the whole,

rates offered for savings remain the same, but average effective rates
paid have risen as increasing numbers of depositors have been
switching from passbook to certificate accounts.
Mortgage commitments and loans of savings and loan institutions
have apparently stabilized somewhat, with slight declines noted in some
areas.

However, respondents from Omaha and Oklahoma City emphasized

that the small declines left loan activity very strong because of the
phenomenal pace of lending earlier. Much the same thing was said about
construction activity—continued strength in building in most areas,
though somewhat reduced from earlier peaks.

Some further slowing down

was anticipated in residential building in the Kansas City Area and
in apartment starts in Omaha.

Respondents from Omaha and Denver were

a little apprehensive about possible overbuilding.
The dollar value of residential construction contract awards so
far in 1972 continues to be well above the 1971 level for the District
and for most of its larger cities.

Speculative building of single-

family dwellings continues strong in the Kansas City Area, according
to home construction firms surveyed. Most contractors are not concerned
with overbuilding at this point, although several mentioned "hearsay"
comments that demand is slowing.

Nearly all of the homebuilders were

of the opinion that there were plenty of funds available to both
builders and buyers.

Contract awards for nonresidential building and for public works
and utilties have also shown increased strength across the District this
year, except for Western Missouri.

General contractors in the Kansas City

Area are expecting an improvement in 1972, however, partly due to an expected
increase in highway construction activity in both Kansas and Missouri.
Sales of domestic automobiles by District dealers are very strong.
Introductory sales of new models are reported to be better than last year,
almost without exception.

"Hold-the-line" pricing on 1973 models is given

some of the credit, because many customers believe that higher prices are
just a matter of time. Many dealers, however, are convinced that price
increases will not retard sales increases very much.
expect 1973 model-year sales to be outstanding.

Nearly all dealers

At the same time, clean-up

sales of 1972 models have gone exceptionally well, and inventories of 1972
cars are very low.

Sales of imported autos are not sharing the buoyancy

in domestic car sales, although later introduction of new models is
undoubtedly a factor.
Net farm income for the United States for 1972 is now expected to
reach $18.6 billion, or $500 million more than reported earlier, according
to the U. S. Department of Agriculture.

The change is due primarily to the

huge grain sales to the Soviet Union, amounting to roughly $1 billion. The
projections for wheat and feed grain exports have also been revised
sharply upward for the 1972-1973 marketing year.

District states produce

approximately 40 percent of the wheat and 20 percent of the feed grains that
are exported from the United States each year.

Thus, these new developments

in the farm income picture should boost the final figures for 1972 District
farm income, although many farmers forfeited higher incomes by selling
their wheat before the sharp price jump in August and September.

However,

historical records in Kansas indicate that, even after allowing for
heavier than usual marketings in June and July, probably 50-60 percent of
the new crop was still under farmer control when the full magnitude of
wheat sales to Russia became apparent.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Indicators of economic activity in the Eleventh District were mixed
in August.

Although the Texas Industrial Production Index eased slightly

from its revised record level in July, the unemployment rate for the
five District states declined, and employment continued to increase.
Department store sales in the District also continued strong, and
construction activity rebounded sharply.

However, the rate of new car

registrations declined slightly.
A decrease in the production of nonmanufactured goods was primarily
responsible for the slight decline in the seasonally adjusted Texas
Industrial Production Index in August.
utilities and crude oil mining.

The decline was centered in public

Nevertheless, production in both these

industries was well above its level of a year ago.

The Index for

manufacturing industries remained essentially unchanged.
Seasonally adjusted total nonagricultural employment in the five
Southwestern states rose to a record level in August and helped to push
the unemployment rate down slightly.

Both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing

employment increased, with employment in durable goods manufacturing and
mining showing particularly notable gains.

Government employment and

employment in service industries also increased in August.

Slight employment

declines were reported in construction and transportation and public utilities.
However, all industry groups posted year-to-year gains.
Total construction contracts awarded in the five Southwestern states
were up sharply in August. All major types of construction increased, but
residential building continued to provide the primary impetus.

The cumulative

value of contracts awarded during the first eight months of this year
is almost a third higher than in the corresponding period last year.
Department stores in the Eleventh District continue to post good
monthly and year-to-year increases in sales.

September sales were equally

strong in the major metropolitan areas of Texas; however, cumulative
figures through September show Houston and Dallas to have the largest
sales increases over the corresponding period last year.

New car

registrations in the four largest metropolitan areas fell slightly in
August, as declines in Dallas and Houston more than offset increases in
Fort Worth and San Antonio.
District oil allowables for October were again set at their maximum
rates.

However, District production continues to fall behind domestic

demand, and refiners are increasing their reliance on foreign oil. With
the traditional year-end pickup in drilling adding to the already strong
demand, drilling contractors in East Texas and sections of the Gulf Coast
are operating at close to full capacity.

Regional drilling equipment

manufacturers and sellers are consequently experiencing a surge in new
orders.
Agricultural production in the five District states is expected to
show marked improvement over output in 1971. A substantial increase in
crop production, resulting mainly from the prospect of a bumper cotton crop,
is expected to account for virtually all of this output gain. Although
livestock production is expected to be slightly below its year-earlier
level, the cattle feeding industry continues to grow, with most of the
increase occurring in Texas.
With gains in production and improved average prices for both crop
and livestock products, cash receipts from farm marketings in the District

states rose sharply in the first seven months of this year over the same
period in 1971.

Even though a recent drop in the spot price of cotton

is of major concern to cotton producers, prospects for farm income
continue bright.
Total credit at weekly reporting banks in the District rose moderately
in September, following a rapid advance in August.

Total loans increased

more rapidly, however, as commercial and industrial loan demand continued
strong.

The demand for business loans was especially strong from nondurable

goods manufacturers and the construction and service industries.
of investment by weekly reporting banks declined from August.

The rate

Banks also

made some adjustments in their portfolios, increasing their holdings of
municipal securities and decreasing their holdings of U. S. Government
securities.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Recent sales of wheat to Russia and China have created a very favorable
situation for growers; with no crop carry-over, good wheat prices are expected
to hold next year also.
Retail spending is maintaining its previous rate of advance and is
now well ahead of the same period last year. Retailers are optimistic
that this trend will continue for the rest of the year. Automobile
dealers are very optimistic for sales of the '73 models, although current
sales are being held down by slow deliveries.

Even in those areas where

unemployment remains a problem, consumer spending is described as
noticeably stronger.
District bankers report stronger loan demand by business.

One large

Oregon bank, despite a slight downturn in commercial loans last month,
expects further growth over the next few weeks on the basis of the present
volume of loan applications.

Commercial banks generally report good demand

for loans, along with steady growth in deposits.

Time-deposit rates have

climbed somewhat, and the prime rates of most banks have been raised in
accord with national trends.

Also, conventional mortgage rates in Southern

California are reported to have risen 1/4 percent or higher.

Banks are

reasonably liquid and are in a position to meet increased loan demand
without major increases in interest rates.
Our directors report that economic activity is continuing to register
solid gains in most sectors of the Twelfth District.

Investment expenditures

should rise strongly during the rest of this year and into 1973. Retail
sales in most areas are maintaining a steady growth.

Construction is

holding up well despite certain signs of weakness, and this in turn is
contributing to a high demand in the District's forest-products industry.
Agriculture similarly has experienced a good crop year.
Against this background of activity, our directors report that
investment expenditures are expected to be higher in the rest of this year,
and that they will grow further in 1973.

In forest products, high demand

for housing justifies modernization and expansion of capacity.

In

aircraft, rising demand for air-transport equipment will stimulate further
investment.

Pollution control is requiring heavy expenditures; in

Washington, for example, one company is planning $22 million in control
facilities, and a smelting company will spend $18 million to reduce smoke
emissions.

General manufacturers in Los Angeles and machinery producers

in Oregon are expanding to meet increased consumer demand, expenditures
by public utilities to expand capacity will be important in maintaining
construction spending.

Although some directors again report overbuilding of

apartments and office buildings, construction generally shows no serious
signs of weakness.
Assisting these higher levels of investment are favorable cash
flows and recent tax changes, particularly the investment tax credit.

The

latter was singled out as a major factor influencing current investment
plans in both industry and agriculture.
Our directors (except in Utah) generally expect a sizable and
broadly-based rise in investment expenditures.

A major California bank

forecasts a 14-percent increase in business fixed investment in 1973.
Associated with this spending on fixed capital will be a higher rate of
inventory accumulation, above the current sluggish pace, through the
first half of 1973.

Agriculture has had an excellent year, and the high income received
by farmers has led to heavier investment in new equipment and facilities.
Many farmers are turning to larger machinery and are also spending to
improve their irrigation systems.

According to a Washington director,

the rising cost of farm labor is another factor generating higher
investment.

Efforts to reduce labor costs have led to expansion of

capacity in hydroponic grown crops, as well as more efforts to mechanize
in field crops.

Even where there is no expansion, there is at least

constant replacement of equipment.

