CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 13, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 3
Third District - Philadelphia page 6
Fourth District - Cleveland page 8
Fifth District - Richmond page 10
Sixth District - Atlanta page 12
Seventh District - Chicago page 14
Eighth District - St. Louis page 17
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 19
Tenth District - Kansas City page 22
Eleventh District - Dallas page 25
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 28

Summary*

In general, the District banks report continuing business expansion
and a good measure of optimism about future prospects.
retail sales are reportedly doing well.

With few exceptions,

Home building nationwide has fallen

back from peaks earlier in the year, but remains very strong in selected areas.
Commercial, banks are experiencing good loan demand from consumers and small
business, while demand from national corporations is more restrained.

The

employment picture appears to have strengthened a bit further, and expectations
of further employment gains were variously noted.

The agricultural situation

was almost uniformly described as bright, with farm output, income and investment
up.
Retail sales were said to be "particularly good" in Philadelphia;
strong or improving in the Richmond, Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco
and Dallas Districts, but only moderate or mixed in St. Louis, Kansas City,
New York, and Cleveland.

Atlanta and Boston report that the summer tourist

season had been strong, but Boston said that vacationers had been "quite careful"
with their money.

Chicago noted a significant rise in domestic airline traffic.

There was some evidence of increased capital spending.

Philadelphia

District businessmen expect to increase plant and equipment expenditures within
the next six months.

Chicago reports that most District producers of capital

equipment have been experiencing higher sales and orders, with good prospects
for the future.

New York also cited some evidence of a strong capital spending

outlook for 1973, and Atlanta reported the announcement of several large
commercial construction projects, including hotel and office buildings.

A survey

by Minneapolis found a significant increase in local firms reporting plant
capacity as "less than needed".

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]

Construction activity remains at a high level, but District trends
are mixed.

Atlanta characterized building activity in its District as being

of boom proportion.

A generally favorable construction picture is also reported

by the Richmond and San Francisco Banks.

St. Louis reports that while construction

activity has apparently levelled off, it has done so at a relatively high rate.
Similarly, though the Dallas Bank reports a decline since June, it notes that
such activity remains well abo-we last year's level.

Cleveland states that

residential contracts appear to have peaked in the May-June period and to have
declined sharply in July.
The nationwide employment situation appears to have improved further
on balance.

Richmond reports increases in employment and hours worked per

week, and both Richmond and Atlanta found shortages of labor in some areas of
their Districts.

New York noted shortages of skilled construction workers, and

Chicago reported both an increase in help wanted advertising and inadequate supply
of quality workers.

The unemployment rate is down further in San Francisco.

Some

other reports pointed to little current change in the job market but, among
these, Philadelphia and Dallas found some evidence pointing to future improvement.
Reports from some Banks indicated that concern over inflation remains
strong.

A number of New York's directors cited the inflationary implications of

the large and widening Federal budget and of the heavy calendar of wage
negotiations in 1973.

Businessmen contacted by Philadelphia expected inflation

to be more of a problem in the future.

Encouragingly, however, Kansas City found

evidence in the agricultural situation that the pressure would be off food prices
for the remainder of the year.

In this connection, most Banks discussing

agriculture—Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco—all

reported good agricultural prospects as a result of both higher prices and
high production, though Richmond said the outlook in that District is for
reduced crops and farm income.

FIRST DISTRICT —

BOSTON

Business conditions were generally described as good, if not
exuberant, but no one was experiencing either a general building of inventories or heavy capital spending.
While our director from Martha's Vineyard reports that that
resort area had a busy season, he noted that vacationers were quite careful with their money.

Take-out places and moderately priced restaurants

fared much better than the expensive restaurants.

Higher consumer spending

was evident, however, by the increasing numbers of vacationers with their
own boats.
Our bank directors experienced different trends.

A New Hampshire

banker reported that his savings deposits were up 20 percent in August,
while a director from a large Boston bank stated that his savings deposit
flows have been stable for the last three months.

Neither reported a

softening of residential mortgage interest rates.

Both banks were expe-

riencing heavy business loan demand.
seasonal buildup of shoe inventories.

In New Hampshire, this came from a
The Boston banker reported that loans

to local businesses were stable and that his sharp growth in loans came from
other areas of the country, mainly from real estate and REITs, finance companies, and some national businesses.
Business orders were reported as very good for carbon black (a raw
material used in manufacturing tires), with a big pickup in the last ten days
of August.

Despite the good orders, the company may be forced to close a

thermo-black plant in Louisiana because that plant has become unprofitable
owing to a 100 percent increase in natural gas prices.

The company cannot

raise its prices because the company as a whole would not meet the Price

Commission's profit margin test.

In part, this is because of the Commission's

rule which does not allow the inclusion of interest payments in calculating
costs.

Since this firm is a major factor in this field, no other company

producing thermo-black can raise its price either.
Professors Samuelson and Wallich, the two academic respondents
contacted this month, both expressed concern over the possibility that the
rapid second-quarter growth will be continued.

Both were prepared to let

interest rates tighten under the stimulus of a growing economy.

Wallich

noted that higher short rates would have the benefit of strengthening the
dollar.

He proposed a 6 to 7 percent ceiling on the rate of growth of the

money stock.
Neither respondent found an economic reason not to raise the discount rate.

Expressing surprise that the rate has not been raised already,

Samuelson stressed his general philosophy of two-way flexibility for both
reserve creation and discount policy.

He would find no inconsistency in

tightening now when economic conditions seem so favorable, but remained prepared to reverse this policy in the future in the event that prospects
deteriorate.

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

The views of this Bank's head office and Buffalo Branch
directors on the economic situation and outlook remain about unchanged.
On balance, the directors believe the recovery is continuing, and they
remain reasonably optimistic about the outlook.

The primary concern

voiced about the future was the prospect for worsening inflation.

It

was stressed that the collective bargaining calendar for 1973 is heavy,
the Federal deficit is large and widening, and that wage and price
controls might be dismantled prematurely.

On the brigher side, several

directors cited evidence of a strong capital spending outlook for 1973,
and there were a number of comments that indicated further improvement in
the local employment picture.
The performance of retail sales were generally pictured as
little changed from the recent past.

Retail demand was described as

strong in New York City, Rochester and Jamestown.

One banker director

did say his information indicated a somewhat mixed picture in the upstate
area, but went on to attribute that to special local factors such as bad
weather.

Several directors also observed that retail sales are generally

stronger in the suburbs than in the central cities, and that back-toschool buying had been encouraging.
Concerning prospective business plant and equipment outlays,
several directors felt such outlays would rise rapidly in 1973.

An

upstate banker said he expected "very strong" capital spending on the
basis of his bank's loan commitments for "pay out" in the first half of
next year.

A senior official of the largest upstate firm also expressed

confidence that capital spending would show "an impressive gain", in part

as a result of the ample availability of both external and internal funds.
The president of a major oil company saw the possibility for an improvement next year in his industry's capital spending picture, following the
drop that had occurred in 1972.

Another director also foresaw continued

rapid growth of capital outlays by municipal governments.

On the other

hand, one upstate banker stated that he did not look for a significant
upgrading of existing capital spending plans, and an upstate manufacturer
pointed to the current level of unused capacity, as well as to the
uncertainties related to the election, as factors currently inhibiting
the expansion of capital spending plans.

Also, the president of a large

metal producing firm stated he was "not bullish" with respect to plant
and equipment spending in the metals industry, in part because of continued
excess capacity and depressed profits.
The directors, with some exceptions, felt the current demand for
commercial and industrial bank loans was not particularly strong.

The

major exception was the chairman of the board of a large New York City
bank, who stated that there had been a substantial pickup in commercial
and industrial loans at his bank since mid-year.

An upstate banker reported

some strengthening in connection with a continued rapid growth of capital
outlays by municipalities.

The New Jersey banker reported a good loan

demand from local businesses, but noted that borrowings at his bank by
national corporations has as yet remained modest.

Also, several upstate

bankers characterized current commercial and industrial loan demand as
"quite soft".

One of these bankers, however, said the current weakness

might be seasonal, and that he was expecting a strengthening in demand
in the coming months.

The senior official of the largest upstate firm

also felt loan demand was picking up, but not as rapidly as might be
expected in the light of the pace of the economic recovery—a fact he

attributed in good part to the current highly liquid positions of many
large corporations.

Similarly, an upstate manufacturer observed that

current industrial cash flow seemed sufficient to fill normal financial
needs.

The president of the major oil company reported that bank credit

to the petroleum industry had been declining since mid-1969, partly
because of increased reliance of those firms on the commercial paper
market.
The responses concerning the employment picture were encouraging.
Continued strength was reported in the Rochester area, where there is
now a shortage of skilled personnel, especially in the construction
industry.

A similar assessment was made by the New Jersey banker who, as

an example, reported that his bank has had difficulties in obtaining
people to build a new bank building.

And, the president of the major

metal producing firm noted that the employment situation in the coal
industry has continued to improve.
Finally, broad concern was expressed by the directors over the
outlook for wage and price inflation.

References were made variously to

the "unhealthy" Federal budget situation, to the heavy collective bargaining
calendar for 1973 and the possible pace-setting effect of large wage
settlements recently negotiated in Canada, to the prospect for higher
gasoline and heating oil prices later this year as supplies run short,
and to fears that existing wage and price controls might shortly be
scrapped.

THIRD DISTRICT ~

PHILADELPHIA

Area businessmen continue to be optimistic about the Third District
economy.

Production activity is continuing to increase.

The employment

picture is practically unchanged but is expected to be better in six months.
Retail sales are brisk and expected to hold up through the fall.

Seasonal

doldrums which are said to be typical for September are holding bank deposits
back.

Loan demand from national borrowers is weak, but consumer, real estate,

and small business loan demand is good.

Business investment in inventory and

plant and equipment is seen rising slowly in the months ahead.

Over half of

the businessmen contacted look for rising prices in early 1973.
Most manufacturing firms in the Third District responding to the Bank's
monthly business outlook survey report new orders and shipments are either
constant or increasing.

The survey also indicates that manufacturing activity

is expected to rise for the next six months.

Employment prospects are improving.

A growing minority of firms have expanding payrolls.

The six-month outlook

is promising; 40 percent of the firms foresee increased hiring by spring.
However, the majority of firms still foresee no particular growth in their
payrolls.

Over half of the firms surveyed are not changing the number of

employees or the length of the average workweek, and they don't plan to do so
in the next six months.
Retail sales have been "particularly good" since tropical storm Agnes,
which kept shoppers at home earlier this summer.

Sales have moved up nicely

on a broad front and are expected to continue strong this fall.
Philadelphia bankers report that deposits are coming in slowly, but
that this is normal for September.

One banker stated that he could get all

the time deposits he wanted by raising interest rates but that demand deposits
were hard to increase.

Business loan demand from large national borrowers

is sluggish at the contacted banks; one banker attributed this to the large
corporation's easy access to the commercial paper market.

In contrast, loan

demand from local businesses, real estate buyers, and consumers is reported
strong.
Area businessmen are not contributing to inventory expansion; the
number of firms reporting inventory increases is about equal to the number
of firms cutting their inventories.

However, six months from now half the

responding businessmen expect to be increasing inventories, compared with
17 percent who plan decreases.
New plant and equipment expenditures within the next six months
are expected to increase, but the number of firms planning such expenditures
dropped slightly from last month's survey.
The responding businessmen expect inflation to be more of a problem
in the future.

The percentage of respondents expecting more inflation

increased slightly from last month's survey.

About one in five are paying

and receiving higher prices this month; over half currently expect prices to
rise within six months.

FOURTH DISTRICT —

CLEVELAND

Key indicators of economic activity in the District reveal some
signs of hesitation in recent months.

Nonfarm payroll employment declined

slightly in June and again in July; the insured unemployment rate continued
to improve in August, however.

Residential construction contracts appear

to have peaked in the May-June period, and declined sharply in July; nonresidential construction remains sluggish.

Our electric power indexes of

manufacturing activity are reflecting temporary leveling tendencies or
slower rates of increase in a number of metropolitan areas.

The performance

of the manufacturing sector should begin to improve as inventory building
gathers momentum.

Steel-industry economists see evidence of near-term

improvement in their industry.
Preliminary returns from our monthly survey of manufacturers
indicate that new orders, shipments, and backlogs continued to rise in
August, but at somewhat slower rates than earlier in the year.

Inventory

accumulation continued for the fourth consecutive month, with the largest
percentage of firms reporting higher stocks since early 1970.

(Our survey

has detected no decline in new orders in more than a year, no decline in
shipments since the end of the recession, and no decline in backlogs since
last autumn.

Inventories, however, were being liquidated through the

month of April.)

Firms also reported little change in labor utilization

in August, a lengthening in delivery time, and no easing in price increases.
An economist from a large retail concern headquartered in the
District reported that areas producing consumer durables have experienced
very strong department store sales in recent months, while areas specializing
in producers' goods have had sluggish retail sales.

In general, sales of

sportswear, cosmetics, and household furnishings have been good, recreational

goods mediocre, and air conditioning terrible.

Kis opinion is that consumers

are highly price conscious and appear to be displaying much resistance to
price increases.
Several major machine tool companies in the Cleveland area indicate
that orders are rising sharply, although they have a long way to go before
reattaining previous peak order levels.
According to several steel-industry economists in the District, thirdquarter shipments are registering only the normal seasonal p a t t e r n — a
disappointment to some analysts who expected a pickup.
outstanding.

Orders have not been

Steel ordering for heavy construction and industrial construction

(still below normal) seems to have bottomed out.

There are signs of a

modest improvement, but the real strength from this sector is not expected
to come until 1973.

The economists say the order outlook from the consumer

sector promises to be very strong for the fourth quarter.

Some hedge

buying in anticipation of a steel price increase on or after January 1 could
occur over the next few months.

According to one steel industry economist,

competitive factors, rather than the Price Commission, have held down steel
prices.

The industry is in a position to raise prices on January 1 (when

its self-imposed price freeze ends) if market conditions are favorable.

The

economists expect the steel industry to have a better year in 1973, with
capital goods providing the stimulus and consumer goods demand about level
with this year.

FIFTH DISTRICT —

RICHMOND

No important changes in current and prospective conditions in
the Fifth District have occurred since the previous survey.

Manufacturers

report a slight decline in shipments and increases in new orders and backlogs.

Increases are reported in employment and hours worked per week.

Construction activity remains strong and the demand for all types of loans
is up.

In general, businessmen and bankers remain optimistic about the

economic outlook for the District.
The diffusion of responses from District manufacturers indicates
a slight decline in shipments, while new orders and backlogs are up substantially.

Increases in both orders categories were reported by manu-

facturers in such important District industries as textiles, electronics,
and steel.

For the first time in several months, increases in manufacturing

inventories were reported.

Inventory levels relative to desired levels also

increased, however, suggesting that some of the increase in inventories may
have been unanticipated.
Retail sales continue strong in the District.

Nearly three

fourths of the banking respondents reported increases in general retail
sales in their areas, and more than one half reported increases in automobile
sales.

Contact with several District retailers indicates that they continue

to experience sales increases.
Increases in employment and hours worked per week were reported by
District manufacturers.

Trade and services respondents indicated an in-

crease in employment but no change in hours worked per week.

On balance,

responses from manufacturers show an increase in wages paid and a decrease

in prices received.

More than one fifth of the manufacturing respondents

reported declines in prices received.

Several respondents mentioned a

shortage of both skilled and unskilled labor in their localities.
Reports from District bankers, while showing increases in both
residential and nonresidential construction, indicate that the pace of
the advance in construction activity has slowed some, compared with the
previous reporting period.

Even so, approximately one third of the

banking respondents report increases in construction in their areas.
In general, reports from bankers indicate that loan demand
remains strong.

More than one half of the banking respondents reported

increases in the demand for business, consumer, and mortgage loans.
Crop prospects, as of August 1, were generally not as good as
those in 1971.

The outlook for reduced crop production reflects both

smaller acreages for harvest and lower yields per acre.

Total cash

receipts from farm marketing during the first half of 1972 were 4 percent
above a year ago, but the gain was only half the size of the national increase.

To date, the 1972 flue-cured tobacco marketing season has been

marked by strong demand, good quality tobacco, and unprecedented recordsetting prices.
Businessmen and bankers in the District are optimistic about
the economic outlook.

Nearly 80 percent of the banking respondents believe

that business activity in their area will increase in the immediate future.

SIXTH DISTRICT —

ATLANTA

Businessmen generally report that spending and production are
advancing.

Business sentiment is bullish.

One of the leading sectors is

construction, especially in Florida and Atlanta.
According to one report, "there has never been a housing boom to
compare with the current statewide boom in Florida11.

There have been a number

of large projects announced such as a 31,500-acre community development in
southwest Florida,

a $600

million residential-hotel-industrial complex to be

build on 2,700 acres south of Orlando near Disney World, and two beachfront
condominium projects in northeast Florida totaling $16 million.

Building

permits in the Miami area are reported to be running 20 percent over previous
record levels.
The construction outlook is strong elsewhere, especially in Atlanta
where several large projects have been announced, including a 1,200-room hotel,
an $80 million planned community, a 600-unit high-rise condominium, two fifteen
story office buildings, a large second-home and resort community, and a community
of 950 single-family homes.

Commercial construction is also setting the pace

in New Orleans where two skyscrapers have recently been announced, one to be
the tallest in the southeastern addition.

The mobile home industry reports

to be booming throughout the District.
All indications are that the summer tourist season was very strong
outside Miami.

Most central Florida attractions had good attendance, and

most of these attractions are planning to expand their operations.

Opryland

near Nashville projected that its first season attendance would be one million,
but it had an attendance of 0.7 million by Labor Day and is planning to spend
$3 million on increased entertainment.

The Tennessee Walking Horse Festival

this year was attended by 133,000 versus 123,000 a year ago.

In Knoxville,

it is reported that a company has bought land with the idea of building
another large amusement park.

Oddly enough, a study by the state of Florida

following the Democratic convention found that "delegates spent virtually
no money on activities which are followed at typical conventions and their
presence kept away the usual summer tourists."

Large numbers of vacant

hotel and motel rooms have been reported, and many of the so-called "glamour
night spots" have reported a low average summer season.
There have been a number of new plant announcements, the largest
being a $280 million oil refinery in Pascagoula, Mississippi.

When a

plastics plant recently opened in Jackson, Mississippi, the company announced
that it would be adding a facility twice the size of its new plant.

Other

recent plant announcements include a mobile home plant in north Florida, a
plastics plant in Nashville, a plumbing fixtures plant in Knoxville, and a
cement plant in the Miami area.
There is a labor shortage in several areas of the District, evidenced
in central Florida by an increase in help-wanted advertising on television and
radio.

SEVENTH DISTRICT —

CHICAGO

The view that a vigorous business uptrend will continue through
mid-1973, with possibly slower growth in the second half of the year, is
becoming increasingly common in the Seventh District.

Employment continues

to edge up, and unemployment is becoming less burdensome, except for some
centers in Michigan.

While some manufacturers are not satisfied with the

degree of improvement in their orders, we do not know of any sectors where
demand is weakening.
exception.)

(Apartment building in the Chicago area may be an

Retail sales appear strong, both hard and soft goods, but

savings inflows to financial institutions remain at a high level.
Help-wanted ad volume in major newspapers has increased substantially
this year but remains well below the levels of the late 1960's.
employers find the supply of quality workers to be inadequate.
are hard to staff, despite the offer of premium pay.

Some
Night shifts

Many employers are

hard pressed to satisfy standards for "affirmative action" in hiring more
women and minority group people in the face of company policies to hold down
total employment.

Companywide ceilings on total employment, particularly for

"overhead" types, are common.
in other upswings.
hirings include:

Adding employees requires more "red tape" than

Aside from arbitrary ceilings, requirements for new
(1) approval at a higher level of management,

justifications, and

(2) written

(3) more frequent reports on the employment status of

individual departments.

Partly because of price controls, manufacturers are

prepared to let delivery times lengthen rather than incur the costs associated
with additional hirings of recruits of doubtful quality.

Obviously, the tight policy on new hires is a major factor favoring
large increases in productivity.

These conditions presumably will change

if the general upswing continues at the rate anticipated.
The prospective rise in the minimum wage would not affect starting
pay in most District industries, except for retailing.
would be affected.)

(Not all retailers

However, a substantial rise in the minimum wage is

expected to "ratchet" pay scales for relatively low-pay jobs that are above
the minimum.
Gas, electric, and telephone utilities report strengthened demand
for their services.

There is little threat of electric power shortages in

this region, in the short run, but prospective supplies of fuel oil and gas
for heat appear to be inadequate.

A large Michigan utility has warned "inter-

ruptable" industrial customers that they will receive no gas in the fourth
quarter of 1972, and possibly not in the first quarter of 1973.
Attitudes toward price and wage controls vary greatly by industry.
Truckers claim that they are in a wage-price squeeze.

Oil firms warn of

"incipient" shortages of both gasoline and home-heating oils, partly because
of price controls.

At the other extreme, the chief executive of a large

Chicago-based airline thinks that the controls were an absolute good, and
have made it "possible for his firm to move from large deficits to a modest
profit".

Incidentally, domestic airline traffic is now well ahead of last

year, after a pause in May.

A fairly steady annual growth of 9 to 10 percent

in passenger seat miles is foreseen for the rest of the decade.
Most producers of capital equipment report higher sales and orders
and good prospects for the future.

Outlays for pollution control have top

priority and sometimes displace other items in capital spending budgets.
Some District firms are negotiating sizable deals with the USSR.

Russians

are among the large attendance at the ten-day international machine tool
show that opened in Chicago on September 5.

(Officials believe this show

to be the largest industrial exposition ever held in the United States.)
Foreign demand for a variety of types of producer equipment has improved,
with the United Kingdom the only soft spot among major nations.
Among the sectors that are not participating in the rise in capital
spending are petroleum, the railroads, and industrial construction.

There

is little likelihood of a pickup in these sectors in the remainder of 1972
or in early 1973.
Apartment building has slowed significantly in the Chicago and
Indianapolis areas in 1972.

(More apartment buildings would be built in

Chicago suburbs if zoning restrictions were relaxed.)

In Detroit and

Milwaukee, on the other hand, apartment building has strengthened relative
to single-family homes in 1972.

Overall, residential construction is strong.

Where permits have declined, it is lack of effective demand rather than credit
stringencies.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Economic activity continues to advance in the Eighth Federal Reserve
District, according to a selected group of business representatives.
output continues to show moderate gains for a wide range of products.

Factory
Retail

sales have risen further in recent weeks on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Construction has apparently leveled off but at a relatively high rate.

More

firms reported moderate increases in employment in recent weeks than heretofore.
Some businessmen reported plans for increased investments next year but pointed
out that current profit levels are not sufficient to provide incentive for
major investment programs.

Farmers continue to view the current year's prospects

with optimism, as higher gross and net incomes are in prospect.
Sales at most major District department stores have continued to
increase moderately on a seasonally adjusted basis.
throughout all departments.

Increases are being recorded

All the gains in the St. Louis metropolitan area,

however, are at stores located outside the central city.

Sales at central

city stores have not increased during the current upswing in economic activity.
An increasing number of firms report moderate gains in number of
employees.

Specifically mentioning additions to their labor force were agricultura

supply, chemical, and corrugated paper manufacturers.

The unemployment rate

has declined to relatively low levels throughout the District with the exceptions
of St. Louis and some small areas in southern Indiana.
Construction continues at a very high level throughout the District
with the exception of the St. Louis SMSA.

Businessmen in St. Louis report

that excessively high labor costs are inhibiting new commercial construction
in the area.

Home building has generally stabilized but at a relatively high

level throughout the District.

While most of those interviewed believe that we have passed the
trough in new investment, few major investments are reported by larger manufacturers.

A representative of a corrugated paper and box board firm reported

that this industry is operating at capacity, but little new plant investment
is contemplated at current profit levels.

Other businessmen also expressed

the view that the low level of profits in relation to sales was inhibiting
new investment.

Most of the Eighth District investment in new plants is

outside the St. Louis SMSA.

The metropolitan areas and the smaller cities

and towns in the southern portion of the District are attracting most of the
new manufacturing plants.

Commercial expansion in St. Louis is generally

limited to investments in new shopping centers in the outlying areas.
Agricultural conditions remain favorable to producers, weather
conditions have been satisfactory, crop prospects are generally good, and
prices are sufficient to provide for profitable incomes to efficient producers.
Many cotton farmers have already contracted their 1972 cotton crop at higher
prices than they received in 1971.

Meat animals are selling at relatively

high prices, the quantity of feed available is adequate, and the potential
profits from feeding are excellent.

Farm supply industries are increasing

their sales to farm customers as a result of the higher farm incomes.
Demand for credit is rising somewhat faster at District financial
firms than the inflow of savings.
interest rates.

As a result, there is upward pressure on

Some increases have already been reported in the prime rate.

None of the larger banks have raised the rates paid on savings, but bank
representatives report that the supply of available funds for lending has
declined and rates on savings may be raised at any time in order to increase
the savings inflow.

Rates on mortgages have remained fairly stable, but

longer term rates did not decline so precipitously as short-term rates during
the recession.

NINTH DISTRICT —

MINNEAPOLIS

The economic outlook for the Ninth District appears bright,
according to bank directors and area manufacturers.

Continued high retail

sales expectations are reported by bank directors, who also describe the
one-year results of the New Economic Policy as beneficial to their respective
areas.

Aided by the policy and greater demand for farm products, the

District's agricultural sector is experiencing greatly improved income and
optimism as well as increased investment.

The results of our latest quarterly

industrial expectations survey suggest continued expansion in District manufacturing activity.
Bank directors unanimously believe that retailers in their respective areas are expecting very good sales for the rest of 1972.

Although a

temporary slowdown occurred in August (two directors cited unusual weather
conditions as the cause), most directors report that retailers' optimism has
increased in the past four to eight weeks.
Directors from nonurban areas explain this stronger outlook partially
as a result of strengthened income and overall financial situations in the
agricultural sector.
factors:

But two local developments are also seen as contributing

the construction of a large open-pit iron ore mine in upper

peninsula Michigan and a gathering momentum in the development of fossil
fuel production in southeastern Montana.
An improving business climate or noticeably rising general confidence
is extensively reported by directors, most of whom feel that the past twelve
months' experience with the New Economic Policy has been a major factor in
creating this situation.

Price-wage controls have apparently had noticeable

effects throughout the District, and most directors feel that in their areas
the greater effect has been on wages.

According to a director from La Crosse,

Wisconsin, restraint on the advance of labor costs has promoted greater
economic activity locally and, without it, some significant cutbacks would
have occurred.
Agriculture has also been aided by the New Economic Policy, states
a director from Billings, Montana.

Since farm product prices were not

controlled, increased demand was allowed to pull them upward considerably
while the policy restricted the advance of agricultural input prices.
Agricultural developments have been especially encouraging recently,
according to all directors from agricultural areas.

Regional beef markets

demonstrated their strength, as prices received for feeder and partially
fattened cattle held steady at very high levels despite an August decline
in the price of fattened cattle.

In addition, the price of wheat, another

important District product, has risen rapidly, which increases the value of
much District wheat help over from last year's production and a large crop now
being harvested.

A director from a wheat-producing area reports that, since

the beginning of Russian purchasing, the price received by farmers for lower
protein wheat has advanced from $1.16 per bushel to $1.46; for higher protein
wheat, from $1.38 to $1.88.

Throughout the District, wheat yields this year

apparently are near last year's record highs.
Agriculture also appears to be the main beneficiary of another part
of the New Economic Policy:

according to three bank directors, the investment

tax credit has greatly stimulated the purchasing of farm machinery and equipment this year.

A director from South Dakota does not feel that investments

induced by the tax credit have been confined to agriculture, yet urban
directors are not able to identify any they feel have been significantly

encouraged by it.

Those reporting major construction projects in their

areas, however, feel that investment related to these projects may have
been accelerated.
Continued expansion in District manufacturing activity is foreseen by respondents to our third-quarter industrial expectations survey.
The value of goods sold by District manufacturers surpassed last year's
level by 9.5 percent in the second quarter and is expected to increase at
a slightly faster rate during the last half of this year before recording
a 7.5 percent gain in the first quarter of 1973.

Durable goods producers

were more optimistic than they were in the previous survey, but manufacturers
of nondurables did not significantly revise their earlier sales expectations.
District manufacturers' favorable sales outlook is also reflected
in their attitudes toward the adequacy of their inventories and plant and
equipment.

In the current survey, 20 percent of the respondents considered

their inventories "low", 10 percent termed them "high", and the remaining
70 percent described them as "about right".

One year earlier, 23 percent

referred to their inventories as "low" and 11 percent "high".

In addition,

considering anticipated sales gains, 27 percent termed their plant and equipment capacity as "less than needed" and 12 percent regarded them "excessive".
These percentages were reversed in the survey conducted in the third quarter
of 1971 but, in both surveys, about 61 percent of the respondents felt their
plant and equipment were "about right".

TENTH DISTRICT —

KANSAS CITY

The strength in consumer spending which was reported in the most
recent GNP data does not appear to be uniformly reflected in the performance
of a number of Tenth District large department stores.

Reports of strong

recent sales were less frequent than were reports of only modest to little
improvement, with poor weather or discount competition usually cited as
reasons.

On the price front, retailers were about equally divided in their

reports of further price increases from their suppliers, although even those
who have experienced such increased reported that both competition and price
controls have served to restrain the degree to which they could pass these
on to their customers.

During the month ended August 15, the index of prices

received by farmers advanced to a new high, a factor which should underscore
the sharp rise in Tenth District farm income reported in the last Red Book.
However, the softness that has prevailed in slaughter cattle markets up until
last week may dampen some of these gains despite the strong uptrend in grain
prices.

Loan demand continues strong at Tenth District member banks, and

the general consensus of those banks interviewed is that the present level of
loan demand will hold steady or increase somewhat over the remainder of the
year.

Unlike the near consensus which emerged last month in conversations

with Tenth District manufacturing firms reporting much improved sales, discussions with a number of large department stores in the Tenth District
elicited mixed opinions.

With one exception, all respondents reported that

sales were up, but the degree of recent improvement varied from city to city.
Generally speaking, the Kansas City and Oklahoma City sales picture was
stronger than was the situation in Denver.

In Omaha, a large national outlet

reported very strong sales while a local independent reported sales below a
year a g o — t h e only respondent to do so, citing strong competition from new

shopping centers which has hurt their sales.
Strength in furniture sales figured prominently in most reports
of improved overall sales.
remains conservative.

Inventory behavior at the retail level still

No stockpiling appears to be in evidence, as

inventory investment is reported keeping pace with the current level of
sales.

Most respondents expressed optimism regarding the prospects for

sales during the remainder of the year.

When asked about price increases

from suppliers, the replies were about evenly divided among those who reported
further price increases and those reporting that their suppliers were holding
the price line.

Even in those cases where supply prices had been raised,

those firms indicated that their ability to pass these increases on to their
customers was constrained by their local competitive situation or by current
price regulations.
The index of prices received by farmers advanced to a new high during
the month ended August 15.

Since then, grain prices have been generally

stronger—reflecting large sales to the Soviet Union as well as growing
demands elsewhere—while livestock prices have averaged lower until very
recently.

Slaughter cattle prices, in particular, have been unusually soft,

falling almost $5 per hundredweight from early July to late August with
only a moderate increase in slaughter rates.
September have been stronger.

Cattle prices so far in

Although cattle prices will probably remain

reasonably stable, showing perhaps some firmness between now and the year-end,
hog prices are expected to decline seasonally from the near-record high
levels that currently exist, as the volume of marketing increases this fall
and winter.

Thus, the recent abatement of wholesale meat prices, together

with the prospects for some further decline, likely will remove most of the
pressure on food prices during the remainder of the year.

Loan demand continues strong at Tenth District member banks.

Among

larger banks, where detailed data are available, demand is especially strong
for business real estate and consumer instalment credit.

Tenth District

weekly reporting bank statistics show this strength, and it is confirmed by
interviews with banks throughout the District.

Several banks report increases

in loan commitments particularly to finance companies.

In Kansas City,

grain sales to Russia have also produced increased commitments.

Commitments

for real estate construction, agriculture, and international trade are also
reported to have increased at one Denver bank.

In response to the strength

in loan demand, some banks have instituted changes in lending policies.

A

respondent in Tulsa and one in Denver report preferences for lending at
shorter maturities.

Another Denver bank is attempting to hold real estate

loans at their current levels in order to increase loans in other lines.

The

general consensus of those banks interviewed is for the present level of loan
demand to hold steady or increase somewhat over the remainder of 1972.

In

order to obtain additional loanable funds, many District banks have also
become more aggressive in their attempts to attract CDs.

In one instance, a

bank in Oklahoma City has set its rates above those obtainable in money
market centers.

While the aggressiveness partly reflects the strength of loan

demand, it is also in response to weakness in demand deposits that has
produced outflows in total deposits.
With only one exception of the banks contacted, the prime rate now
prevailing is 5 1/2 percent with about half of the respondents having raised
the rate in the last week of August. The lone exception carries a prime rate
of 5 3/4 percent which is justified on the basis of local loan demand.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

DALLAS

Most of the major indicators of economic activity within the
District were weaker in July but were still well ahead of their yearearlier levels.

The Texas industrial production index edged downward

from June, and the District unemployment rate rose slightly.

Moreover,

construction activity in the District was well below its peak reached
in May.

Department store sales continued to improve, however, and a

survey of executives of large retail stores in the District indicated
that they are optimistic about business conditions in the near future.
Nearly 90 percent of the large District retailers that responded
to our questionnaire indicated that they expected their sales to be better
during the second half of 1972 than in the corresponding period of 1971.
Moreover, a third saw their sales being much better in 1972.

At the same

time, over 35 percent said they expected to increase their work force
moderately in the next six months (after allowance for usual seasonal
change).

The majority of those responding also expected their profits to

be higher in the last half of 1972, compared with 1971.
Looking back over the past six months, 93 percent of these firms
noted higher sales in 1972 than in the corresponding period in 1971 and
sales at one third of these stores in 1972 were much higher than in 1971.
For the majority of these firms, "big ticket" items were more important
in the past six months than in the same period last year.

Profits were

also higher during the first half of 1972 at three fifths of the responding
firms, with about 15 percent recording much higher profits than during the
similar period in 1971.

Compared with a year ago, almost three fourths of these retail
firms indicated that the present level of their inventories was greater.
Current inventory levels were categorized as too high, however, by almost
half of the firms surveyed, while 40 percent said their inventories were
about right.

Nevertheless, disregarding seasonal influences, 43 percent

of these firms revealed they planned on increasing their inventories over
the next six months.

In response to a question on inventory procedures,

well over half of these retail firms said that their inventory practices
had changed over the last five years.

Of this group, slightly less than

half indicated that these changes meant lower inventory sales ratios while
about 30 percent said that their inventory procedure changes had led to
higher inventory sales ratios.
In assessing the impact of last year's currency realignments,
one fifth of those responding noted substantial increases in the prices
of their imported merchandise, while two thirds reporting that the prices
of imported goods had increased moderately.

Two thirds of the managers

of the firms surveyed said they also expected retail prices to increase
somewhat in the next six months, but none said they expected substantial
increases.
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for the states in the
District rose moderately in July despite an increase in total employment.
Decreases in employment in both durable and nondurable manufacturing
apparently were responsible for the rise in the unemployment rate.

The

seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index also declined in
July but still remained 10 percent above its year-ago level.

All industry

sectors share in the decline, as only a few individual industries
showed month-to-month increases.

Among those declining the most were

the transportation equipment, food and kindred products, and apparel goods
industries.
Total construction activity also fell sharply in July for the
second consecutive month, as both residential and nonresidential building
declined.

Construction activity appears to be reaching more sustainable

levels after reaching a peak in May and still remains well above last
year's level.
District oil producing states continue to produce at maximum
levels.

New Mexico has made some revision in its market demand pro-

rationing system in light of the continuing full production situation.
The maximum production schedule has also encouraged drilling operations,
particularly in Texas and Louisiana.

The strong demand for gasoline

from increased car sales and lower efficiency of car engines, due in
part to anti-pollution equipment, has put pressure on refining capacity.
The upland cotton harvest in the southern ranches of the District
is proceeding well ahead of last year's rate.

Total production for the

five District states is projected at 5.5 million bales, over a third
higher than last year's crop, from a 12 percent increase in acreage.

Both

domestic and world prices of cotton are beginning to weaken, as total
production is expected to exceed consumption this year.

District crops

in general are looking very good, and significant increases are expected
ff>" «pa--1.y all crops.

Cattle on feed in Texas and Arizona on August 1

totaled nearly 2.7 million head, about one-fourth higher than last year.
Reflecting these improved conditions, District farm income is expected
to reach a record high this year.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

According to our directors, economic activity in the Twelfth
District continues to grow at the rates established in recent months, and
no slowing is foreseen in the rest of this year.

Among the more important

sectors in stimulating this advance are retail sales—including
construction, and agriculture.
lowered still further.

automobiles—

As a result, unemployment rates have been

Bankers report steady loan demand and little change

in interest rates.
Consumer spending is strong throughout the District.

In Tacoma,

retail sales in July equaled the previous 1968-69 peak despite a local unemployment rate of 10 percent.

Southern California merchants are described as

experiencing much better business than in 1971, and they expect continued
improvement in the rest of 1972.

Automobiles, in particular, have benefited

from the greater consumer spending.

In Tacoma, the number of automobiles sold

was 13 percent above the same period in the previous year and, in Los Angeles,
dealers describe their sales as excellent.

Some dealers had a "sell-out month"

in August for 1972 models, and they are going into the new-model year with low
inventories and optimistic expectations.

Both domestic and imported cars are

sharing in these gains.
Agricultural prospects similarly are good in most District states.
Livestock prices are expected to remain high, and the only problem for ranchers
appears to be a shortage of feeder cattle in some areas.

Potato prices are

reported at being at an "all-time high", and good crops are being harvested in
Idaho and Washington.
crops,

T

n

Above-average prices exist for other vegetables and fruit

cases, the prices refie.c

mailer uiantlngs, and in others, such

as fruits, the higher prices are due to smaller crops caused by bad weather.
Good yields are in prospect for such crops as wheat, corn, and sugar beets.

Lumbering activity remains high in the Pacific Northwest, as the
leveling-off in national construction activity is being offset by stronger
demand for wood products from other sectors of the economy.

The continued

strength in the timber industry has been an important factor in lowering
unemployment, especially in Washington.
Construction in most parts of the District remains at a generally
high level.

There are, however, variations by region and by type of con-

struction activity.

Residential construction is buoyant in most areas, and

in some cities, such as Salt Lake City, is at record levels.

One exception

is Alaska where a decline in residential construction has occurred, but this
has been offset by more commercial projects.

Commercial construction, with

the possible exception of office buildings in some cities, is continuing
to rise.

Government construction is strongest for highways but relatively

weak for public buildings and schools.

Apartments are the only construction

category which appears to show signs of weakness.

Our directors in the Los

Angeles area, Idaho, Spokane, and Portland report various signs of overbuilding.
Vacancy rates are climbing, and in one city several savings and loan associations
have stopped making loans for apartment construction.

The overall consensus

is that construction will maintain its current levels for the rest of 1972.
Little change has occurred in District banking conditions.

Loan

demand especially for business loans remains strong, and moderate increases
in deposits, with a few exceptions, are reported.

Some bankers expect a

slight increase in interest rates but not a major change.

