CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 17, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 3
Third District - Philadelphia page 6
Fourth District - Cleveland page 8
Fifth District - Richmond page 11
Sixth District - Atlanta page 14
Seventh District - Chicago page 17
Eighth District - St. Louis page 21
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 23
Tenth District - Kansas City page 26
Eleventh District - Dallas page 29
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 32

SUMMARY*

Overall, District reports reveal continued economic expansion
in most sectors of the economy, although there are indications of
slowing in certain activities.

In the forefront, there is continued

concern about inflation, the wage-price controls, and the
performance of profits.

Consumer sentiment and spending appear to

be gathering strength in many areas, as is capital spending.
Residential construction, however, is showing some signs of weakening.
On balance, businessmen are still cautious with regard to inventory
Investment.

Employment is generally rising, unemployment

remains a problem.

Current and prospective agricultural conditions

are excellent in most parts of the nation. The major categories of
bank loans are improving.
Boston reports concern among businessmen about inflation and
about the ability of the price and pay boards to achieve their goals.
Economists attending a regular outlook session at the Cleveland Bank
expressed the view that further progress in reducing the rate of
inflation will be difficult to achieve, and they think it unlikely
that inflation can be held below 3.5 percent for any sustained period
over the next year or so.

Chicago reports there is widespread

Irritation among businessmen over recent actions of the price commission.
Atlanta, on the other hand, mentions that there have been few reports
of inflationary psychology, despite tight labor markets in their area.

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]

Districts "taking the pulse" of the manufacturing sector
report further gains in new orders and shipments, coupled with
improvement in employment and the workweek.

Richmond and Cleveland,

however, detect a recent slowdown in steel orders.
Chicago reports the demand for certain types of capital goods
is up sharply, primarily for modernization rather than
for expansion.

Sales of heavy trucks in particular are expected to

remain vigorous through mid-1973.

Businessmen in St. Louis also

say their capital spending is largely for modernization and equipment,
noting that profit margins are still too low to provide incentive far.
major plant expansion.

Chicago and Minneapolis both mention extremely

good sales of farm machinery and equipment.

Respondents in New York and

Cleveland raise questions about accepting too readily the strength implied
by recent plant and equipment surveys, at least until more evidence is
available.

San Francisco mentions some caution in business spending plans.

Recent consumer spending patterns are difficult to interpret,
in part because the early Easter season may have distorted March and
April retail sales data.

New York, Minneapolis, and Kansas City

report gathering strength in consumer sales.

Chicago and Atlanta

emphasize strong sales of consumer recreational goods.

On the other

hand, Cleveland mentions a recent weakening of GAF retail sales;
St. Louis reports a leveling in department store sales; Dallas sees
some signs of weakening in nonautomotive retail trade; and Richmond
says retailers in the Baltimore area were disappointed with sales in
April and early May.
Construction generally remains strong in most Districts,
especially in Atlanta.

Cleveland, however, reports a sharp drop

in residential construction.

Minneapolis mentions that

rising vacancy rates in the Twin Cities are causing banks to be
more cautious in their lending policies.

San Francisco notes that

the high level of apartment and commercial building in Southern
California is raising concern over vacancy rates and causing banks
to be more cautious in extending credit.
Districts commenting on agricultural conditions (St. Louis,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco) report highly
favorable prospects for crops and livestock.

Chicago mentioned

that recent wet weather delayed corn planting.
Districts commenting on bank loans report moderate to
strong increases in loan demand, except Boston, where business
loans are weak.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Concern over inflation and the ability of the price and pay boards
to meet their goals is continuing.

While profits were generally reported

as having risen substantially in the first quarter of 1972 and new orders
were generally rising, employment and inventories have not been increased.
None of our directors indicated that their firms were currently
increasing employment, although one director indicated that his firm plans
to increase employment in the second half of the year.
There have been no recent upward revisions in capital spending plans.
Two manufacturers of machinery for the can industry indicated that current
orders were below last year's levels, but were optimistic about the
second half of the year.

New orders for intermediate processing goods,

like white pigment, and for consumer durable recreation equipment were
reported at record levels.

Despite the pickup in orders, all the firms

indicated that inventories either were being held at current levels or
were continuing to be cut.
A large area bank indicated that during the past six weeks savings
deposits have not been experiencing the previous rapid gains.

There also

appears to be a softening of mortgage interest rates, with a slight drying
U

P of demand at the current 7 - 7 1/2 percent levels. Weakness in business

loan demand has made this bank turn to new aggressiveness in finding
customers and to a changing of loan standards, at least in terms of
geographic location.
Professors Eckstein and Wallich were critical of the recent surge
in the growth of bank reserves.

While each recommended a tapering off,

they were both careful to point out that it is now too early in an expansion
to introduce a restrictive monetary policy. Although it is not yet time to
reverse monetary policy, Wallich urged the Board to consider what policy
would be appropriate if the pay and price boards are not able to curb
inflationary pressures.

Both Samuelson and Wallich found encouragement in

the first quarter GNP figures.

On the basis of the large gain in final

demand, Samuelson felt most forecasters had, like himself, revised their
forecast back up to the $1145-1148 range where they stood last fall.
Wallich granted that the first quarter figures did not reflect a hesitancy
he had expected.

He believes that the expansion should be strong "from

here on out" but qualified this by warning of the danger of "spring
euphoria."

Samuelson prescribed a 7-8 percent rate of monetary growth

over the first seven months and a trailing off to 5-6 percent in the
latter part of the year.

He expects short-rates to be over 5 percent by

the end of the year, leaving little room to keep long rates steady or
declining.

In recent talks abroad, Wallich has been surprised by the

depth of the criticism by foreign central bankers of recent and past U. S.
monetary policy.

He noted there is a wide gap between their views and

those of most American economists.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Opinions expressed by Head Office and Buffalo Branch directors and
other business leaders point to further advances in economic activity.
Plant and equipment spending is apparently being upgraded, consumer
confidence is improving, and the demand for business loans is strengthening.
The unemployment situation, however, while improving slightly, remains far
from satisfactory.
Most respondents looked for a further upgrading of plant and
equipment spending over the balance of the year, but were more restrained
regarding the strength of the upswing than suggested by recent surveys.
Among the Head Office directors, the chairman of the board of a large New
York City bank thought the capital expenditures outlook was good, but not
as favorable as the McGraw-Hill Survey indicated.

The president of a large

nonferrous metal firm stated that recent reports of an upgrading of plans for
capital outlays may be "fairly accurate," but could not confirm these on the
basis of his business1 own experience.

The Buffalo Branch directors felt

the tone in the capital goods sector was taking a turn for the better and
reported that a number of small businesses were expanding facilities and
that the demand for improved equipment was particularly strong. However, a
Rochester retailer, a Head Office director, stated that while the largest
upstate firm was adhering to current expansion plans, several other companies
were planning cutbacks.
also less optimistic:

Opinions expressed by some business leaders were

A senior official of a large electric equipment firm

said talk about heavy capital spending was not reflected in his firm's
heavy machinery business, which was slow.

As noted in last month's report, the March-April retail sales picture
has been somewhat blurred by the early Easter, which favorably affected
March sales.

Nevertheless, the views expressed by most respondents, on

balance, point to the emergence of a brighter consumer spending picture.
Most of the Buffalo directors thus reported a pickup in retail sales
following a somewhat disappointing Easter season in Western New York, and
these directors felt that consumers' moods had brightened. Most reported
local retailers are expecting to meet 1972 sales projections as consumer
demand continues to strengthen.

Among the Head Office directors, the

large New York City banker found the retail picture fairly encouraging,
and the Rochester retailer was optimistic about the outlook, despite the
fact current business in the Buffalo-Rochester-Syracuse area was not good.
The vice president of a large nationwide chain of department stores
reported that sales in both March and April had been good, indeed better
than his firm's expectations, and that on the basis of preliminary reports,
the trend was continuing in early May. He noted special strength in home
appliances and furnishings, presumably linked to the occupancy of new
housing.

In his view, the consumers have not become reasonably confident,

and his firm was optimistic regarding the remainder of the year. Moreover,
indirect indications of gathering strength in consumer sales were also
evident in the comments of several manufacturers.

Thus, the senior

official of the electric equipment firm reported their consumer goods
sales were moving well, in some areas with "considerable strength," while
the president of an upstate manufacturing firm reported a significant
pickup in his company's sales of auto parts.
Those directors who expressed an opinion on the business loan
situation reported a strengthening in such credit, primarily related to

construction projects.

Three of the Buffalo Branch bankers pointed to the

increase in loans to finance the construction of multiple dwellings units,
including condominiums.

One of these directors, while noting the strong

demand for construction credit, referred to the sluggishness in demand from
national firms, which he felt were raising needed funds in the equity and
bond markets rather than drawing on their credit lines.

Some of the

respondents expected an eventual improvement accumulation would bring
further increases in the demand for business loans. With respect to other
types of loans, among the Head Office directors, the president of an upstate
bank reported a strong demand for credit in his area, especially in mortgage
loans for new apartments (but also for new factories), while the chairman
of the large New York City bank stated that loans to finance companies and
real estate loans have been particularly heavy.
The Directors felt that some improvement—albeit scattered and as yet
limited—was occuring in the unemployment situation.

The president of the

metal producing corporation reported that there seems to be some improvement
in Arizona and California and pointed to the fractional rise in March and
April in help wanted advertising in the West and Southwest.

The New York

City banker felt the situation had improved slightly, but remarked that a
decline in the overall unemployment rate was difficult because of the sizable
influx of new entrants into the work force. The Buffalo Branch directors
generally agreed that there had been some recent improvement in the local
employment situation, but noted that this must be viewed against the high
unemployment rates prevailing during the winter.

They noted that the local

picture was still not good—while skilled workers were again in demand,
unemployment among the unskilled would continue to plague the area.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The general tone of conditions in the Third District continues to
be one of steady improvement.

Area manufacturers report further increases

in new orders and shipments for both April and May and, as a result, have
added employees and lengthened the average workweek.
continued expansion during the months ahead.

And these firms see

Prices show signs of stability

at these firms, both for prices paid and prices received.

Loan demand is

growing steadily at area banks with more of the same predicted for the
next month.
District manufacturers polled in the Bank's Monthly Business Outlook
Survey report continuing strength in the regional economy.

Over 45 percent

saw overall business conditions improving during the last two months. This
increased activity meant improved conditions for many firms.

Approximately

30 percent of the firms reported increases in new orders and shipments for
April, while over 35 percent report increases in the same categories so far
in May.
picture.

This pickup is having a favorable impact on the regional employment
Nearly 8 percent of the firms added employees in April, while

over 16 percent report they are doing so in May.

In addition, some firms

are lengthening their average employee workweek.

And the outlook appears

favorable during the next few months.

Over 40 percent of the firms see

improved overall conditions in June, with over 35 percent predicting a
pickup in new orders and shipments.

On the six-month horizon, nearly 70

percent see increases in new orders and shipments.

Almost 30 percent plan

to add employees over that time span, with 17 percent stretching out the
average workweek.

Nearly 50 percent report they will be increasing capital

expenditues during the next six months.

Despite this increse In business activity, the price picture appears
to be remaining fairly stable.

In April, nearly 65 percent of the firms

reported no change in prices paid, while nearly 80 percent reported no
change for prices received.

Comparable figures for May are at the 70

and 90 percent levels respectively.
Loan demand at area banks is growing slowly but steadily over a wide
variety of sectors.

Commercial and industrial loans show moderate improvement.

There appears to be particular strength in construction, mortgage,
and foreign loans.

The outlook over the next month appears optimistic,

especially in construction, real estate, and consumer categories.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

District manufacturers, our industrial directors, and economists
attending a recent meeting of the Fourth District Roundtable report
continued improvements in business conditions, although there were
indications of some recent slowing in steel and retail sales. Residential
construction in the District has weakened recently.

Business economists

in the District are now just a shade less optimistic with regard to the
business outlook than they were at the beginning of the year.
Our latest survey of District manufacturers reveals a slight
moderation in the rate of increase in new orders and shipments during
April (reflecting what is thought to be a temporary lull in steel orders,
following a surge earlier this year). Moderating tendencies are expected
to continue during May. Manufacturers still seem reluctant to accumulate
inventories, according to our survey, but they have been increasing
employment moderately and lengthening the workweek.
Our industrial directors report that consumer-related business has
been strong, particularly those portions reflecting the housing and
automotive markets.

Some hesitation in packaging, however, was noted.

Directors also mentioned improvement in cutting tools and defense business.
Residential construction contracts in the District leveled off in
December, declined moderately in January and February, and dropped sharply
in March (30 percent below their November 1971 peak).
On May 12, about 40 business economists attended the regular
Roundtable meeting held at the Cleveland Bank.

The median forecast of

the group called for a $98 billion gain in this year's GNP, with real

growth at 5.5 percent, and the price deflator rising 3.7 percent.

There

was widespread agreement that it would be difficult to reduce the rate of
inflation to below 3.5 percent for any sustained period during the next
year or so.

(Estimates of the Federal deficit for fiscal year 1973 in the

$35 to $40 billion range were viewed as an adverse factor in the price
situation.) Unemployment was expected to average 5.6 percent during 1972,
with the rate declining to 5.3 percent by the fourth quarter.
Professor John Kendrick, a guest speaker at the meeting, forecast
a 3.5 percent, or better, gain in productivity in the private economy
during 1972, and a tapering in the rise for 1973.

He indicated that as

more companies reach their profit ceilings, there would be less incentive
to hold down costs; as a result, productivity would be adversely affected.
Over the longer run, Kendrick predicted a lower rate of productivity
growth (conventionally measured) in the 70's than in the 60's—reflecting
a significantly higher share of capital spending devoted to ecological
controls.
Business economists whose firms are in the consumer market expressed
some concern over recent weakness in retail sales of general merchandise,
apparel, and furniture.

It was thought that these sales may be suffering

in part because of consumers' adverse reactions to rising prices of food
and utilities.

There was also concern that recent developments in Indochina

may be a disruptive influence on consumer spending.

Economists associated

with the automobile industry said consumers have increased their new car
purchases in response to price reductions and income changes in line
with past experience.

The economists forecast domestic new car sales of

9 million units in 1972, and imports of 1.6 million units. For the consumer
sector as a whole, the business economists scaled down their forecast of

the 1972 gain in PCE (from $57 billion at the previous meeting in January
to $52 billion currently).
The business economists also reduced their forecast of inventory
investment for 1972, and their forecast of net exports.

No further gain in

residential construction outlays for the balance of the year was expected.
On the other hand, their forecasts for government expenditures and business
fixed investment are now higher than they were in January. With respect to
capital spending, there was a feeling that we need more confirmation by way
of new orders and appropriations than has recently been the case to expect
plant and equipment outlays to exceed a gain of 9 percent for the year.
(In recent months, surveys have projected gains of 10-14 percent.)
Steel industry economists noted a lull in orders from capital goods
users recently, and the steel industry is expected to use less steel this
year in its capital spending.

Overall, customer stocks of steel are

beginning to rise, following liquidation through the first quarter.

The

steel industry is continuing to recall its furloughed workers, but because
of the stretched out "call back" period, it will be some time before
employment recovers to the level prior to last year's liquidation phase.
The recent steel import quota arrangements have improved the outlook for
the steel industry.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Latest information on the Fifth District economy continues to suggest
a stepped-up pace of recovery, although current reports from manufacturers
are somewhat less bullish than in the last month or two.

The trade sector

continues strong in most parts of the District, with most respondents in our
latest survey indicating further sizable gains in both general retail and
automobile sales.

A notable, and somewhat puzzling, exception is the Baltimore

Area, where retailers express keen disappointment with the level of retail
sales in April and early May.
District.

Construction continues strong throughout the

Employment is also reported on the rise, especially in the

Carolinas, with further increases in wages.

Our latest survey of the

manufacturing and trade sectors provides little evidence of any notable
pickup in inventory buying.

Banking respondents, however, report increased

business loan demands and continued strength in demand for consumer and
mortgage loans.
Reports from District manufacturers are mixed, although the diffusion
of responses in our latest survey suggests further increases in new orders
and backlogs.

The gains, however, are concentrated in furniture, textile,

and building materials.
fall-off in orders.

Chemicals, paper, and steel producers report a

The Survey of Manufacturers suggest no recent changes in

inventory policies, with most indicating general satisfaction with current
levels of stocks relative to sales. Current capacity levels are still rated
on the high side by most respondents.
In the trade and service sector, both bankers and retail establishments
report further improvement, although the number reporting increases in sales

was less than in last month's survey. Automobile sales remain strong in
most parts of the District, and truck sales are reported as unusually strong.
Trade and service respondents report recent increases in inventories but
indicate that current stocks are somewhat larger than desired.
More than one-third of all respondents in our latest survey report
increases in employment, with both manufacturing and trade and services
taking part in the gain.

Trade respondents also indicate an increase in

hours worked, while manufacturers report no change in the length of the
workweek.

Some further wage increases are reported, notably in the furniture

and textile industries.

Both manufacturing and trade respondents indicate

no recent changes in prices received.
District bankers report that both residential and nonresidential
construction in their respective areas remain strong.

Fifty percent of

the banking respondents Indicated an increase in residential construction,
and approximately one-third reported an increase in nonresidential construction.
There were no reports of decreased construction activity.

Bankers also report

s

izable recent increases in the demand for all types of loans, with demand

for consumer and mortgage loans especially strong.

In the Baltimore Area,

keen competition for mortgages has led to more liberal terms and conventional
rates as low as 6 1/2 percent.
District farmers' January-February cash receipts from farm marketings
were 5 percent above a year earlier, but the increase was substantially below
the national gain of 14 percent.
A high level of optimism concerning the outlook for business activity
in the District continues to characterize both the banking and the general
business communities.

Seventy percent of the banking respondents believe

that business activity will increase in the next three months, while none
expects a decline.

In most areas of the Distirct, the outlook for retail

sales is rated as very good, and retailers express optimism. A notable
exception is the Baltimore Area, where central city retailers, especially,
remain in a gloomy mood.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

With few exceptions, Sixth District businessmen and bankers
report strong economic expansion and an optimistic outlook. A
citrus industry executive describes Florida's economy as "busting
out all over," and a Tennessee banker indicates that economic
conditions in his area are "very strong and the mood of the people
is great."

"Full employment" conditions are claimed in Atlanta and

parts of Tennessee and Florida.

However, talk of inflation seems

to have subsided somewhat.
Nonresidential construction appears to be strengthening, and
residential construction remains strong. Downtown Jacksonville is
reported to be a maze of sidewalk barricades because of a near
tripling of construction activity in the past three years. A building
boom is also reported in Birmingham, and a $30-million coliseum is
being planned on the Mississippi Gulf Coast.

Plans for a new city of

80,000 have been announced for an area 25 miles west of New Orleans.
A 7,400-acre development—with an eventual population of 37,000—is
being planned near Palm Beach, Florida. A $25-million motel
condominium project has been announced for Florida's Northwest Gulf
Coast.

Construction has been so great at two areas near Orlando that

they have declared moratoriums on multi-family construction in order
to study density and site plans and to update zoning maps. A
Tennessee director claims that construction is so strong in his area
that that any farmer with a saw and hammer has become a general
contractor.

Announcements of new plants and plant expansions continue
at a moderate pace.

For example, a $50-million plant owned by

Playtex Corporation has recently been announced for East Alabama.
A nuclear reactor component plant under construction in Pensacola
is being expanded.

This plant is reportedly booked solid through

1975 and is taking orders for delivery as far out as 1981.
In many areas of the District, unemployment is reported to
be nearly nonexistent.

An Atlanta director adds that output per man-

hour has held up well and job turnover has been low compared with
other periods of full employment.

Some directors have been

suspecting that the unemployment statistics are inflated.

One notes

that workers receiving unemployment insurance have been working as
day laborers on farms and taking wages only in the form of cash.
Two hundred engineers are being transferred to the Mississippi Gulf
Coast because of a high level of shipyard activity.

However,

unemployment is reportedly high in New Orleans and Lake Charles,
Louisiana.
Retail sales are reported strong.
particularly in strong demand.

Sporting goods are

A Central Tennessee boat manufacturer

indicates that he does not have sufficient space to produce boats on
order.

The Nashville recording industry is reportedly experiencing

a 25-percent gain over last year.

Earlier this year, Disney World's

projected 1972 attendance was raised from 8 to 10 million, but
actual attendance is running at a higher rate.

Attendance at other

Florida tourist attractions is up strongly.
A sample of three New Orleans consumer finance companies
indicates loan demand trends from

:,

steady" to "down slightly."

All

companies polled report that collections have been good and that the

downward trend in loan demand "would probably be with us for a
few more months." All reported interest rates down slightly,
reflecting the lower demand level.

One expressed the opinion that

consumer borrowers are still uncertain of Phase II controls, as
evidenced by the decline in income tax borrowing this year. One
company expressed surprise that the improvement in delinquency
ratios in recent months has not yet been followed by an increase
in loan demand.
There have been few reports of inflationary psychology
despite tight labor markets and some bottlenecks in construction.
A shortage of cement is reported in several parts of Florida. An
executive of an Atlanta plumbing supply firm Indicates that
Atlanta's construction industry is pressing against capacity. A
small hospital in Florida reports that it incurred sharp cost
increases when renewing service and maintenance contracts recently.
There is also reported to be a shortage of small farm machinery.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The economic uptrend is continuing in the Seventh District,
with most sectors participating.

The improvement is expected to

continue through 1972 and into 1973. Order backlogs are increasing,
employment is rising, price inflation is at a slower pace than last
year, inventories are generally low.

Shipments of consumer

durables are very strong, demand for some types of capital equipment
has picked up markedly, and bank loans, especially business loans,
have increased substantially.

Initial concern over the announcement

of the Vietnam blockade (Hay 8) appears to have died down with no
significant impact on spending decisions by consumers, businessmen, or
lenders.
Widespread irritation exists in business circles concerning the
actions and pronouncements of the Price Commission.

In particular,

the Commission's productivity and profit margin standards for judging
proposed price increases are criticized as arbitrary and inequitable.
Nevertheless, a large number of businessmen believe that price and wage
controls, overall, have been a desirable stabilizing influence.
Compliance is generally very good, perhaps reflecting the fact that
most markets remain highly competitive.

The momentum of the business

uptrend probably will overcome short-run uncertainties related to
controls, but longer-term doubts remain.
Some firms have not implemented authorized price increases,
and some prices have been cut to improve competitive positions,
even though product sales have increased sharply. Examples are
household appliances, motor trucks, color TV sets, and some petroleum
products.

Factory shipments of virtually all major consumer durables—
autos, appliances, furniture, and TV sets—continue for above
last year.

Demand for recreational vehicles and equipment is

taxing capacity for such products as motor homes, bicycles,
motorcycles, and camping equipment.

There are no signs of a

weakening in consumer demand for durables.

Inventories are judged

to be either "on the thin side," or, at least, not out of line
with sales prospects.
In March and April, demand for various types of capital
goods was above the year-earlier level by a wide margin. Examples
Include motor trucks and trailers, materials handling equipment,
hydraulic excavators, industrial tractors, cement mixers, electric
motors, and mechanical and electrical components and controls.
Sales of farm machinery are extremely good.

Increases in these

sales generally have exceeded expectations, substantially in some
cases.

Exceptions to the pronounced improvement in capital goods

include railroad equipment, heavy overhead cranes, large machine
tools, and rolling mill equipment.

Increases in outlays for

modernization, replacement, and pollution control (rather than basic
expansion) dominate the picture.

The European market for U. S.

capital goods has strengthened more than most experts had predicted.
The weakest foreign markets are Australia and Japan.
The strike of an Indiana plant that supplies about half of
the heavy truck engines was ended in late April after 56 days.
Full production was achieved in only three days.

Sales of heavy

trucks, 20 percent above last year so far in 1972, are now expected

to remain vigorous through mid-1973.
Labor disputes are relatively unimportant at the present
time.

However, a strike of elevator maintenance men in the

Chicago area is now delaying construction of large commercial
buildings.
Local experts have raised their projections of U. S.
housing starts for 1972 to 2.1 million or more.

Real estate

transactions in the District are at a good pace and higher than
expected.

Apartment building may be off this year in the Chicago

Area becasue of rising vacancies in luxury type apartments, but
production of single-family homes may equal or exceed last year.
More firms are hiring again, but on a selective basis.
Demand for executive and administrative personnel has increased
further and on a broader front.

Experienced engineers* metal-

workers, and construction workers are sought, and shortages may
become significant in the year.

But business firms are not hiring

the "warm bodies" that were employed in the last 1960s, at least to
the extent they are free to exercise judgment.
Sales to farmers of agricultural equipment, fertilizer, and
other production needs have been excellent.

However, wet weather

across the Midwest has delayed corn plantings to the extent that
additional acreage probably will be shifted to soybeans. Wholesale
meat prices continue to strengthen, and pressure is being exerted
on retail meat prices.

Speculators in the futures markets apparently

beleive the fall decline in hog prices will be relatively small.
Farm land values have continued to rise in the Seventh District. In
part, this reflects demand for "residential" farms and for
recreational sites.

Demand for all major types of bank loans has strengthened
substantially in recent months.

One large Chicago bank reports

demand for business loans to be at the highest rate in its
history.

Life insurance companies are accommodating a rise in net

policy loan disbursements because of a drop in repayments. Activity
in business mergers has accelerated, but there appears to be more
desire to restrict acquisitions to enterprises in lines related to
existing operations than was the case in the merger surge of the
late 1960s.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District continues up at a moderate
rate according to a selected group of businessmen. Manufacturing continues
to expand at about the same rate as in recent months.

Construction, while

leveling off from the rapid growth rates of the past year, remains at
very high levels in most of the District.
moderately.

Total employment is increasing

The outlook for agriculture is optimistic.

Investments in

equipment and plant modernization are on the upswing, but profit prospects
are still not sufficient to provide incentive for major investment
programs.

Business loans at banks are expanding moderately, and savings

are continuing to flow into financial agencies at a high rate.

On the

less optimistic side, growth of sales at major department stores has
apparently leveled off in recent weeks, and unemployment in the St. Louis
SMSA remains near the relatively high U. S. rate.
Manufacturing firms in the District report that sales and orders
continue to expand moderately.

No recent layoffs were indicated, and some

firms have increased employment. All manufacturers interviewed report
considerable optimism as to the business outlook for the remainder of 1972.
Construction continues at a high rate throughout most of the District.
Both commercial and residential construction is approaching record levels
in many areas of the District.

The St. Louis SMSA is, however, an exception.

Single family homebullding in the St. Louis SMSA is up from 1971, but
multi-family and commercial construction activity is very low. One-third
of the construction work force in St. Louis is estimated to be out of work,
as home building can absorb only a small portion of the idled commercial
construction workers.

The outlook for farm income in the Eighth District remains optimistic.
Weather conditions have been satisfactory, and current price levels for
farm products point to the possibility of-substantial increases in net
farm income for the year.

As a result of high income expectations, sales

of farm production items are well above year-ago levels.
While investments in plant modernization and equipment continue to
expand, little interest has developed in overall plant expansion. Most
businessmen report that profit margins are still too low to provide
incentive for major plant expansion.

Some complain that sales can only

be made at profitless levels.
Although still viewed as satisfactory, sales of major department
stores have apparently leveled off in recent weeks.

Furthermore, retailers

report that it is increasingly difficult to make a profit.

Nevertheless,

this is one area where some new investments are taking place, even in the
St. Louis SMSA. A number of new shopping centers are under construction
around the fringe areas of the City of St. Louis, but this additional space
is partially offset by inner city vacancies.
Bank credit for commercial purposes has begun to increase moderately
in recent weeks.

Lending officers at District banks report that interest

rates on such loans are expected to strengthen in the months ahead as demand
for credit expands.

Funds at savings and loan associations remain abundant,

but no further reductions in mortgage rates are expected.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

District bank directors were unaminous in expressing the
opinion that District consumer sentiment has strengthened and
that second quarter retail sales are expected to improve. Reports
on capital spending, however, varied, with some of the directors
reporting a pickup while others reported no Increase. Aside from
rising vacancy rates for apartments in the Minneapolis/St. Paul
Metropolitan Area, the residential construction market in the
District continues strong.

First quarter demand for long- and

intermediate-term agricultural credit was robust and is anticipated
to remain vigorous in the second quarter.
Consumer sentiment has improved, and bank directors report
that District retailers expect their sales to advance noticeably
in the second quarter. Although his firm's sales gain in April
failed to match February's and Marchts performances, one director
anticipates a good second quarter and attributes April's poor
showing to the year's timing of Easter, A Twin City Area banker
noted a marked increase in consumer sentiment and indicated that it
was reflected in automobile sales and instalment loans.

So far this

year, retail sales in another director's area have been good, and he
expects them to continue to improve.

In South Dakota, the recent

Improvement in the cattle and hog markets has resulted in improved
consumer attitudes and a pickup in retail sales. A similar view
was expressed by a director from Southwestern Montana where increased

cattle prices and expanding copper production have stimulated
consumer spending. Two directors, however, revealed that
uncertainties over the Vietnam War recently tended to dampen
consumer sentiment in their areas.
A pickup in investment spending was disclosed by several
bank directors.

A Wisconsin director, for example, stated that

a shopping center is under construction in his area and that two
additional shopping centers are expected to be built. A Montana
director related that a considerable number of small commercial
construction projects were under way in his area, while a South
Dakota director reported a rise in farm machinery sales. One
director did not report an improvement in capital spending, but
he did detect an increase in loans to finance inventories.

In the

opinion of a Twin City Area banker, however, no pickup has occurred
in either inventory or capital spending.
Recent surveys revealed that vacancy rates in Twin City
Area apartments have risen, but directors' reports disclose that
this phenomenon is restricted to the Minneapolis/St. Paul Metropolitan
Area. A Twin City Area banker stated that overbuilding has occurred
in certain areas of the metropolitan area, but luxury apartments are
experiencing no difficulty in attracting tenants. This bank indicated
that it has not experienced any deterioration in the quality of real
estate loans but is being cautious in extending credit for apartments.
Outside the Twin Cities, directors reported no overbuilding of
apartments and indicated that the housing market remains quite strong.
According to our latest agricultural credit conditions survey,
demand for intermediate- and long-term agricultural loans Increased

in the District during the first quarter, while the demand for
short-term loans did not change. The strength in demand for
intermediate-term loans came from an increased level of spending
on machinery and equipment.
It appears that the desire for long-term loans was
increased by renewed optimism about the long-term profitability
of land and land-related long-range capital investment. The
survey also indicates that more farmers have sought long-term
financing simply because interest rates have declined.
Because survey respondents foresee continued farm spending,
they expect the demand for intermediate-term credit to rise
throughout the second quarter.

Although the demand for short-term

agricultural credit does not appear to be poised for more than a
normal seasonal increase.

Responses indicate that the demand for

long-term agricultural credit is anticipated to continue to rise.
Bankers also commented in the recent survey that their interest
rates charged to farmers have become very sensitive to rates charged
by their farm credit system competitors.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Consumer spending strength now appears to be widening to include
stepped-up purchases of some durables, particularly furniture, according
to reports received from large department stores in the Tenth District.
Reflecting this improved sales picture, inventory investment by retailers
has picked up.

Similarly, manufacturers of consumer durables in the

District report that they too have increased their investment in inventories
of both raw materials and finished goods in response to an improving sales
picture.

Commercial banks in the District continue to report expanding

consumer instalment and real estate loan demand, and the improving
business loan demand alluded to in earlier Red Books now seems more firmly
established.

In the agricultural sector, a good crop and livestock

picture, buttressed by strong consumer demand, augurs well for Tenth
District farm income in 1972.
Responses from large department stores with outlets throughout Tenth
District states appear to confirm that sales to consumers are strengthening.
While sales of soft goods remain strong, the scope of consumer demands now
has widened somewhat to include more purchases of durables as well,
particularly furniture.

Present sales of furniture are reported as very

strong, with expectations that this trend will continue on into the fall
months.

Accordingly, these retailers have increased their purchases for

inventory, with one store reporting a 6-month delivery lag on new furniture
orders4

When queried as to whether future price considerations had a

significant bearing on stepped-up inventory investment, retailers were
nearly unanimous in expressing the view that present and expected future

sales strength was the main justification for increased inventories, rather
than any present versus future price incentives.
Discussions with District manufacturers of various types of consumer
durable goods elicited the view that business sales have clearly strengthened
over earlier months.

With production rising in response to Increased sales,

and with growing expectations of future sales strength, manufacturers'
inventory behavior also is showing more buoyancy.

Purchasing managers

continue to stress that stringent inventory controls remain in effect in
their respective companies, but an improved sales situation for many has
dictated an increase in Inventory investment. Manufacturers of small
household appliances, radio and television sets, wood furniture, and
cabinets were nearly uniform in noting that improved sales, rather than
any present price advantage vis-a-vis the future, had dictated growth in
inventories of both raw materials and finished goods.

One manufacturer of

electrical housewares stressed his concern over gaining extended lead time
as sales improved in the months ahead.

Wood furniture and cabinet

manufacturers were adding heavily to inventories of raw material, but were
constrained in their inventory accumulation by increasing difficulty in
securing raw materials, particularly wood.

Nevertheless, they indicated

that they would persist in their efforts to build up their stocks in
anticipation of continued growing strength in sales.
Loan demand at Tenth District banks continues to expand.

Consumer

instalment and real estate loans remain areas of steady growth. The
improvement in business loan demand noted in the last two Red Books appears
established.

Furthermore, the gains now appear to be coming from national

as well as local accounts.

This is attributed to a narrowing or elimination

of the spread between the local prime rate and the national rate. Demand

from local sources remains strong, supported In some cases by special
factors.

Denver banks, for example, report sharply Increased borrowing

by local customers, due in part to construction activity connected with
the 1976 Olympics.
Demand deposit inflows at District banks were unusually heavy in
April, while some moderation occurred in Inflows of consumer-type time and
savings deposits.

However, bankers contacted appear convinced that time

accounts will continue to contribute to future deposit expansion. Large
CD's have declined in recent weeks, but at least one large bank plans to
begin active solicitation of CD money in response to heightened loan
demand.
With the exception of Western Oklahoma and the southwestern part
of the Tenth District, which are suffering from drought, crop prospects
appear good at this time as soil moisture is reported as adequate-to-surplus
over most of the District.

In general, wheat condition is rated as good,

and maturity is ahead of last year.

The number of cattle on feed on

April 1 was up 14 percent in District states and 9 percent nationally,
compared with a year ago; and current indications are that beef supplies
will continue above 1971 levels throughout the remainder of the year.
Continued strong consumer demand for livestock products, combined with the
present crop outlook, indicates that District farm income may reach a new
record high in 1972.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Indicators of economic activity in the Eleventh District continue
to show strength.

Industrial production rose to a record level in March,

and total employment in the five District states continued to increase.
Construction activity in the District also picked up in March, after slowing
in February, and retail sales continued to show steady improvement.
Seasonally adjusted total employment in the five southwestern states
rose only slightly in March, and with the labor force continuing to expand,
the average unemployment rate rose to 4.5 percent from 4.4 percent in
February.

Nonfarm payroll employment continued to increase, although not

as fast as in recent months.

The largest increases among the major

industry groups were in construction and finance. Mining, transportation
and public utilities showed slight declines, but remained above their
March 1971 levels.
The seasonally adjusted Texas Industrial Production Index rose in
March for the third month in a row, reaching a record 127.9 percent of its
1967 base.

The manufacturing and utilities sectors both contributed to

the rise, while mining declined slightly.

In manufacturing, all durable

goods industries showed production gains, with the largest being in
transportation equipment. Among nondurable goods industries, significant
gains were reported in textile mill products, printing and publishing,
and petroleum refining.

Food products, paper and allied products, and

leather and leather products experienced declines in production from
February, operating below their year-ago levels. Production of crude oil

and natural gas declined slightly from February, but the mining of natural
gas liquids, metal stone, and earth minerals increased moderately. Output
of utilities increased substantially over the month before as a result of
the Increased distribution of electricity and gas.
Oil allowables in all four major producing states in the District
were left unchanged for May.

Regulatory commissions in Texas and Louisiana

announced that their rates are at the highest level proper conservation
will allow.

It was believed that any further increases would damage

producing fields.
Construction activity in the five southwestern states, as measured
by the value of contracts awarded, rose significantly in March after
falling in February.

Residential building continued to provide much of

the impetus to the construction industry, but both nonresidential building
and nonbuildlng construction also increased substantially.

Construction

activity in Texas, however, recovered only slightly after a substantial
decline in February.

Nevertheless, the cumulative value of contracts

awarded in Texas during the first three months of this year was more than
a fourth higher than in the corresponding period last year.
Sales of department stores in the District continued to show
year-to-year gains during April.

Among major metropolitan areas in Texas,

sales were strongest in Dallas and Houston, while San Antonio showed
moderate gains and El Paso no gain over the April 1971 level.

Automobile

registrations in the four largest metropolitan areas of Texas made
substantial monthly and year-to-year gains in March.

Total registrations

in these four areas for the first three months were up 13.4 percent from
the corresponding period a year ago.

Agricultural prospects in the District states are progressing
well.

Recent rains have improved general crop and livestock conditions

in all but the western states of the District.

Cattle feeding continues

to expand in the District's cattle feeding states of Arizona, Oklahoma,
New Mexico, and Texas, as the number of cattle on feed on April 1 totaled
nearly 16 percent more than a year before.

This compares with a 9-percent

gain for the nation's 23 most important cattle feeding states.
A sharp drop in prices of poultry and eggs, together with a decline
in livestock prices, caused a modest decrease In the index of prices
received by Texas farmers and ranchers during the month ending April 15.
The index of all crop prices rose slightly from mid-March.
Total credit at weekly reporting banks in the District rose
moderately in April, following a rapid advance in March.

Total loans made

notable gains, as all major categories of loans rose in response to
further improvement in economic activity within the District. District
banks also added to their investment portfolios in April, as sizable
acquisitions of Treasury Bills exceeded declines In holdings of U. S.
Treasury Notes and Bonds and municipal Issues.

Total deposits of weekly

reporting banks contracted slightly in April, due mainly to a sizable
reduction in the volume of large CD's outstanding.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

In the opinion of our Directors, economic conditions in the Twelfth
District are maintaining the trends of recent months.

Employment is

rising gradually, but unemployment remains a problem in some areas.
Construction, despite some signs of weakness, remains a major source of
strength.

Consumer expenditures and business investment are at satisfactory

levels but do reflect some caution in spending plans.

Payrolls are rising

across the District, yet there appears to be no immediate prospect of a
significant reduction in unemployment.

There are such favorable factors

as increasing hiring by the previously depressed aerospace industry.
Boeing is expected to add another 5,000 workers by the end of 1972 in
response to increased sales of jet airliners.

In California, the

aerospace industry is described "on the upswing and no longer is a drag
on the area's economy." Employment increases also are reported for the
steel industry in Utah. At the same time, Utah's agricultural employment
will be below normal because of crop losses due to late frosts.

In fact,

agricultural employment throughout the District may be lower through a
combination of crop damage in some areas and increased mechanization in
others.
Directors report no plans to increase hiring by their own firms.
This policy is common both for directors in banking as well as in manufacuring.
Hiring is aimed at maintaining present staff levels.

Some major banks are

planning to reduce their staff slightly, and another company, which planned
to layoff 50 workers because of a slowdown in orders, is holding these
workers for vacation replacements.

Several directors report that their

firms continue to be cost conscious and are following a restrictive hiring
policy.

This view seems quite common.

Consequently, the consensus is

that no major increase in employment is to be expected, and temporary
summer employment will be relatively difficult to find.
Activity in the construction industry is currently strong throughout
the District.

There are some signs of weakness in a few areas, but the

basic situation is favorable for the industry.

In Southern California, the

high level of apartment and commercial building construction is producing
concern over vacancy rates, and lenders are beginning to be more cautious.
Banks in such areas as Orange County have tightened their financing
standards to protect against the possibility of more difficulties in
renting new units.

In other parts of the District, such as Idaho and

Utah, construction starts "continue at a healthy pace."

The ready

availability of mortgage financing for most kinds of projects is another
favorable influence on maintaining current levels of construction.
The agricultural outlook is favorable for most producers. For
example, potato growers expect a good price structure.

In part, this is

due to reduced plantings in response to the heavy crop of 1971. Fruit
crops are also expected to be favorable for producers in those areas that
escaped late frosts; serious losses in orchard crops had occurred in
Eastern Washington, Idaho and Utah. Drought in parts of California has
caused serious problems for ranchers and some crops.

Other crops such as

rice are expected to reach a normal production level.
Bankers report good loan demand for most categories, including
commercial loans.

No important changes are reported in banking conditions.

CORRECTIONS
Section
I Table
I-T-I,
forfeeds,
wholesale
theThe
seasonally
figures
should
be:
wholesale
prices,
117.4;
industrial
117.1;
farm
products
&
foods
and
118.5.
percommodities,
centadjusted
change from
preceding
period
should
be:
wholesale
prices,
3.4;
industrial
commodities,
4.2;
farm
products
&
foods
and
feeds,
-1.0.
For
consumer
prices,
the
cent
change
from
preceding
period
should
be
2.0
for
food,
and
3.1
forper
commodities,
except
food.
The
per
cent
change
from
three
periods
earlier
should
be
7.2
for
food
and
1.4
for
commodities
except
food.
Page 22,II
line
4. II-T-I.
Last word
should
be seven
(not
eight).
Section
Table
The
data
for
"FNMA
auction
yield"
should
read
across
as9/30
follows:
7.63,the
.07,
.02,
Section
III
Page13-21,
14.
The
heading
top
of and
the .06.
first column
should
(8/16
to
only).
Sectionread
IV Page
should
be at
III, page
13-21.

