CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 14, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 3
Third District - Philadelphia page 6
Fourth District - Cleveland page 8
Fifth District - Richmond page 10
Sixth District - Atlanta page 12
Seventh District - Chicago page 14
Eighth District - St. Louis page 17
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 19
Tenth District - Kansas City page 22
Eleventh District - Dallas page 25
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 28

*

SUMMARY

Reports from the twelve districts indicate continued strengthening
in business activity and greater optimism in general.

Consumer spending,

which has continued strong in most regions, seems to be the main source of
strength.

Greater output in industries closely related to the provision of

final goods, especially durables, was cited as principal source of expanding
manufacturing employment and increased business loan demand.
have, for the most part, remained unchanged.

Inventories

Construction of single-family

dwellings has continued to boost overall activity.

Loan demand at commercial

banks has increased, with consumer and business loan categories up most
sharply.

In general, wage and price increases have been moderate.
Most districts reported encouraging strength in sales of consumer

goods.

Part of the gain in consumer purchases was attributed by Atlanta,

Richmond and Chicago to stronger auto sales; Dallas, however, reported a
decline in auto registrations.

Major household items and other consumer

durables were strong in some districts.

Kansas City, Boston and Chicago

specifically mentioned recreational items.

While retail sales rose in the

St. Louis district, the advance was not as great as anticipated by retailers.
Slowness characterized retail sales in the New York district, where the
outlook was less bright than a month ago.
Steel production was reported favorable in the Chicago and
Cleveland districts.

The output levels are considerably different, however,

for the various steel industry products.

[Asterisk:Prepared

Production of steel sheets for

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis ]

use in autos and appliances has displayed the most strength in both districts, while demand for steel used in commercial and industrial construction has remained relatively weak.
Manufacturing activity was reported to be increasing in five
districts.

Sales of both durables and nondurables advanced in Minneapolis

and capital goods orders were strong in Boston.

Dallas reported gains in

industrial production in April with broad-based strength across industry
lines.

Manufacturers that supply national markets are reportedly optimistic

in the St. Louis district.

St. Louis, and Chicago as well, mentioned

benefits to manufacturers resulting from reduced foreign competition.
Richmond reported strength in district industries.

Most districts reported

little change in inventory accumulation.
Several reserve banks reported signficant employment gains in
their respective districts.

Philadelphia indicated over 15 percent of the

firms responding to a survey added to their payrolls and nearly 5 percent
lengthened their average workweek.

In the Chicago district, there was an

increase in the number of firms adding workers or stretching workweeks, but
two major-city governments are still very concerned about unemployment.
While Dallas and Boston reported no significant labor market changes,
Minneapolis indicated the Ninth District's unemployment rate rose from
5.7 percent in March to 5.9 percent in April.
Construction activity has remained strong in most districts.
San Francisco reported that national construction activity gains have aided
recovery of the Pacific Northwest because of the greater demand for lumber
and wood products.

Generally, residential construction has been strong in

the nation, but Atlanta reported it appeared to be slowing.

Commercial

construction has slackened and concern has been expressed for possible
overbuilding of multiunit dwellings in the San Francisco and Kansas City
districts.

Of all the districts, only Atlanta reported anticipation of a

surge in commercial construction.
Loan demand in general, and business loan demand in particular,
were noted as being quite strong by most districts.

Exceptions included

New York, where an increase in total loans was not accounted for by
commercial and industrial loans, and Kansas City, where business loan demand
has also been weak.

Richmond and Dallas reported strength in consumer

loans, while Philadelphia and Kansas City reported moderate gains in consumer lending.

Housing and construction credit were noted as sources of

strength in the Dallas and St. Louis districts while in the Philadelphia
district future strength in construction lending is anticipated.
Four districts reported continuing strong inflows of savings
deposits.

One of the four, Kansas City, noted inflows were above year-

ago levels but slower than earlier in 1972.

St. Louis, Boston and Chicago

also mentioned strong savings inflows.
Most districts cited the importance of the Price Commission's
role in slowing the rate of inflation.

The Minneapolis and San Francisco

reserve banks indicated prices and wages were growing at reduced rates,
and retail establishments in the Kansas City district have reported no sharp
run-ups in suppliers' prices.

In the Boston district, suppliers' prices

have generally been rising gradually and one director indicated the pace
was faster in the second quarter than in the first.

In the Philadelphia

district, despite expectations of no change in prices paid, 20 percent of

the manufacturing firms which responded to a survey were anticipating
establishing price increases on their own products in June.

Only 7 percent

reported price increases in May.
Weather and cattle prices were emphasized in reports on the agricultural outlook.

Weather conditions throughout much of the Midwest reportedly

had adverse effects on plantings.

Excessive rainfall in parts of the

Minneapolis and St. Louis districts have retarded crop developments and in
the case of Minneapolis caused some switching from corn plantings to grain
sorghums and soybeans.

Drought conditions have developed in the Atlanta

district and the northern part of the St. Louis district.
Higher beef prices were noted by the Chicago, Richmond and
Kansas City banks, and the St. Louis bank reported strong sales of farm
equipment.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Business is described as strong, with consumer spending very high
and capital spending plans being revised upward.
very good.

Profits are reported as

Bankers report deposits are continuing to surge and business

loan demand is rising.
Manufacturers of consumer goods and a banker on Martha's Vineyard
all attest to higher than expected spending by consumers on leisure-time
activities.

Recreational vehicles —

campers, trailers, motor homes, boats

are described as selling like a "house afire."

—

On Martha's Vineyard, business

is reported as busier than usual for this time of year, with single-family
homes being put up at a record pace.
Despite the rapid pace of consumer goods sales, inventories are
not being raised.

Two reasons are given.

difficult to build inventories.

First, sales are so rapid it is

Second, the use of computers has cut down

on the need for inventory accumulation.

One large manufacturer indicated

he expected work-in-process inventories to rise when machine tool orders
picked up, because of the long work-time involved in their production.
Half of our directors whose firms manufacture capital goods indicated
orders were very strong.

The other two directors said while machine tool

orders were up, they were not coming in as fast as surveys of capital
spending plans would indicate.
real surge in 1973.

These latter two directors expected the

Two of our directors indicated their own manufacturing

firms were drastically revising upward their capital spending plans.
Despite the brisk pace of business activity, only one manufacturer
reported a significant increase in his work force.

Prices paid to suppliers were reported as generally rising by
more than 2 percent, with one director indicating the pace was faster in
the second quarter than in the first.

Natural gas, an important raw material

for one manufacturer, has doubled in price since January.
Business loan demand is reported by area bankers as good despite
the lack of inventory accumulation.

Savings deposits inflows are surging,

but there is little or no downward movement in mortgage rates.
Professor Samuelson, the only academic correspondent available this
month, said monetary policy should be of an "accommodating" nature in this
early stage of expansion.

He felt a rate of growth of real output of 6 to

7 percent throughout the rest of the year is a likely and desirable policy
target.

To meet this goal, he prescribed an 8 percent average annual growth

rate in the money stock between now and year-end, even if interest rates were
to "ease upward."
Samuelson is not a price optimist.

Even if the rate of inflation

were to exceed the consensus 3 1/2 percent figure, he would not restrict
aggregate demand, since the pressures would be mostly cost-push in origin.
He would shift to a 6 percent money growth policy only if the rate of growth
of real output exceeds 8 percent.

Samuelson also noted Professor Modigliani

would regard a 10 percent monetary growth rate as necessary to accommodate
the 6 to 7 percent real growth target.

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

According to directors of the head office and the Buffalo Branch
and other business leaders, Phase II on balance has been relatively successful in curbing the wage-price spiral.

New developments in Vietnam have had

little or no impact on business and consumer confidence; the recent retail
sales picture seemed somewhat less bright than last month's and businesses
continue to follow very cautious inventory policies.
Concerning Phase II, respondents' current assessments varied somewhat but can perhaps best be summed up by the view of a head office director,
chairman of the board of a New Jersey bank, who stated it had both its good
and bad aspects and while a wage problem still existed, it was not as serious
as last year's.

Among other head office directors, a senior official of a

large New York City bank gave the program '"A' for effort and 'B' for performance" and felt there would be a Phase III.

The president of a large

nonferrous metal-producing corporation thought the program was "hurting"
corporate profits and thus making return on investment inadequate by controlling prices more effectively than wages.

A senior official of a major

metal container firm, however, felt Phase II has helped slow the inflationary
spiral and, on the basis of his firm's experience, has been a definite factor
in curbing the magnitude of wage increases.

A Rochester department store

official stated that but for controls, wages in his area would "skyrocket."
Buffalo Branch directors generally agreed controls had been "reasonably"
effective, and given the number of labor contracts expiring next year,
such controls would probably be required for at least another year.

Among

other respondents, the chairman of a large nonbank financial firm characterized Phase II as a "brilliant stroke," but "regretfully" felt it to be but

the "first step" toward more controls.

A former senior official of this

Bank, while not assessing the program as "brilliant," stated he was surprised by how well it was working.
According to most respondents, recent military developments in
Vietnam have had little or no impact on business and consumer confidence.
As will be noted below, however, some respondents mentioned the situation
as a factor possibly slowing the gradual rise in retail sales that has been
under way since last fall.
Indeed, the current consumer spending picture that emerges from
the views expressed by respondents appears less bright than last month's.
Buffalo Branch directors viewed retail sales in western New York as "holding
steady," with only minor seasonal fluctuations.

A leading Rochester

retailer characterized the current retail sales picture in his area as
"indifferent," and reported only "guarded" optimism among retailers regarding
the outlook for the next few months.

He felt consumers still lacked

confidence, perhaps because of Vietnam or because of the wage controls.
The container manufacturer also was not optimistic over near-term retail
sales prospects for a number of reasons, including the uncertainties
created by Vietnam, the effects of Phase II and the coming elections.

He

felt the adverse impact of these factors on consumer confidence being
accentuated by the manner in which they have been handled by the news
media.

The president of a nationwide chain of variety stores stated con-

sumer spending had not been "buoyant" this spring, and "the consumer is
not carrying the economy yet."

This feeling was shared by the president

of a "popular priced" textile manufacturer who, however, looked for a

gradual pickup over the balance of the year.

A senior official of a

high priced, high quality New York City department store reported his
firm's business had been fairly good in May and had picked up further in
early June.

He expected a continued moderate increase in sales over the

coming months, but felt consumers remained restrained and reported his
firm was only cautiously optimistic.
This relatively lackluster consumer spending picture found its
counterpart in reports of a continued lack of strength in business inventories.

Some businessmen commented that with the help of computers to

determine the minimum required, users and retailers did not wish to tie
up working capital to carry excess inventories.

The department store

official mentioned above stated his firm's inventories were currently
somewhat "heavier" than at this time last year, but they were not "crazy"
over this situation and were actually trying to reduce them.

The Rochester

retailer reported stores in his area also were "continually" attempting
to control inventories.

The nonferrous metal producer reported no increase

in copper inventories; the container manufacturer also saw no inventory
increases in that industry.

A New York City banker saw little evidence

of strength in the inventory picture in his bank loan developments:

while

its total loans are well ahead of last year's, the increase has not been
accounted for by "industrial and commercial" loans.
expressed by the New Jersey banker.

Similar views were

And Buffalo Branch directors almost all

felt there appeared to be no strengthening in business inventories.

The

only exception was the director of the upstate food processing firm who
reported a buildup of food packaging material in that industry.

THIRD DISTRICT —

PHILDELPHIA

Manufacturing activity in the Third Federal Reserve District
remains on the upswing and employment continues to expand.
spending plans are frequently reported by area firms.

Increased capital

Industrial prices

are, for the most part, stable in the district, although near-term price
increases are anticipated by some firms.

The longer-term price picture,

however, has improved somewhat over the past few months.

Loan demand

continues to be strong on a broad front, although a flattening in activity
is expected during the next few months.
Area business executives report the regional economy is continuing
its upward course.

The business outlook survey of large manufacturers in

the district shows approximately four times as many responding firms experienced increases in new orders and shipments as recorded decreases during
May.

Area firms expecting increases in these key indicators outnumber those

forecasting decreases by about three to one for the month of June.
This increased activity continues to have a favorable impact on
the employment picture in the district.

During May over 15 percent of the

responding firms added workers to their payrolls while nearly 5 percent
lengthened their average workweek.

Forecasts for June show nearly 20 per-

cent expecting to add workers, with over 15 percent stretching out the
average workweek.
Looking ahead six months, three-fourths of the manufacturers
believe the level of general business activity will be higher.

Two-thirds

of the respondents foresee increasing new orders and shipments a half
year ahead for their own firms.

In anticipation of increased business

tempo, many of these firms plan a pickup in hiring during the next six
months.

Nearly 30 percent expect to add workers during that time span.

Also, plans for capital investments six months ahead continue at a high
level.

Over 45 percent of the firms expect increases in capital outlays

while only 5 percent anticipate cutbacks.
The price report from manufacturing firms gives mixed signals.
The month of May appeared to be one of relative stability, with over 70
percent reporting no change in prices paid and over 90 percent reporting
no change in prices received.

Forecasts for June show a similar report for

prices paid, but more firms expect to increase prices they are charging.
Nearly 20 percent anticipate price increases on their own products during
June.

This compares with only 7 percent of the firms that reported price

increases for May.
The six-month outlook for prices, however, is becoming more
optimistic.

In March, over 70 percent of the firms were forecasting

increases in prices paid during the following six months; over 60 percent
were forecasting increases in prices received.

By May, less than 55

percent were predicting increases in prices paid while only approximately
40 percent were expecting to raise their own prices over the ensuing
six months.
Area bankers report continuing strength in loan demand.

Commercial

and industrial loans are growing steadily, although demand for funds to
finance inventories has been relatively weak.

Real estate loans remain

stable while consumer loans show some signs of improvement.

The outlook

is for a flattening in loan activity during the next few months, although
construction is expected to remain a source of strength.

FOURTH DISTRICT —

CLEVELAND

Reports from our industrial directors and from business economists
in the area indicate current expansion of business activity in the district
is gathering momentum.

Market demands for both consumer goods and capital

goods generally are improving, although the steel industry has yet to register
an across-the-board recovery.

Both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing employ-

ment are rising, but insured unemployment remains on a plateau.
Comments by our industrial directors about improving business
conditions in their firms or industries were nearly uniform, reflecting
strong consumer spending, a continued high level of auto parts production
and a pickup in capital goods and aerospace business.

One director noted

that although his machine tool business has yet to experience a significant
upturn, he remains optimistic (his firm's specialized type of machine tools
tends to be among the last to show improvement).

Several directors mentioned

top management was providing strong pressures to hold down capital spending,
and another pointed out that although capital appropriations in his firm
will be up substantially this year, capital spending will not exceed last
year's level.
Our latest survey of manufacturers supports the view that economic
activity continued on a strong upward course during May.

In fact, for the

first time in many years firms reported the increase in each of our eight
survey items was stronger than expected one month ago.

(Survey items

are new orders, shipments, backlogs, inventories, delivery time, employment, hours and prices.)

Another significant fact revealed in the survey

results was that there was a net inventory accumulation in May —

the

first time in many months.

Survey participants expect strength in manu-

facturing activity to be sustained in June and do not anticipate a slowing
in the rate of inflation.

(Thus far this year, our diffusion index for

prices paid has been running slightly below the level that prevailed prior
to Phase I.)
Economists in the steel industry report steel orders are increasing,
but not uniformly among major customers.

The strength is mainly in steel

sheets, reflecting rising demand from auto and appliance companies.

Steel

orders for agricultural machinery and equipment are up sharply, as is
demand for wire and wire products.

The weakness is mainly in orders for heavy

plates and structurals, reflecting lack of strength in high-rise commercial
building and industrial building.

The steel industry itself has not been

using those products to any great extent because its capital spending programs have been reduced this year.

The economists mentioned steel users

are showing little inclination to build inventories; they seem to be operating
on a "hand-to-mouth" basis.

Our contacts also indicated there is considerable

speculation in the steel industry about reasons for the sharp decline in
steel imports during April; some industry analysts apparently are doubtful
the recent low level will be maintained.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Results of our latest survey of businessmen and bankers indicate
a continuing uptrend in business activity in the Fifth District.

In

general, shipments, new orders and backlogs of orders are increasing in the
manufacturing sector.

Retail sales —

especially automobile sales —

tinue to reflect the strength evident in our last several surveys.

con-

Employ-

ment and hours worked per week are reported unchanged in the trade and
services sector and increasing in the manufacturing sector.

Banking

respondents also report increases in employment in most areas of the
district.
strong.

Residential and nonresidential construction activity continues

Banking respondents indicate the demand for all types of loans

is increasing.

Businessmen and bankers continue to be optimistic concerning

the general economic outlook.
Manufacturing respondents report further increases in shipments,
new orders and backlogs, with gains especially notable in such important
district industries as paper, chemicals and primary and fabricated metals.
On balance, manufacturers report a decline in inventories and the diffusion
of responses indicates inventories in some important lines have fallen
below desired levels.

Coupled with increased demand for business loans

reported by bankers in the survey, this suggests some step-up in the
rate of inventory buying by district manufacturers may be under way.

Current

capacity levels are rated as about right by most manufacturing respondents.
Both banking and retail respondents report further increases in
sales.

Automobile sales were reported to be especially strong, with more

than 50 percent of the banking respondents indicating increases in their
areas.

Trade and service respondents also indicate inventories are down.

Employment and hours worked are reported to be up in manufacturing
but little changed in trade and service.

Both manufacturers and trade

respondents report increases in wages, with some retail firms expressing
concern over the impending minimum wage increase.

On balance, trade and

service respondents reported no change in prices received while manufacturers
reported a slight decline.
According to reports received from district bankers, residential
and nonresidential construction activity continues strong in the district.
More than half of the banking respondents report an increase in residential
construction.

Bankers report strong demand for all types of loans.

Demand

for consumer loans appears to be especially strong, with 17 of 21 banker
respondents indicating further increases in their consumer loans outstanding.
This district's January-April cash receipts from farm marketings were 3 percent above a year earlier, but the increase was
significantly less than the 16 percent gain nationally.

Larger livestock

receipts accounted for all of the district increase.
In general, bankers and other businessmen in the district remain
optimistic about the general economic outlook.

Forty percent of the

banking respondents believe business activity in their respective areas
will improve in the next three months and the remainder believe activity
will stabilize at present levels.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Businessmen and bankers generally agree the Sixth District's strong
economic expansion will continue through the rest of this year and into next
year.

One of our Tennessee directors expressed the majority opinion in the

following:

"Most individuals feel optimistic not only about current conditions

but about business in general for 1973.

They point out problems caused

by an increase in the minimum wage; they are aware of the dangers of inflation;
and they know uncertainty caused by a possible change in administration must
be considered.

But, in spite of this, they are confidently planning for

an increase in their business in 1973."

However, a minority of business-

men feel inflation has not been checked and will accelerate in 1973, to be
followed by restrictive economic policies.
Recently, there have been several announcements of major new
plants.

The most noteworthy is a plant that will build offshore nuclear

generators.

This facility, eventually expected to employ 10,000, will be

located in Jacksonville, Florida.

An auto producer has plans to construct

a plant in Jackson, Mississippi, that will make electrical components for
autos.

A major shipbuilding and repairing firm will build an elaborate

facility in Tampa.

Tampa Harbor is also receiving a new phosphate terminal.

A southeast Alabama director reports that during the last 60 days plant
announcements have picked up noticeably.

In that area, plants will be

built to produce such diverse products as charcoal briquettes, ceramics,
garage doors and truck beds.

There have also been a number of new plants or

plant expansions in construction-related businesses, such as cement, lumber,
composition board and lighting fixtures.

In addition, several firms recently

announced large capital appropriations for plant modernization and pollution
control.

Tennessee is reportedly receiving inquiries from a number of foreign

countries concerning locating or purchasing plants in that state.
electronics firm is locating its first "mini-plant" in Atlanta.

A major

This

facility will hire about 20 people and will produce a variety of products,
emphasizing speedy delivery and individual attention.
Retail sales, especially of consumer durables and autos, have
been strong.

One department store reports a sharp increase in purchases on

time, an indication of strong appliance sales.
in several areas.

Auto sales are reported good

A large Atlanta retailer recently announced it intends to

open a store in Birmingham.

A nationally known furniture retailer plans to

build a combination warehouse and distribution center in Jackson, Mississippi.
A slight downturn in loan demand at two New Orleans consumer finance companies
has not turned out to be as significant or as long-lasting as earlier thought.
Commercial vehicles and farm machinery are selling very well, and
there is a shortage of heavy-duty trucks.
The growth of residential construction may be slowing.

Only one

major project has been announced recently and Birmingham's apartment market
is approaching the saturation point.

However, a surge of commercial building

is expected in Atlanta.
Drought has damaged corn, soybeans and other crops, and if adequate
moisture is not forthcoming soon, damange will become severe.
beetle has infested timber in some areas of the district.

The pine bark

Infested timber

must be harvested quickly, at increased cost and then used only for pulpwood.
A telephone company executive has warned a steady increase in phone
rates will be necessary if services are to be expanded rapidly.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Each passing month has been accompanied by a shrinkage in the
number of Seventh District residents who remain skeptical that a broad
recovery of activity is indeed under way.

In fact, interest in the

general business outlook has subsided to its lowest ebb in years, as
more and more firms observe improved demand for their own products and
services and business loan demand picks up.
cite the national unemployment rate —
and by television commentators —

Remaining doubters commonly

prominently featured in newspapers

which they accept as an equivalent sub-

stitute for the trend of employment.
More firms are adding workers or stretching workweeks.

The

volume of help wanted advertising has increased in the Chicago area in
recent months from a low plateau in 1971.

But the overall supply of

workers, including most skills, remains ample.

City governments in Detroit

and Milwaukee are much concerned about the extent of unemployment in their
central areas.

Many students and teachers are expected to fail in their

search for summer jobs.
Vigorous demand continues for trucks, trailers and some types
of construction equipment.
substantially.

Some district producers of defense equipment are hiring

again on a modest scale.
goods —

Orders for smaller machine tools have improved

Shipments of all types of big-ticket consumer

household durables, recreational equipment, lawn and garden

equipment, power tools —

are very strong and above forecasts.

sales of autos are creating shortages of some favored models —
worst in many years," according to one large Chicago dealer.

Record
"the

Steel producers are somewhat more optimistic.

Imports are less

of a problem than had been feared, with currency realignments and new
trade agreements partly responsible.

Steel output in the Chicago area

has moved closer to the high level of a year ago than is the case for the
nation.

Demand for steel sheets is far outrunning demand for heavy grades,

reflecting the level of usage in the motor vehicle and consumer goods
fields.
Permits granted for apartments in the Chicago area have been
running well below last year, but real estate circles report a recent improvement in demand for apartments from both renters and buyers.

Sales of

moderate-priced existing homes are completed in very short periods after
being placed on the market, but sales of high-priced homes (over $100,000)
are quite slow.
Major construction projects in the Chicago area have been held
back by strikes.
steel erection.

The elevator constructors' strike continues, halting
A lathers' strike stopped most work for two days as other

trades honored picket lines.

A masons' strike is threatened.

Construction

laborers in Indiana and Illinois recently settled for an immediate boost in
total compensation to about $7.50 per hour.

While huge office buildings

will add substantially to the supply of office space when completed, the
vacancy rate for office space in the Chicago loop is two and one-half times
the relatively low rate of two years ago.
Retail beef and pork prices are being pushed up as the volume of
marketings of cattle has lagged expectations.

One large district retail

food chain recently announced a boost of 6 to 8 percent in beef prices,

citing higher wholesale prices.

Poultry and eggs are in good supply.

Crop

prospects are favorable with growing conditions "better then average" despite
a late start.
Some of the largest district banks report loan demand higher than
anticipated "across the board."

The reversal in business loans has been

"dramatic" with a substantial year-to-year decline in 1971, replaced by a
substantial increase this year.
loans has been in term loans —

A large share of the recent rise in business
three to seven years to maturity —

competition with capital markets.

in

These loans feature many variations in

rate terms and other features, depending on preferences of the various banks
and their customers.

Savings inflows are holding up well in view of the

improved level of retail sales.

Two large Chicago banks are outrunning

competitors for savings by offering stuffed animal "mascots" —
a kangaroo —

as premiums for opening new accounts.

a lion and

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

A sample of Eighth District businessmen reports improved sales and
expects future moderate gains.

Employment is holding steady in the major

cities, while smaller metropolitan areas are reporting additional hirings.
Firms that compete with foreign suppliers are more optimistic since they are
beginning to feel some effects of the dollar devaluation.

Farmers in some

areas of the district are experiencing adverse weather conditions.

Retail

sales have improved over last year and the housing industry continues to
show strong advances.

Credit is plentiful as savings continue to flow into

thrift institutions at a high rate.

Loan demands by businesses have

increased in recent weeks.
Manufacturing firms in the St. Louis metropolitan area that
supply customers in national markets are generally more optimistic than
locally-oriented firms, except those related to residential construction
activity.

A large food processing firm is experiencing the expected modest

increase in sales and feels prospects are good for the remainder of the
year.

Shoe manufacturing plants are at full capacity, but expect no addi-

tional employment at this time.

The dollar devaluation and inflations in

foreign countries have made the shoe industry optimistic about further
advances in sales because they now have a better competitive position with
respect to imports.

Suppliers in hotel, restaurant and airline industries

are continuing to experience an uptrend in business, reflecting improvement in these leisure-service industries.
Farmers in many areas of the Eighth District are experiencing
poor weather conditions.

A drought situation is developing in the northern

half of the district and is seriously hurting newly planted crops.

In some

areas of the central Mississippi Valley, rains and floods have slowed the
planting of crops.

Strong sales of farm equipment are reported.

Sales of

one large manufacturer of agricultural equipment are up 25 percent from
last year and the firm feels a solid basis for further growth is present.
Retail sales exceed the slow pace of last summer, but are still not as high
as hoped.

Retailers generally feel sales will improve with economic

conditions.

Stores in the downtown area of major cities have been experi-

encing poor sales performance.
The construction industry is still a bright spot.

The pace of

housing construction is good, but commercial construction is sluggish.

The

continued strong pace of home construction is making builders optimistic
as they move into the summer, typically their busiest season.

Building

suppliers' sales are up over a year ago, and in some cases further hirings
are planned if sales continue upward through the remainder of the year.
Housing credit remains plentiful as savings continue to flow into
S&Ls at the high rates of the past few months.

Expected slowing of the

rate of savings inflows has not occurred, and as a result mortgage rates
in the district are generally holding steady, with slight declines reported
in some areas.
Loan demands at eight district banks are strong, especially for
commercial and industrial loans.

One major bank reports loan demands

increased by 6 percent in the last four weeks and expects strong loan
demands to continue.

Bankers see the prime rate rising by the end of the

year to perhaps 6 percent.

NINTH DISTRICT —

MINNEAPOLIS

Despite the fact the unemployment rate in the Minneapolis/St. Paul
metropolitan area remained unchanged this spring, the district's overall
rate of joblessness rose as unemployment increased in other areas.

District

businessmen doubt Phase II can achieve its goals, but do believe the Administration's efforts are helping curb inflation.

A recent newspaper poll disclosed

Minnesota residents were far from unanimous in their economic outlook.
The results of our second-quarter Industrial Expectations Survey suggest
continued improvement in district manufacturing activity.

Also, district

resort and motel managers are looking forward to a good tourist season
this summer.

District crop development has been retarded, however.

Weather-

caused delays are forcing farmers in some areas to plant less profitable
crops on remaining unseeded acreages.
After averaging 5.3 percent in January and February, the district's
unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, jumped to 5.7 percent in March
and rose to 5.9 percent in April.

Much of the recent rise in unemployment

can be traced to northeastern Minnesota.

In addition to U.S. Steel closing

a plant in Duluth, a banker there reported the delayed opening this year
of the Great Lakes shipping season had also retarded employment expansion
in his area.

Furthermore, Minnesota this spring experienced its smallest

seasonal rise in construction employment in ten years.

Unemployment is

also a problem in Montana, and a branch director reported the Anaconda
Company this year is laying off approximately 1,500 people in that state.
In addition, cessation of construction on the ABM site at Malmstrom Air
Force Base has already cost the Great Falls area 1,000 construction jobs.

On the other hand, the unemployment rate in the Minneapolis/
St. Paul metropolitan area has not risen this spring and a Minnesota Department
of Manpower Services spokesman reported jobs were more plentiful this spring
than twelve months earlier.

Directors from North Dakota, South Dakota,

the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and northwestern Wisconsin reported some
improvement in labor market conditions this spring.
Although district businessmen are skeptical of whether or not
Phase II will be able to achieve its goals, bank directors indicated their
contacts believe the Administration's efforts have slowed the rate of inflation.
In addition, one director reported district businessmen currently were
more optimistic about expected price performance than they were at the
beginning of the year.

Another director stated his area's recent pickup

in business activity had lessened businessmen's concern over wage-price
controls.

No directors foresaw any shift this year in the Administration's

program to combat inflation.

One director, however, reported the Pay Board

was getting tougher in its rulings.
A recent Minnesota poll revealed district residents have mixed
expectations about economic activity during the next six months.

In assessing

the overall economy, 50 percent of the respondents looked for "good times"
while 44 percent anticipated "bad times."

When asked to comment on labor

market developments, 35 percent expected employment to increase, 41 percent
foresaw no change and 23 percent anticipated the number of people holding
jobs would decrease.

Survey respondents were more optimistic about curbing

inflation than they were a year ago.

In this current survey 50 percent

indicated they expected the prices of most things they buy to increase
as compared to 73 percent who gave this reply a year ago.

Responses to our second-quarter Industrial Expectations Survey
suggest continued expansion in district manufacturing activity.

The strongest

year-to-year sales increase in ten quarters was achieved in the first quarter,
when district manufacturing sales advanced 12.2 percent.

This gain surpassed

the 6.5 percent sales advance expected last February and resulted from
an unexpected strengthening in both durable and nondurable goods sales.
Despite their heartening first-quarter performance, however, district manufacturers only modestly revised upward their expectations for the second and
third quar ter s.
District motel and resort managers, according to a telephone
survey, are optimistic about this summer's tourist business.

When asked

to characterize their outlook for this summer, eleven respondents expected
their business to be "excellent," three termed their anticipatiorfs "very
good" and eight foresaw a "good" tourist season.

In the western portion

of the district, Yellowstone National Park's centennial is expected to
attract additional tourists.
Crop development has been retarded throughout the district.
Generally, spring weather was late, but the greatest delays were caused
by recent excessive rainfall in feedgrains-producing areas of southern
Minnesota and eastern South Dakota.

Estimates of the degree of lateness

are greater in the western portions of this region.

A director from east-

central South Dakota places the overall stage of crop development at three
weeks behind normal and reports much of the acreage prepared for corn (principal
crop of the region) is being switched to less profitable grain sorghums.
Other reports indicate switching to soybean production in southern Minnesota.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

With the possible exception of inventory loans, business loan demand
at commercial banks in the Tenth District has weakened recently.
and personal loan demand remains strong, however.

Real estate

Mortgage commitments and

savings inflows to savings and loan associations continue well above their
year-ago pace.

Department store sales, especially of household durables, are

still advancing vigorously.

Prices generally are perceived by marketing men and

purchasing managers alike to be rising moderately (as one said, at a "manageable"
pace), but recent performance of meat-animal prices bodes ill for retail meat
prices in the near future.

Overall, respondents were almost uniformly optimistic

about the business situation for the rest of 1972.
Tenth District bankers report little change in overall conditions of
loan demand, with continued strength in real estate and personal loan categories
partly offset by some signs of weakness in business loans.

Strength in real

estate loans appears broadly based, including both residential and commercial
mortgage loans.

Most bankers interviewed indicate installment lending is

moderately strong and some report exceptional gains.

Several Tenth District

bankers single out credit card purchases as accounting for increased installment
loans.
The recent weakness in business loans reported by most bankers interviewed is in contrast to the steady and strong growth in business lending in the
Tenth District noted in the last three Redbooks.

No clear pattern emerged in

the reasons given for the decline; one Kansas City bank reports a large corporate
customer has engaged in a public financing in order to reduce its bank indebtedness
Oklahoma banks, however, report strong business loan demand —
expansion by oil drilling companies.

for example, for

Although overall district business loan

demand appears to have weakened somewhat, several banks have recently experienced
rising volumes of business loans to finance inventory accumulation.
Savings inflows to savings and loan associations in the Tenth District
continue above those of a year ago, but appear somewhat smaller than earlier in
1972.

Mortgage commitments remain generally strong, although some apprehension

about possible overbuilding of multiunit structures was expressed by associations
in Omaha, Oklahoma City, Topeka and Denver.

Rates paid on savings are stable and

rates charged on mortgages are generally reported as steady, though a tendency
toward stiffening was noted by a Topeka correspondent and an Omaha firm suggested
a slight softening there.
Stable or slowly rising prices since early this year were reported by a
majority of purchasing managers surveyed.

But more rapidly rising prices were

noted by a manufacturer of construction-related products, a maker of electric
cable and associated products and by a rubber-tire manufacturer (with reference
to textiles and paper).

Major retail establishments across the district report

no sharp run-ups in their suppliers' prices, although increases are occurring.
Some department stores report they are absorbing such price increases at the cost
of a profit margin squeeze, but more indicate they are passing their cost increases
on to customers.
Most purchasing managers Interviewed indicate little if any significant
change in the terms and conditions of the purchases they make.

The only firms

mentioning longer lead times were lumber and construction products firms and an
electric cable manufacturer.

One of these firms has increased inventories to

compensate for extended lead time, but otherwise there were no inventory changes
reported due to general economic conditions.
Department store inventories appear to be behaving about as desired by
retailers, with several respondents noting inventories were running as planned,

or budgeted, for this year.

In no instance were inventories reported to be

lower than desired.
Sales thus far in 1972 continue to be above those in the same period
of 1971 in Tenth District department stores, with durable goods sales generally
stronger than sales of nondurables.

Nearly all sales categories showing special

strength this spring were durables:

building materials, furniture, major

appliances and other home furnishings and bicycles and sporting goods.

When

areas of weakness in sales were mentioned, they generally were specific soft
goods items.

The major exception was men's apparel, an area of special sales

strength in department stores in several district cities.
After declining slightly more than 2 percent in March and April, farm
prices rose 3 percent during the month ending May 15, mostly on the strength of
higher meat-animal prices.

Slaughter steers have since registered further price

gains while hog prices have remained steady to weak.

Seasonal factors, brisk

demand and some tightening in pork supplies point to a firm price structure
through the summer, after which meat-animal prices may ease off.

Thus retail

meat prices, after showing some stability during the last two months, likely will
face strong upward pressures over the next few months.
Wheat producers in Oklahoma and southern Kansas are making good progress
harvesting the new crop.

Yields are running somewhat higher than expected,

particularly in those areas of Oklahoma that sustained drought and frost damage
earlier in the season.

In Kansas, opinions on wheat prospects are mixed, but a

growing feeling is that total production may approach the record 312 million
bushels produced last year.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

DALLAS

Recent economic indicators reflect growing strength in district
economy.

The Texas industrial production index rose in April for the fourth

consecutive month.

Construction contracts in the district reached a record

level, and the unemployment rate declined slightly.

A survey of head

office and branch directors revealed a clear majority expect economic activity
in their community and industries to increase moderately over the rest of
1972.

However, directors believe the improving economic conditions will

be accompanied by rates of price increase about equal to or somewhat faster
than recent rates.

Despite the expectation of improved economic conditions,

directors from district industries anticipate levels of employment, plant
and equipment expenditures and inventory investment at their firms to remain
about unchanged during the remainder of 1972.

Banking directors now expect

a moderate increase in market interest rates.
Almost three-fourths of the directors feel economic activity in
their area was somewhat stronger in May than during the first quarter, and
two-thirds of the directors foresee a moderate further gain in activity
during the next six months.

Directors from commercial banks were more

optimistic about economic conditions during the rest of 1972 than were
directors from business firms in the district.

The outlook for prices

by both businessmen and bankers was not optimistic.

Eighty percent of the

directors expect prices to be rising at the end of 1972 at about the
same rate or somewhat faster than in recent months.

Only 20 percent of

the directors felt prices would be rising at a somewhat slower rate by
the end of 1972.

Directors associated with nonbanking business were surveyed with
respect to the outlook for their firms and industries.

A majority antici-

pated employment, plant and equipment expenditures and inventories for their
firms will remain about the same between now and the end of the year.

None

of the respondents was anticipating higher employment by the end of the year,
and one was anticipating substantially lower employment.

Only two directors

rated summer employment opportunities for students at their firms as good
or very good, and this was offset by two who rated summer employment opportunities as bad or very bad.

The majority indicated summer employment

opportunities at their firms, were marginal.

While the majority of business

directors anticipated inventories at the end of the year would be about
the same as the present level, two directors anticipated moderately higher
inventories.

Most of the directors felt actions of the Price Commission

would have a moderate or marginal effect on slowing price increases in
their industries.

However, only three directors felt the Pay Board would

have any effect in slowing increases in wage rates in their industries
during the remainder of the year.

Two-thirds of the business directors

did not expect their company profits to be affected in 1972 by Phase II
controls, while the other one-third expected a slight negative effect on
profits.
Commercial banking directors were asked about recent loan demand
at their banks and their expectations about interest rates.

The majority

felt the demand for business loans, consumer loans and mortgage loans
was much higher at their banks in May than in the first quarter of 1972.
While demand for agricultural loans was essentially unchanged, loan demand
was particularly strong in the construction industries.

Moreover, the

overwhelming majority of bank directors stated their banks' willingness to
make loans had remained essentially unchanged from the first quarter.

Funds

at their banks were judged to be moderately available or very available
to meet loan demand at the present time.

Not a single banking director

expects a moderate increase in short-term rates during the next six months:
half feel long-term rates will also rise moderately, but the other half feel
long-term rates will remain at about present levels.

The banking directors

believe the prime lending rate will be between 5 1/2 and 6 percent by the
end of the year, with 5 3/4 percent the most frequently mentioned rate.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index rose
in April for the fourth consecutive month.

In manufacturing, all industry

groups reported monthly as well as year-to-year gains.

Petroleum refining, a

significant industry in the index, increased 14.1 percent over last April.
Oil allowables in the district's four producing states were left unchanged
for June.

Seasonally adjusted total employment in the five southwestern

states receded slightly in April, but nonfarm payroll employment remained
at the March level and the unemployment rate edged downward.
groups showed year-to-year gains in payroll employment.

All industry

Construction

activity in the five southwestern states continued its fast pace.

The

total value of contracts awarded rose to a record level in April.

Sales of

department stores in the district continued to show monthly and year-toyear gains, but automobile registrations dropped significantly in April
from March levels.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

According to reports received from our directors, economic conditions
are following the same trends established in recent months.

Output and employ-

ment are rising gradually, but not at rates rapid enough to bring about any
major reduction in unemployment.

Business investment plans are somewhat

cautious, consumer spending is steady and construction is maintaining a high
level of activity, yet there are some elements of weakness.

In the housing

sector there is some evidence of overbuilding of apartments in southern
California.

Since declines in dwelling-unit authorizations have occurred

in recent months, homebuilding in California may also be slowing, and consequently later this year there may be a weakening in the demand for real
estate loans and declines in mortgage rates.

In other states, such as Utah

and Idaho, commercial and residential construction are at record levels.
Overall, the construction situation appears to be satisfactory and the areas
of strength more than balance the few signs of weakness.
Construction activity has stimulated demand for lumber and wood
products.

The resulting greater output and employment has reinforced

recovery, particularly in the Pacific Northwest.

Expectations in the

lumber industry are that demand will remain strong for the rest of the
year.
Our directors were asked to comment on current wage and price
trends.

The consensus is both wages and prices have been growing at slower

rates since the freeze was imposed last year.

The directors do not foresee

any major increases in either prices or wages, although there are a few
complaints some wage increases allowed in the past were too liberal.

Most

firms and banks expect to stay within the guidelines without great hardship.

In a few industries competitive pressures would prevent price

increases in any event.

In general the directors prefer to keep the guide-

lines system for the time being.
Other comments on the guidelines pointed to both problems and
advantages.

A problem for some firms is caused when unionized employees

gain approval for wage increases above the general guidelines allowed for
other employees not represented by unions.

On the other hand, several

directors thought the guidelines do play a useful part in negotiations
of labor contracts by restraining wage demands.

Another favorable factor

has been the acceptance by several large unions of rollbacks from increases
obtained in their previously negotiated settlements.
Directors representing banks report some improvement in the
demand for commercial loans and further increases are expected.
sequence, somewhat higher interest rates are expected.

In con-

One director

thought the prime rate might climb 50 to 100 basis points later in the
year and short-term money rates would lead the increase.

At the same

time, other directors thought mortgage rates would rise somewhat less than
other rates, if they rise at all.
Demand deposits continue to rise.

This reflects, according to

some directors, a generally liquid corporate condition and a consumer
preference for holding large demand deposit balances, as well as a greater
level of economic activity.

Saving deposits are also somewhat higher

despite the 4 percent rate on passbook accounts paid by some banks.

