CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 19, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 15
Seventh District - Chicago page 18
Eighth District - St. Louis page 21
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 24
Tenth District - Kansas City page 27
Eleventh District - Dallas page 30
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 33

SUMMARY*
Economic activity around the Nation is maintaining its forward
momentum according to reports from the twelve Districts. And, the outlook for 1973 ranges from optimistic in several Districts to "almost
universally ebullient" in the Seventh District.

Orders, inventories,

and shipments of manufacturers were reported on the rise, and manufacturing employment is expanding.

Retail sales are strong, and the 1972

Christmas season is expected to result in sales well above the 1971
level.

Construction activity has generally remained at high levels or

expanded further, but signs of weakness in construction were noted by
several Districts.

With the economy continuing to expand, shortages of

labor and materials were noted as emerging problems. Wet weather has
curtailed the harvest of several crops and inflicted some losses, but
the overall farm income situation remains favorable.

Loan demand con-

tinues strong at banks, but trends in deposits have varied significantly
between Districts.
Manufacturing activity was reported on a noticeable upswing
according to survey results reported by the Cleveland, Richmond, and
Minneapolis banks. Steel shipments were cited as especially strong in
the Cleveland report, and steel economists predicted a record year for
steel shipments in 1973. Chicago noted that auto and truck production
was at high levels and further gains were expected in 1973. However, in
the Philadelphia District, manufacturers reported a lull in their December
orders while maintaining an optimistic view about the next six-month period.
[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.]

The increase in business activity continues to generate expectations of higher levels of capital spending. Several directors of the
Boston bank anticipated large increases in capital spending in 1973
because of the approach of production to capacity levels. Atlanta reported
that the construction of numerous small plants had been announced recently
in the Southeast, and Chicago indicated that auto makers were accelerating their capital spending plans. However, St. Louis reported complaints
from businessmen in their District that profit margins were not sufficient
in some industries to stimulate plant and equipment spending even though
utilization rates were near capacity.
Although construction activity is still characterized as strong
in most Districts, there is growing concern about possible overbuilding
of multi-family residential units. Cleveland, Boston, New York, San
Francisco, and Minneapolis all indicated that apartment and/or condominium
construction may be excessive in parts of their Districts. Although
several Districts suggested the possibility of a decline in housing activity in 1973, the extent of the possible decline was not large. Builders
in the St. Louis District were reported to be optimistic about further
gains in construction in 1973, including an increase in single-family
housing for the St. Louis metropolitan area. Atlanta reported numerous
large-scale construction projects—both residential and nonresidential—
in the Southeast, especially in Atlanta and in central Florida.
Retail sales are rising and the outlook for the months ahead
is favorable. All of the Districts commenting on retail trade indicate
that 1972 Christmas sales should be well ahead of last year. San Francisco
and Chicago noted that luxury and "big ticket" items were selling well.
And Kansas City reported that the strong auto sales included many of the

more expensive models or models with large amounts of optional equipment.
Although reporting retail sales as generally good, Minneapolis indicated
that sales of winter recreational vehicles had not been up to the earlier
expectations of one manufacturer.
Employment is expanding in most areas and declines in unemployment were mentioned by several Districts. Dallas reported a record level
of employment in the Eleventh District states in October as a result of
widespread gains.

In the Third District, Philadelphia noted that the

unemployment rate had fallen from 5.7 to k.5 percent in the last three
months. Atlanta indicated that unemployment rates in several southeastern
states were at their lowest levels in years. With the gains in employment,
some signs of labor shortages were reported by the Atlanta, St. Louis,
Richmond, and Chicago Districts. And Chicago noted that turnover rates
and absenteeism were rising at firms in the Seventh District.
The generally favorable agricultural situation has been set back
somewhat by wet weather in the Midwest, Southeast, and Southwest that
delayed the soybean, sorghum, and cotton harvests. Kansas City indicates
that the production of soybeans and sorghum will fall below the November
crop report estimate, and Atlanta cited a loss of 30 million bushels of
soybeans in Tennessee. The extent of the losses in the Chicago District
was uncertain, but it was noted that the overall farm outlook was still
the most favorable in many years. Dallas reports that the cotton yield
continues to look good, but the delay in harvesting may hurt the quality
of the crop. While the wet weather hurt production in most areas, Florida
citrus and vegetable growers were aided by the moisture.

Loan demand was reported to be generally strong by Dallas,
Kansas City, and Richmond.

Consumer instalment loans and mortgage loans

were mentioned as areas of strength by bankers in the Cleveland and
Philadelphia Districts.
among the Districts.

The trend of bank deposits varied considerably

Cleveland reported a strong rise in deposits while

Kansas City and Philadelphia indicated that deposits were largely unchanged.
Bankers in the Kansas City District are trying to attract additional
deposits by offering higher rates on CD's than currently prevail in the
New York market.

Banks are apparently not experiencing a shortage of

funds, and Cleveland reports that most banks in the Fourth District are
highly liquid.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Our business directors reported business conditions as very
strong. Improvements in machinery and aerospace orders were noted,
while orders in the consumer durables area were variously termed as
"steadily improving" to "fantastic."

Some directors felt that the Price

Commission's profit margin rules would begin to pinch profits in the
second half of 1973 j while others noted current problems.
A raw material supplier to the tire industry noted that
business was excellent, with record sales and orders in November. There
is some apprehension, however, that retailers are overstocking tires so
that the high level of manufacturers' sales now may be borrowing from
future sales. A high orders backlog was noted by a manufacturer of
superalloys who also reported that commercial aircraft engine orders
were finally getting back to respectable levels. These are replacement
engines for the 727 and 7^7 planes. A manufacturer of general aviation
aircraft also noted strong orders. Machine tool orders were also
reported as finally really turning up.
Several directors expected large increases in capital spending
in 1973. Two directors noted that in a number of lines, production had
already reached capacity levels, although one director of a large conglomerate stated that most of his lines still had slack.
A bank director whose bank does the payroll for a number of
firms in the Boston SMSA reported no increase in employment in November
from August levels, although payrolls rose l8 percent from the previous
month's level. Obviously, firms are still relying heavily on overtime
rather than new hiring.

A New Hampshire banker reports a slowing in both savings and
demand deposit growth. Apartment building remains strong, and the demand
for mortgages almost exceeds the bank's ability to make the loans.
Mortgage rates are up one-fourth percent, but other rates have been steady.
All our directors were asked to comment on the effects of the
Price Commission's profit margin guidelines.

One director said that the

recent change in the way of calculating costs (allowing the inclusion of
interest on long-term debt and adjustments for divested companies) meant
that the guidelines would not affect his firm in 1973noted that the guidelines had caused some inequities.

Another director
For example, a

large consumer paper goods producer whose costs had risen substantially
could not raise its prices because another large, diversified consumer
goods producer, which also is a major supplier of consumer paper products,
could not raise its prices because the latter company had hit its profit
margin ceiling.

Thus, the first company's profits were being squeezed.

This director noted he is aware that this kind of problem is occurring
in a number of firms. Two directors stated that they had recently raised
prices in a number of lines and, therefore, did not expect any profit
squeeze in the first half of 1973Two of our academic correspondents this month, Professors
Samuelson and Wallich, stressed that a "well-behaved, speedy" expansion
has occurred with inventory accumulation still "held in reserve" and
showing signs of coming to life.

Professor Wallich felt the wholesale

price figures confirm an increasing rate of inflation; the behavior of
the deflator, he argued, was in part a statistical quirk due to devaluation.

Preferring a more lengthy expansion to speed at this stage,

Samuelson favored moving toward restraint.

Specifically, he would like

to see a gentle rise in the Federal funds rate—130 basis points over
the next year—and would not be upset by a 4-percent rate of monetary
growth even if it brought a substantially faster rise over the next month
or two.
Professor Eckstein disagreed with this viewpoint, arguing that
an increase in banks reserves at an annual rate of at least 6 percent is
of critical importance. Unless the Federal Reserve accommodates the
expansion that much, "all bets are off" on the prevailing handsome forecasts, as well as the hope of holding the bill rate under 5-55 percent
and the Aaa utility rate under 8.0 percent during 1973. The only serious
danger of excess in the current outlook is in housing, where rationality
may be destroyed by the tax shelter feature in apartment building. The
bottlenecks which have been experienced are mainly a by-product of the
housing boom and are not surprising for this stage in an expansion.
There is still no prospect of a general excess demand for labor. Eckstein
was dubious about the projected amount of overwithholding refunds as well
as the stimulative impact of the refunds on consumer spending.
All three criticized attempts to hold interest rates down
administratively.

Eckstein felt it would lead, to demands for more rigid

interest rate controls and for capital allocation. Wallich argued it
would result in serious distortions, in particular by forcing borrowing
outside the banking system. This would be institutionally damaging and
could weaken the Fed's ability to control the situation. He felt the
political trade-off could be better achieved by an increase in the
corporate income tax rate. To Samuelson, the key is to gain the cooperation

of labor leaders who, he suspected, are more concerned with profits than
with the prime rate. He did not feel there would be serious distortions
in the short run but suggested the problem will not disappear after the
spring round of labor negotiations since any restraint on the part of
labor would probably be contingent on the continuation of profit-price
controls.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
Reports from our directors and other business leaders recently
contacted indicate that economic activity remains very strong. Respondents cited the high and improving degree of business confidence and
described the outlook for 1973 in generally favorable terms.
Most respondents characterized retail sales as very good now
that the holiday season is underway. The chairman of the board of a
Rochester department store, who earlier had been somewhat skeptical about
consumer spending, said that Christmas sales were likely to outpace last
year's showing by a wide margin, and this view seemed to be generally
shared. A director of the Buffalo branch attributed the buoyancy of consumer spending to the expectation of a Vietnam settlement, increased personal income, the removal of election •uncertainties, and the stability
accompanying wage-price controls.
The economic outlook for 1973 was described as favorable by all
respondents although the degree of optimism varied.

In the view of most

directors, production, sales, and employment are expected to show further
advances.

One director felt that the growth in output and employment

would be almost as rapid as the gains experienced this year. Several
respondents said that production is likely to outpace sales because of
the need to rebuild inventories. On the other hand, a director associated
with the metals industry commented that inventory accumulation by the
metals-using industries was being held down by the continued presence of
considerable excess capacity and a weak price outlook. A director of the
Buffalo branch, who is a senior official of a large upstate manufacturer,
suggested that unemployment will average about 5 percent for 1973 as a whole.

He added that wage increases might moderate a bit but that advances in
prices will probably be about the same as in 1972.
In this connection, almost all of the respondents were agreed
that wage-price controls would remain necessary next year. A bank chairman said the program should be maintained for at least a while longer,
although he felt that it should not become a permanent feature of the
economy. Another director said that the program, at least in some form,
should be continued for another 9 to 12 months.

Only one director, asso-

ciated with the metals industry, expressed reservations about the program.
He said that the metals industry favors eliminating the controls and
noted that fluctuations in uncontrolled raw materials prices combined
with controls on the prices of final products had resulted in distortions
and inefficiencies in overall pricing.
All of the directors detected a high and improving degree of
business confidence in the economic situation, but the current state of
confidence was described in terms that fell short of exuberance. Changes
in inventory spending were variously described as minimal to robust. One
director said that inventory controls were still very tight, while another
in the automobile parts business said that inventory spending is increasing
sharply as a result of a tightening supply situation and slower deliveries.
Several respondents noted that there was some progress in implementing
capital spending programs which earlier had been slowed down or held in
abeyance pending clarification of the overall economic outlook.
The chairman of a large New York bank said there are signs of
serious overbuilding of apartments in some parts of the country and was
concerned about the proliferation and credit status of real estate investment trusts and land development companies. He suggested that these

enterprises may represent the one significant weakness in our overall
credit structure. Another director thought that overbuilding would become
a national problem if housing starts remained at their high 1972 level.
However, he expected a reduction in housing starts of about 10 percent
during 1973 because of shortages of building materials and reduced availability of mortgage money and felt that this would prevent overbuilding
from becoming a general problem.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The outlook is still optimistic in the Third District; approximately 65 percent of the respondents to this Bank's monthly business
outlook survey report expectations of increased business activity during
the next six months.

However, some area businessmen do expect a tempo-

rary lull in production between now and Christmas.

Current employment

opportunities are unchanged, but the longer-run outlook is better.

Over

UO percent of the responding firms are planning to increase their investments in inventory and plant and equipment during the next six months.
Home construction continues at a high level.

Most banks' deposits are

flat while their consumer, small business, and mortgage loans continue
to expand.

On the darker side, inflationary expectations are on the rise.

Some lull in production for December is showing up in the responses from businessmen polled in the Third District.

Three times as

many firms report increases as decreases in their new orders and shipments for November.

But, for December, the decreases in planned pro-

duction slightly exceed the increases.

The longer-run outlook still

remains bright, however, as over half the area businessmen report plans
for increased production during the six months ahead.
Over 85 percent of the respondents to the Third District's
business outlook survey report no change in the number of persons they
employed or the length of their average employee's workweek during
November.
During the next six months, over half the firms still report
no change in their employment plans, but, one-third of them do report
plans to increase the number of persons in their work force.

The

unemployment rate in the Third District has just fallen to k.5 percent
from 5.7 percent three months ago.
Only a few more firms report increased inventories for November
than report decreases, with the majority having no change. Looking six
months into the future, however,

percent of the firms report plans to

increase their inventory investment. Similarly, over UO percent report
plans to increase investment in plants and equipment during the next six
months.
Home construction activity in the Third District is continuing
strong at the high levels of past months with very large increases
occurring in the Atlantic City area. Nonresidential construction is flat.
Public works construction in the Third District is off substantially.
However, total construction is still rising.
Area bankers report that demand deposits are flat. Time deposits are increasing slowly at some banks. Small business, consumer, and
mortgage loans continue to be in strong demand, but few large national
corporations are increasing their borrowings at this time.
Not one respondent to this month's outlook survey reports
experiencing any decrease in the prices he pays or the prices he receives.
On the six-month horizon, over half the firms expect to pay higher prices
and over one-third expect to receive higher prices.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
The pace of business activity in the District has become
noticeably stronger in recent months, and some signs of tightening in
resource utilization are apparent.
sector continues to be robust.

Improvement in the manufacturing

Gains in retail sales have been sizable,

and banks are experiencing heavy demand for consumer loans, especially
for auto financing. Most of the large banks are highly liquid, reflecting
large deposit flows, and consumer and mortgage loan demand remains strong.
Business loan demand seems to be following a normal seasonal pattern but
is short of expectations.
The recent behavior of the insured unemployment rate provides
some indication of the increasing tightness in labor markets in the
District. The insured unemployment rate has declined to about 2 percent
in recent months from a high of more than 4 percent that was reached in
late 1971.

(The prerecession low was 1 percent.) Gains in nonfarm pay-

roll employment have been sizable since midsummer, and the improvement in
manufacturing employment has been more pronounced in the District than in
the Nation.
Preliminary results of our latest survey of District manufacturers
indicate that the pace of industrial activity in this area is becoming
particularly strong.

For the month of November, our composite diffusion

index of eight key items rose to the highest level since early 1966.
(The composite diffusion index conforms closely to the national index of
leading indicators before trend adjustment.) Responding firms reported
substantial gains in new orders, shipments, and backlogs during November
but only limited strength in inventory accumulation. Extensions in

delivery times were reported by an increasing percentage of firms in the
survey. Employment and the workweek rose sharply last month. The
diffusion index for prices paid, which had remained in the 60 percent
area between February and October, jumped to 67 percent last month.
Firms responding expect a continuation of the strong upward pace in
December in all survey items except inventories.
Economists from major steel companies in the District report
that shipments will be somewhat stronger than usual in December. Some
customers are placing orders now to beat the price increases, effective
after the first of January, on selected products.

(Bethlehem Steel

announced they will not change steel sheet and strip prices until April 1.)
Current orders for steel plates and structural steel are showing a
seasonal increase, reflecting a pickup in machinery production.

Steel

orders from consumer goods producers are still very strong. One major
area of weakness in the steel industry stems from the railroad industry.
Despite the shortage of freight cars, the railroads have been unwilling
to make commitments for new freight cars because of the possibility for
Government subsidies.

(Congress had considered such legislation.) The

steel industry economists are projecting 1973 shipments of 96 million
tons or better, a gain of 5 percent from this year.

(The steel industry's

previous record year was 95 million tons in 1969-)
On the financial side, bankers throughout the District emphasized
the continuing strength in mortgage loans, with little sign of slackening
thus far. A few reports, however, suggest that bankers expect some slackening in residential construction in 1973-

One banker said the condominium

market in Cleveland seems to be saturated; another noted that apartment

overbuilding is a problem in Columbus; and a third banker mentioned
overbuilding of HUD units in Pittsburgh,

(in addition, he spoke of

natural gas shortages limiting homebuilding in that area late next year.)
The observed strength of retail sales is also reflected in
heavy demand for consumer credit, according to banks contacted.

As yet,

none of the banks are experiencing any abnormal delinquency problems,
however.

According to respondents of some of the largest banks in the

District, business loans have been growing about in line with normal
seasonal patterns, but somewhat below expectations.

Loans for capital

spending and inventory accumulation have fallen short of expected paths,
in part reflecting the huge cash flow of many businesses.

Major banks in

Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Cincinnati reported they are in highly liquid
or comfortably liquid positions and that they plan to participate heavily
in the forthcoming Treasury financings.
Demand, time, and savings deposit flows have been very strong
in major centers.

One exception, however, is western Ohio, where deposit

flows were described as moderate.

Farmers in that area have sustained

extensive financial losses because extremely bad weather ruined a
significant share of corn and soybean crops.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Fifth District business conditions continue to improve, according
to the results of our most recent survey of businessmen and bankers.

Man-

ufacturing shipments, backlogs, and new orders continue to reflect the
strength evident in recent months.

The retail sales picture is bright

with better than seasonal increases being reported.

Further increases in

employment and hours worked per week were reported, with labor shortages
restricting the output of some firms.
prices received were reported.

Widespread increases in wages and

Businessmen and bankers in the District

remain optimistic about the prospects for business during the next several
months.
District manufacturers report that shipments, new orders, and
backlogs continued the strong upward momentum recorded last month.

In- <

creases in these indicators of business activity were reported by approximately 4-0 percent of a.n manufacturing respondents.

While the increases

appeared to be fairly general, strength was especially evident among
textile and apparel producers.

Boxcar shortages continue to plague some

District manufacturers, and furniture production is reportedly being
restricted by a shortage of both skilled and unskilled labor.

More than

one-half of the manufacturing respondents indicated a decline in inventory
levels, but inventories relative to desired levels were reported to be
about right by most respondents.

Over the last several months, a growing

number of manufacturing firms have reported that current plant and equipment
capacity is at lower than desired levels.
Employment expansion continues and more firms report a shortage
of both skilled and unskilled labor. Both manufacturers and trade and

service respondents show increases in employment and hours worked per
week.

On balance, bankers report increases in employment in their areas.

Both manufacturers and retailers report that wages and prices received
have increased during the last month.
The retail sales picture in the District remains bright.

More

than 50 percent of the bankers surveyed indicated that general retail
and automobile sales have increased since the last reporting period.
Contacts with regular survey respondents, directors and other businessmen, in the District suggest that department store sales are strong.
In general, loan demand increased at responding banks in the
past month.

Increases were reported for business, mortgage, and consumer

loans, with more than 50 percent of the banking respondents showing an
increase in consumer loans.

Banks also report continued strength in the

construction sector, with nonresidential activity being at a somewhat
higher level than residential activity.
District farmers' total cash receipts from farm marketings during
the first nine months of 1972 were 10 percent above those in the same
period last year, with gains of
in receipts from livestock.

percent in crop receipts and 7 percent

Record high prices averaging 10 percent

above a year earlier highlighted the 1972 flue-cured tobacco marketing
season.

Volume of marketings was 5 percent smaller, however, so value

of sales Increased only 5 percent.
Optimism concerning the economic outlook remains high among
District businessmen and bankers.

More than two-thirds of the banking

respondents expect an improvement in business activity in their areas in
the immediate future.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Economic activity continues to surge, according to reports of
businessmen and bankers.

The outlook is optimistic, but the exuberance

of the expansion is causing some bottlenecks and is exerting inflationary
pressures.

A number of large residential and commercial construction

projects have been announced.
accelerated.

The pace of new plant announcements has

Labor shortages are reported in some areas.

Residential construction continues strong. A $100 million
planned development has been announced for an area south of Atlanta.
This development will include industrial sites, apartments, single-family
homes, and retail areas. A 2l6-unit condominium development also will be
built south of Atlanta. A $70 million planned community is to be built
on the Gulf in north Florida.

Home building continues at a hectic pace

in central Florida. A i4-,000-unit development has been announced for an
area near Orlando.

This is the sixth major planned unit development

under way in central Florida. A shortage of apartments is reported in
the Orlando area.

In the Birmingham area, however, there is evidence

that home building will soon begin to taper off, but 1973 is still expected to be a good year for housing there.
The outlook for commercial construction is also strong. A $100
million, 2,03*+ room hotel has been announced for the downtown Atlanta
area.

This is the fifth major hotel announced for downtown Atlanta in

the past year. A $1+7 million complex has been announced for an area in
north Atlanta.
apartments.

It will include a 29-story office tower, a motel, and

In the Tampa area, a major retail firm is planning a dis-

tribution center and an insurance company will build an office complex.
A 21-story hotel has been announced for the Orlando area. A new l8-store

shopping center is to be built in the Huntsville area.
A group of ten oil companies plans to build a $500 million
superport near New Orleans.

Western electric will build a material

management center near Montgomery, Alabama.

There has been a rash of

announcements of relatively small plants in the last month.

Most of

these plants are in the textile and apparel industry, but they also include plants for processing wood, fabricating metals, and producing auto
emission control equipment.
Retail sales are reported strong throughout the Southeast, and
merchants are unanimously optimistic about the Christmas season.
A shortage of labor is reported in much of Florida.

In parts

of that state, the unemployment rate is less than 2 percent. A bank in
the Jacksonville area reports difficulty in finding qualified help. An
apparel plant to employ 500 will be built near Pensacola, provided a
labor survey indicates that adequate labor can be found.

The citrus in-

dustry is worried about finding sufficient harvesting labor if the projected huge crop materializes.

In areas of Tennessee, Louisiana, and

Mississippi, unemployment rates are at the lowest levels in many years.
Delta Airlines is adding about U00 employees in the Miami area to handle
increased traffic.

However, 600 employees will be out of work in south

Georgia because a poultry processing plant has gone into bankruptcy.
Two hundred and ninety employees are being laid off at an unprofitabable
apparel plant south of Atlanta. A laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, is
laying off 200 employees.
Land speculation in central Florida is reported to be at its
highest level since 1929*

In the Ocala area, borrowers with little or

no equity are applying for loans to speculate in real estate.

The

hectic pace of construction in central Florida is producing delays,
shortages, and cost increases.
in tight supply.

For example, sewer pipe is reported

Nevertheless, a pipe producer in central Florida has

been unable to go ahead with a plant expansion because of the inability
to obtain sufficient natural gas commitments. Attempts to line up alternative sources of energy have proved unsuccessful.

Prices of homes in

the Orlando area are reportedly inflating rapidly. A director from that
area says that homes that a few years ago sold for $30,000 are now selling for between $50,000 and $60,000.
Wet weather has continued to hamper soybean harvesting.
estimated that 30 million bushels have been lost in Tennessee.

It is

The wet

weather has been a boom to the citrus industry and to vegetable growers
and cattlemen in central Florida.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
The economic outlook in the Seventh District, as indicated byviews of lenders, manufacturers, retailers, and farmers, is almost
universally ebullient.
to be evaporating.

The last residuals of recession psychology appear

Expectations of further substantial gains in activity

in 1973 are very widely held. Margins of unused resources of facilities
and manpower are shrinking, and many industries are operating at effective capacity.
goods lines.

Inventories are uncomfortably low in both hard and soft

Residential construction is the only major sector that

appears likely to show a decline in 1973, and overall, such a decline
may be small in total.

The extent of crop losses because of adverse

weather remains uncertain.
Fourth quarter retail sales are heading for a record by a wide
margin.

Purchases of luxury goods and big ticket items are especially

strong, and customers are using credit freely.

In some cases, low

inventories are impeding sales.
Hiring is increasing at all levels including managers, professionals, and manual workers—both skilled and unskilled.

Staffing second

and third shifts and filling dirty or hard jobs are more difficult.
Among the trained workers in short supply are accountants, experienced
engineers, welders, pipefitters, and machinists.

Employers report higher

labor turnover rates and increased absenteeism.
With ample evidence of a substantial improvement in the job
market, the problems of central cities continue to increase with high
levels of joblessness (not necessarily "unemployment" as defined) and
growing welfare rolls.

Producers of both cars and trucks expect gains in output in
1973 from record levels in 1972. Long waiting lists exist for various
models of cars and trucks. Plans for capital expenditures are being
accelerated by motor vehicle companies.
Other industries operating at virtual capacity are foundries,
.forge shops, bearings and other parts and components, lumber, gypsum
board, color television, furniture, recreational vehicles, petroleum
refining, paper, some basic chemicals, machine tools, and important types
of construction machinery.

Some plants have been taken out of production

in recent years, and some operations have been scaled down for one or
more of the following reasons:

cost cutting, consolidation of operations,

pollution standards, OSHA rulings, and foreign competition.
Shortages, or incipient shortages, are reducing the desire of
some companies to compete actively for new business or take on new
accounts.

Some are shifting production to the "top of the line."
Prospects for a substantial rise in total capital expenditures

in 1973, including manufacturing buildings, appear excellent. Consulting
firms that specialize in product development and long-range planning
report sharp increases in new business in the past month or two, after a
long dry spell.
Shortages of natural gas and fuel oil are developing in the face
of a very cold winter thus far. Local experts view the petroleum outlook
very seriously and are predicting rapidly growing dependence on foreign
sources with a large adverse impact on the balance of payments and the
domestic price level. Reports of the enormous LNG deal with Russia are
viewed skeptically.

Because of pressure to keep production moving, seme producers
complain that quality control problems have increased.

At the same time,

warranty coverage is being extended, and consumer-oriented legislation
is highlighting the need to avoid defects.
Accountants are disturbed by the steps some business firms are
taking to avoid reporting profit margins in excess of the guidelines.
These practices are said to resemble those that developed when excess
profits taxes were in effect.
The extent of losses of corn and soybeans caused by adverse
weather is still uncertain.
snows have impeded harvests.
small overall.

Muddy ground is now frozen hard, but recent
Nevertheless, actual losses may yet be quite

Even if a substantial shortfall occurs, the total effect

on farm income may not be adverse because of higher prices.

About three-

fourths of the Russian-bound grain is not yet shipped from U.S. ports.
Attempts will be made to move the grain before export subsidies expire
next May.

In general, the atmosphere in farm areas is the most pros-

perous in many years.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Businessmen in the Eighth Federal Reserve District remain
optimistic, foreseeing a vigorous business expansion in the year ahead.
Representative firms report sales increased in recent weeks for all
lines of output.

Manufacturing continues to expand.

Construction ac-

tivity is currently at a high level and is expected to rise still further next year.

Employment continues to rise moderately, and a tighter

labor situation is reported over an increasing portion of the District.
Profits have increased, but some businessmen complain that profit margins are insufficient to stimulate new investment despite near capacity
utilization levels.

Loan demand continues up, and further increases in

interest rates are anticipated.

Excessive rain in late October and

November has led to a deterioration of agricultural conditions.
Rising retail sales are reported throughout the District with
the exception of the inner-city stores in St. Louis.

Major department

stores report sizable sales gains in November on a seasonally adjusted
basis and expect the higher levels to be maintained through the Christmas shopping season.

Communities not represented by the major firms re-

port that retail sales are booming.

Inner-city stores in St. Louis,

however, report little change in sales volume, and chains with downtown
stores report that their sales growth is in suburban stores.
Manufacturing activity continues to expand on a broad front.
Major chemical companies expanded output and deliveries in the fourth
quarter.
are up.

Orders for plastics, fibers, carpets, chemicals, and appliances
Sales of electrical equipment for new plants are rising. An

increasing number of manufacturing firms report overtime work, and

delivery dates are lagging further for products in short supply. Brick
plants in northeast Mississippi are not promising delivery on current
orders of brick until May.
Employment continues to rise, further tightening the labor
markets in most District communities. Most manufacturing firms report
an increase in production workers despite major efforts to hold employment in check. Labor shortages are reported in many of the smaller and
some larger communities in the District, and the unemployment rate is
generally low.

St. Louis, Evansville, and Fort Smith are exceptions and

have shown little improvement in recent months.
Business profits have generally increased with the sharp sales
gains, but complaints are made that profits are still too low to provide
incentive for major investment expansion in some industries. Specific
examples include the box board industry and the lumber and wood industries.
Construction remains at a high level, and businessmen in the
industry are quite optimistic about the outlook for construction in 1973Reports from Arkansas and Tennessee show a continued high level of housing starts during the autumn months with prospects for no slowdown next
year. The St. Louis Home Builders Association estimates a 10-percent
increase in construction of single-family units next year. One exception
to this optimistic outlook is the Louisville area where an excessive number of apartments have apparently been built, and the apartment rental
market is reported to be soft. Also, commercial construction in the St.
Louis area remains at a relatively low level.
Demand for credit continues to expand, and interest rates continue to creep up for most types of loans. Home mortgage rates, however,

remain relatively stable, and one of the larger savings and loan
associations in St. Louis reported a slight decline in its rates in
November.
Agricultural prospects in the Eighth District deteriorated
sharply in November.

Excessive rainfall delayed the harvesting of all

crops including corn, soybeans, and cotton.

In some areas half of the

crops remain in the field, and the damage to soybeans and cotton is quite
severe.

Crop prices are relatively high, but weather damage may cause

severe losses to farmers in some communities.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
The general outlook for manufacturing and retailing in the
District appears bright, but some slowdown is anticipated in construction
activity.

Sizable manufacturing sales gains are foreseen in the fourth

quarter and the first half of 1973; District manufacturers, however, have
yet to encounter capacity constraints and are generally experiencing no
difficulty procuring needed workers and supplies.
are enjoying a good Christmas season.

District retailers

Construction is not very encour-

aging in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area, but both residential
and nonresidential building appears to be flourishing in the remainder of
the District.
Results of our fourth quarter industrial expectations survey
predict continued expansion in District manufacturing activity.

District

manufacturers reported sales up 12.7 percent from a year earlier in the
third quarter and estimated comparable gains in the fourth.

They also

anticipate 11.0-percent increases in both the first and second quarters
of 1973.
This optimistic outlook can be attributed to the District's
durable goods industries. After increasing 15.0 percent in the third
quarter, sales of durable goods are expected to be up 17.9 percent from
a year ago in the fourth quarter and then advance lU.O and 11.2 percent
in the first and second quarters,respectively.

These sales gains will

occur primarily in the electric and nonelectric machinery, primary and
fabricated metals, and lumber and wood products industries.
Nondurable goods sales, meanwhile, advanced 11.3 percent in
the third quarter and are anticipated to increase 7-^ percent in the next
two quarters, followed by a 10.8-percent gain in the second quarter of 1973-

Although strong sales gains have "been reported "by District
manufacturers, bank directors revealed that District manufacturers are
generally not bumping up against capacity limits or having difficulty
hiring workers or obtaining needed supplies. According to one Wisconsin
director, for example, a large manufacturer in his community is expanding facilities but anticipates no difficulty adding 100 people to the
work force.

Several directors did report, however, that skilled labor

is becoming harder to employ. And, one Twin Cities manufacturer stated
that delivery times are lengthening on some items.
Also according to bank directors' reports, District retailers
generally are having a very good Christmas season. One major Minneapolis/
St. Paul area retailer reported that Christmas spending so far has been
very good; he expects his Christmas business to be up 10 percent or more
from a year ago.

One director indicated that not only are his area's

retailers optimistic about Christmas business but several also anticipate
business to be quite good in January.

A major Minnesota producer of

winter recreational vehicles, however, reports that sales have not been
up to earlier expectations.
Construction activity will probably slacken in the Minneapolis/
St. Paul metropolitan area during the first six months of 1973 but continue
quite strong in the rest of the District. According to a Minneapolis/
St. Paul area banker, housing sales in the Twin Cities metropolitan area
have virtually stopped, and large developers are curtailing activities
until the market improves.
In addition, apartment vacancy rates are quite high in this
area, and little apartment construction is anticipated there in 1973.
other parts of the District, however, several directors reported quite

In

favorable outlooks for residential construction. This optimism was
dampened only slightly by a South Dakota director who indicated that new
home prices in his area have recently risen 10 percent.
The prospects for nonresidential construction in the Minneapolis/
St. Paul metropolitan area are not very bright either; the area already
has a surplus of office and warehouse space. But directors outside this
Twin Cities region reported a number of nonresidential construction projects. Efforts to meet pollution control standards, for example, are
spurring construction activity in northeastern Minnesota. And, although
some consider it too early to assess revenue sharing's impact, several
directors believe those funds will stimulate public construction in their
areas.
A director associated with the construction industry foresees
no pickup in District highway construction during the first six months
of 1973. Looking ahead in another direction, however, this director feels
that the Administration's allotted funds for sewage treatment plant construction will significantly bolster this type of construction, if spent,
although only h5 percent of the funds authorized are to be used in fiscal
years 1973 and 197*+. Local governments so far have received very little
funding fran the Environmental Protection Agency.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
Weather conditions

in the Tenth District are adversely af-

fecting the agricultural harvest, and according to major retailers contacted in a number of large metropolitan areas in the District, slowing
down Christmas shopping traffic as well.

Despite this slowdown, however,

sales are described as good, particularly for hard goods, and, retailers
are quite optimistic for sales prospects over the Christmas season as a
whole.

This strength in the retail area extends into new car sales, and

the more expensive models or options are reported to be in strong demand.
The strength of retail activity is reflected in Tenth District banks,
where several bankers noted improved consumer attitudes toward instalment buying.

In fact, demand in all major loan categories is still re-

ported as strong, and, in the face of either flat or declining demand
deposit figures in November among larger Tenth District banks, a more
aggressive seeking for funds has emerged.

Negotiable CD growth appears

to have picked up, with several District banks paying from one-eighth to
one-half a percentage point more than the going New York rates.
Adverse weather conditions over a wide area of mid-America
have greatly slowed the harvest of soybeans and feed grains this fall.
At last report, considerable acreage remains standing as heavy rains and
snow have turned the fields into a quagmire of mud.

Temperatures within

the District have recently dropped below the freezing point, and many
farmers are now able to move through the fields with less difficulty.
However, field losses appear to be heavy—particularly for soybeans and
grain sorghum.

Consequently, final production levels likely will fall

considerably short of the estimates released in the November crop report

coupled with reports about additional grain sales abroad. These developments have led to sharp price advances in the grain markets.

In the

period ahead, prices likely will remain sensitive to new rumors—pro and
con—until the harvest is completed.
Bad weather also is blamed for slowing down Christmas shoppers,
but major department stores throughout the District still expect strong
finishes to a year of good business.

Since Thanksgiving, snow and extreme

cold have cut traffic in many stores, although a few report that their
sales paces are above last year at this time. Managers report little
difficulty in finding extra clerks for the holiday season, nor do they
complain generally of problems with suppliers. For the year to date,
sales of hard goods have been especially good, notably major appliances
and furniture.

Without exception, store managers expect strong sales

into 1973} although one thinks the first quarter of 1972 will be hard to
beat.
New car delivery times, for all of the big three, have doubled
in major District cities.

Sales are as good as or substantially better

than last year. Buyers seem more flush. They have more to put down, and
if they don't buy the top of the line, they buy a lot of options. Most
dealers expect next year's sales to top this year's.
After recording moderate to sizable gains in demand deposits
during September and October, the larger banks in the Tenth District reported flat or declining demand deposit figures for November. Interbank
deposits were the weakest category, showing a significant decline—
perhaps, as a result of the change in Regulation J—but all categories
apparently were sluggish.

In contrast, negotiable CD growth seems to

have picked up. Several District banks are paying from one-eighth to
one-half percentage point more than the going New York rates, with an

individual bank's CD inflow reportedly depending on how large a premium
it is willing to pay relative to those of local competitors. A few
banks expected to add slightly to their CD's after the issuance of
revenue sharing checks.
Demand is reported still strong in all major loan categories.
Local commercial customers and consumer instalment borrowers (auto paper
and credit cards, in particular) were the most frequently mentioned
sources of loan demand.

Several bankers said that they had been con-

ducting campaigns aimed at increasing instalment loans and noted that
consumer attitudes toward instalment buying had improved since earlier
this year.

Most agreed that the strength of retail activity was prob-

ably the major factor.

One respondent reported that term loans have been

accounting for much of the strength in the bank's lending activity.
Fears of disintermediation were rare among District bankers
contacted.

However, all respondents felt that somewhat higher lending

rates would be justified either now or in the near future.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS
The latest indicators of economic activity in the Eleventh
Federal Reserve District were mixed. While total employment, department
store sales, and new automobile registrations were all higher, construction activity slowed and the Texas industrial production index edged
downward. The rate of growth of total bank credit also slowed slightly
in November. A recent survey of business economists in District states,
however, revealed them to be quite optimistic about economic conditions
in 1973Our respondents generally expected economic activity in 1973 to
be higher for both the Nation and their states. They were particularly
optimistic about the prospects for consumer spending and plant and equipment investment. They also felt that residential construction, both
nationally and within their states, would continue strong.
In line with this general optimism, the majority of our respondents expected employment gains in 1973. Most expected growth in employment to be greater in the District than in the Nation. Employment
advances were anticipated to be particularly strong in the service industries. Manufacturing and state-local governments were also mentioned
as sectors where employment growth was expected to be more rapid.
Despite the outlook for rising employment, less than half saw the
unemployment rate declining significantly.
The majority of our respondents foresaw continued improvement
in corporate profits in 1973. There was also general agreement that wageprice controls would be continued, at least in some form, after April.
In fact, over half the respondents felt that controls would be continued
into 1974.

Despite the fact that wage and price controls were viewed as
continuing, there was almost unanimous agreement that consumer prices
would be rising at a higher rate in 1973 than in 1972. Those responding
were also in agreement that the deficit for fiscal 1973 would be greater
than the Administration's estimate of $25 billion.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index eased
slightly in October after rising sharply in September.

Small increases

in the indexes for manufacturing and mining were more than offset by a
sharp decline in the index for utilities. Expanding durable goods production enabled manufacturing to post a small gain despite a slowdown in
the nondurable sector, notably, petroleum refining. Within the durable
goods sector, significant increases were recorded by the transportation
equipment and fabricated metal products industries. Mining also edged
higher as increased production of natural gas and natural gas liquids
outweighed a decrease in crude oil production. The sharp decline in the
index for utilities was due primarily to the decreased output of the
electric utility sector, probably reflecting a larger than seasonal
decline in air conditioning usage.
Harvest of a good cotton crop has been delayed by cold, wet
weather across the District in recent weeks. Some loss in quality of
cotton is expected but yield prospects continue mostly good. Otherwise,
agricultural conditions remain optimistic for a year of record production
and incomes.
Regulatory agencies in District states continue to allow maximum
oil production. State regulators continue to closely monitor producing
conditions, however, and several fields in Texas have had production
restricted for conservation reasons. The Texas Railroad Commission has

also held hearings to determine state priorities for natural gas in case
rationing should become necessary.
Construction activity in the District states, as measured by
the value of contracts awarded, declined in October for the second consecutive month. All major types of construction experienced award
decreases, but the largest decline occurred in nonbuilding construction.
Both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors recorded
gains in employment in October and helped to push total employment in the
District states to a record level.
at

Still, the unemployment rate remained

percent—the same as in September. All major employment categories

reported gains except mining.

Increases were the largest in the construc-

tion, durable goods, trade, and service industries.
Sales of department stores in the District continued to advance
in November.

Among major metropolitan areas in Texas, sales were

strongest in Dallas and Houston. But San Antonio and El Paso also
experienced modest gains.

New automobile registrations in the four

major metropolitan areas of Texas increased in October.
The rate of growth of total loans at weekly reporting banks in
the District accelerated sharply in November.

Reductions in bank security

holdings, however, held the rate of increase in total bank credit to a
somewhat slower rate than in October.

Time and savings deposits also

rose sharply in November due primarily to a large increase in large
negotiable CD's outstanding.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
In the opinion of our directors, economic activity in the
Twelfth District remains strong.

Consumer retail spending is expected

to reach record levels during December. With the possible exception
of construction, most other sectors are maintaining a steady rate of
expansion.
Retail sales are reported to be running at 8 to 12 percent
above last year's level throughout the District.

In some cases, gains

of 15 percent axe mentioned. The demand for consumer goods is broadly
based, but it is strongest in such lines as sporting goods, bicycles,
and home furnishings.

Some of our respondents also think that there is

a tendency to buy higher-priced lines and to upgrade in terms of quality.
A similar situation exists for automobiles.
good throughout the District.

Sales are generally

In a few cases, demand for imported cars

is described as weak, but in other areas foreign car dealers are experiencing good sales. The principal problem for domestic car dealers is
obtaining deliveries from the manufacturers, and, as a result, low
inventories are preventing sales from reaching even higher levels.
Dealers expect this strong demand to be maintained into next year.
Construction activity is continuing to hold up, but there are
more signs of weakness. Multiple unit construction is falling off because of overbuilding in many areas, but single-family construction and
commercial projects are keeping overall demand steady.

For example,

in Seattle, construction has started on the first large downtown department store in thirty years.

Current rates of construction may not be

maintained, however, and one large California bank has forecast a
25-percent decrease in the state's building activity in 1973-

In California, recent court decisions requiring environmental
impact studies on large projects and the passage of a constitutional
amendment in November imposing controls on use of coastal areas are
causing some uncertainty.

A few banks are reported to be restricting

construction loan funding on affected projects until the legal picture
is clarified.

But at the moment, even in California, construction

overall is still showing considerable strength.
The timber industry is showing no signs of any slackening in
activity.

Lumber prices are higher, and mills in Oregon and Washington

are working full time. According to one director, the demand for timber
will be maintained in the coming year because of the need to build up
inventories which presently are very low.
Good crops and prices are expected in most agricultural areas
of the District.

Fall planting has been completed, and the crop prospects

for wheat are excellent.

Beef prices are holding steady, although the

existing levels may not cover the costs for some feedlot operations.
As a result of record crops and prices in 1972, farmers are making
heavy purchases of new equipment and adding to strong retail demand.
District banks report that demand for loans to support inventories is quite strong, but as yet there are no signs of a general jump
in consumer installment credit demand.

Some banks report record increases

but others have experienced no major increase.

Several bankers suggest

current spending is being financed by heavier reliance upon past savings
than upon credit.

On the other hand, many purchases are being made through

bank credit cards and the effects on credit demand will not be fully
apparent until January when customers decide upon the proportion of their
balances to repay.

