CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

July 18, 1972

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 14
Seventh District - Chicago page 16
Eighth District - St. Louis page 20
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 22
Tenth District - Kansas City page 25
Eleventh District - Dallas page 28
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 31

SUMMARY*

Reports from the twelve Districts indicate that economic
activity continues to strengthen and the outlook of most businessmen
and bankers is optimistic.

Consumer spending, especially for tourism,

recreational vehicles, and autos} appears to be a major source of strength.
Capital spending and plans for future outlays still appear to be gathering momentum, and orders and shipments of heavy capital goods producers
are reported to be on the upswing.

While construction activity is at a

high level, signs of some slowdown in construction are becoming apparent
in several Districts.

Inventories are still being held closely in

check with most manufacturing and trade firms reporting no change or
only a modest increase in inventories.
tions are good to excellent.
set back crop conditions.

In general, agricultural condi-

However, heavy rains in some areas have

Loan demand is on the increase, but banks

apparently have adequate funds to meet the expected near-term loan
demand.

Interest rates on most loans are reported to be little changed

or slightly higher in the last month.
Optimism on the part of businessmen and bankers is evident
in most of the District reports this month.

Atlanta notes that descrip-

tions of the economy generally run from good to booming.

Richmond

reports that their directors are optimistic, and Kansas City notes that
businessmen seem "unguardedly optimistic" about the economic outlook.
And the consensus at Chicago's annual Business Outlook Conference was
that the current economic expansion would last at least through the
first half of 1973.

New York directors were characterized as mixed on

the economic outlook but were more optimistic than in the previous month.

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas ]

Strength in the demand for consumer goods was noted in most
regions.

Minneapolis reports yearly sales gains of 5 to 10 percent in

the Twin Cities area in the second quarter and a strong demand for meat
at the retail level.

Retail firms in New York were more optimistic

this month about consumer confidence and outlays; consumer spending on
nondurables appeared to be good in the Boston District.

Brisk auto

sales were cited by Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco while Chicago
reported an optimistic forecast for autos in both 1972 and 1973 at
their Business Outlook Conference.

Cleveland, however, reported that

car sales in that District had risen less than in the nation.

And St.

Louis noted a decline in retail sales at major department stores in
June, following a strong uptrend earlier in the year.

Although the

recent heavy rains depressed retail sales in the Philadelphia District,
retail executives there are optimistic about sales this fall.
Improved consumer demand is also indicated by increased
spending for recreational activities.

The Boston, Chicago, and San

Francisco Districts all report booming sales of recreational type
vehicles.

Atlanta reports heavy attendance at Florida's Disney World,

with the benefits of this visitor attraction apparently spilling over
to other parts of the Southeast.

Businesses catering to vacationers

in the Kansas City District were doing very well although tourists were
reported to be avoiding luxury items.
Plans for increased capital spending were noted by St. Louis
and Chicago as a source of further economic strength.

And announcements

of new plants and plant expansions continue to be numerous in the Atlanta
District.

However, the percentage of firms reporting increased capital

spending plans in Philadelphia's regular survey has stabilized at about
1+5 percent in the past two months.

The upturn in capital spending this year is beginning to have
a noticeable impact on the sales of some heavy goods manufacturers.
Chicago cited increased sales of heavy construction equipment and overthe-road trailers while Boston reported an increase in orders for oil
field equipment and aircraft parts.

Steel companies in the Cleveland

District are experiencing a strong and steady order pace with the prospect of some pickup in orders from the auto industry for August deliveries.
Inventory levels are generally unchanged or only increasing
moderately.

Manufacturing respondents to the monthly Richmond survey

reported little change in their inventories and judged their inventory
levels to be about right.

San Francisco reported no sign of major

inventory building at the retail level in that District, and Richmond
noticed no change in trade inventories.

New York and Boston, however,

saw some evidence of moderate inventory building at the retail level.
The Minneapolis Bank directors cited high finance costs, better management, and better-than-expected sales as possible reasons why inventoryto-sales ratios were remaining relatively low.
Crop conditions are generally good to excellent in the St.
Louis, Chicago, Kansas City, and San Francisco Districts.

However,

cool weather and excessive rainfall have hurt crops in the Richmond
District, and New York and Philadelphia report some crop damage due to
flood conditions.

Rain also slowed the Kansas wheat harvest, but the

1972 crop may still rank among the largest on record.

Prices for both

crops and livestock are reported to be favorable for increasing farm
income this year, especially in view of generally high levels of production.

While employment gains were reported in some Districts, the
uptrend is apparently still rather slow.

Some manufacturers in the

Richmond and Philadelphia Districts expect to increase their employment
and lengthen workweeks.

Nonfarm payroll employment is expanding moder-

ately in the Cleveland District, and the insured unemployment rate has
turned down.

The unemployment rate for the five southwestern states

in the Dallas District is at a low

percent, but employment analysts

there are not optimistic about gains in employment during the rest of
1972.
The demand for all types of loans is apparently strong in
nearly every District and advancing at a steady pace.

Cleveland did

note, however, that business loan demand over the June tax date was
less than a year ago in their District.

The supply of loanable funds

at banks is adequate, but in the Chicago District the volume of outstanding CD's has been rising.

While interest rates are apparently

little changed, St. Louis and San Francisco noted a slight rise in
rates.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Business conditions are generally described by our directors
as good, and in the recreational area as exuberant.

All indicators show

a very respectable rate of expansion, with the demand for funds from banks
continuing to be fairly good.
Capital goods orders to machine tool manufacturers were reported
as recently strengthening.

Orders will have to rise substantially more,

however, before profits are good, according to one director.

Orders for

machinery connected with oil fields were described as very good due to
the 100 percent oil allowances currently in effect in Texas.

New orders

to industries connected with aerospace were reported as improving.

This

was indicated both by a manufacturer of superalloys and by an aircraft
builder, who pointed to a pickup in commercial orders, especially for
parts.

A moderate level of activity in new contracts for Government and

commercial building was also reported.
Manufacturers reported that they were still keeping inventories
down but noted the beginning of replenishment of stocks at the retail
level, and in some cases in manufacturing.

One manufacturer of a raw

material input to the tire industry stated that he felt that tire inventories, now at a three-month supply, were too high and thought that
cutbacks in inventory levels would be very possible.
Consumer spending on nondurables appears to be good, but not
bubbling.

Consumer spending on recreational equipment—boats, campers,

and recreational vehicles—were reported by one large manufacturer to
be booming.

This manufacturer noted that there had been some price

increases recently in recreational vehicles, but he also added that he

thought price controls had been very effective in slowing price increases.
A Bank director located on Martha's Vineyard reported that the area is
having a very busy season, with a tremendous boom in housing on the island.
Only one director mentioned that recent flooding had affected
his business.

A manufacturer of small commercial and pleasure aircraft

said that his Pennsylvania plant would be out of operation for 90 days
because of flooding.
One director settled a new wage agreement with the United'Steel
Workers Union.

The contract, which called for a 7-8 percent increase in

the first year and lesser gains in the following two years, was substantially below other recent settlements.

The company successfully resisted

inclusion of cost-of-living adjustments.

In other labor developments,

construction workers in Manchester, New Hampshire are on strike, raising
new fears about inflation in the business community.

(They are asking

for wage increases above the Pay Board guidelines.)
Professors Eckstein and Samuelson agreed that the economy is
moving along the lines of the consensus forecasts and that the performance
has been good but not excessive.

Eckstein felt it would be a mistake to

react strongly to the June wholesale price and unemployment figures.
said the Fed's job is not "to solve problems it can't solve."

He

Samuelson

warned that the floating of the pound, while not important for the U.S.
trade position, can psychologically have important implications for
capital movements.

If speculators turn to the dollar, the Smithsonian

Agreements may be in jeopardy.

This is not the occasion for tremendous

tightening but instead some "pious movement" toward "operation twist."
He urged contingency planning on how the domestic expansion could be
preserved if the agreements do break down.

Eckstein recommends a continuation of smooth, modest growth in
RPD, permitting interest rates to "fall where they may."
distressed by a 5s percent prime rate.

He would not be

Neither Samuelson nor Eckstein

would favor a higher discount rate at this time.

Samuelson noted the

stock market is "queasy" and would react better if an increase were to
be made later.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Opinions on the current economic outlook expressed recently
by the Banks' directors and other business leaders were mixed but on
the whole gave a somewhat more optimistic overall picture than last
month.

Despite the adverse effects of bad weather conditions in June,

including widespread damage in the District area as the result of
Hurricane Agnes, a number of respondents felt that consumer confidence
was strengthening further and that somewhat more liberal inventories
buying policies were being pursued.

There were also reports of

improvements in the unemployment situation in some areas.

In general,

little concern was expressed over the current international monetary
disturbances, nor over the uncertainties related to the developing
discussions of Federal income tax reforms.
Concerning the current business outlook, most of the head
office directors did not change their recent assessment.

In general,

they foresaw continued expansion of economic activity over the coming
months, and some—if not altogether satisfactory—success of Phase II
in curbing the wage-price spiral.

One director, an upstate banker,

pointed to the adverse effect of the hurricane on the tourist trade
in his area and to the extensive crop damage which he feared would
have a definite effect upon food supplies later in the year.

A

Rochester retailer felt that the recent flooding would adversely affect retail sales for one or two months, but he expected a resumption
of normal activity thereafter.

The responding Buffalo Branch direc-

tors, on the other hand, all indicated a more sanguine view, in
different degrees, of the business outlook in their areas.

They

based their revised outlook, variously, on increased retail sales,

heavy construction activity, loan demand, and—in the view of one
director—"inflationary fiscal policies" that at least in the short
run were exerting upward pressures on the economy.

Repairs of the

flood damages were also mentioned as a stimulating factor.
A distinctly more optimistic outlook was also evident in
the tone of the reponses of the senior officials of retail firms we
usually contact in New York City.

To be sure, in their view the

bad weather conditions in June had temporarily acted to slow down the
gradual rate of growth in consumer outlays that has been underway over
the past year.

In general, however, they felt that consumer confidence

would continue to strengthen, and they looked toward a good year.
While still closely controlling inventories, they were now gradually
increasing them.

(One official, who a few months ago reported that

his firm would rather risk losing some sales because of "stockouts"
rather than increase inventories, now stated that current policy was
to be reasonably certain an adequate supply of merchandise was on hand
in order not to lose potential business.)
A few respondents showed some concern over the latest upheaval in the foreign exchange markets, but the majority did not feel
that the current international monetary situation was having any serious impact on current domestic economic developments.

Some of the

retailers, however, did mention encountering some difficulties as a
result of the uncertainties regarding the exact dollar cost of their
imported lines of merchandise.
With respect to the possible decision-making impact of the
developing discussion over Federal tax reforms, most respondents
either expressed no opinion or felt it was too early to affect
business decisions.

Some directors discounted this discussion as

"election rhetoric."

One director felt that instead of inhibiting

business capital outlays, the reverse might be the case as businesses
sought to take advantage of favorable tax treatment now while it was
still available.

Some Buffalo Branch directors, however, reported

continued concern on the part of businessmen over the heavy and
increasing burden of New York state and local taxes.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

In general the overall business climate continues to improve
in the Third District.

New orders and shipments continue on an uptrend.

Firms are expecting to hire more workers, and many expect to increase
their plant and equipment outlays.
demand for loans.

Area banks are experiencing rising

However, inflation appears to be a yet present concern

of manufacturers, and retail sales in the Third District suffered recently
because of adverse weather conditions.
Results of the Bank's monthly business outlook survey indicate
that industrial activity is still rising, although at a slower rate than
last month.

Half the companies contacted expect no change in new orders

and shipments in the next month while slightly more than a quarter expect
an increase.

The six-month picture is a bit better with 60 percent of

the firms expecting increases in new orders and shipments by Christmas.
This continued expansion in business activity is having an
increasingly favorable effect on employment.

During the next month, 13

percent of the firms expect to hire more workers and 5 percent plan to
increase their average workweek.

Within the next six months, over 25

percent expect to increase both hiring and the length of their average
workweek, while less than 3 percent plan cutbacks in those employment
areas.
Capital spending plans appear to have stabilized in recent
months.

About 1*5 percent of the firms contacted in each of the past two

months reported plans to increase their capital spending in the next half
year.

This is up only slightly from Ul percent which indicated they

planned to increase their capital expenditures in April.

The outlook for inflation is less optimistic.

Although roughly-

half of the businessmen contacted expect no change in prices from now
until Christmas, some indicate expectations of rising prices over that
time period.

And virtually no firms reporting in the survey expect de-

creases in either prices received or prices paid during the next six
months.
Loan demand at commercial banks in the Third District is advancing steadily.

Consumer, real estate, and business loans are all

increasing and are expected to continue on their upward trend.

One large

bank reported that it had all the business loans it wanted as a result of
an aggressive recruiting program.
June was a disaster for retail sales in the Third District due
to 22 days of rain.

Summer goods just did not sell, and, surprisingly,

home furnishings were also down slightly.

However, retail executives are

optimistic about sales for this fall.
The flood which hit the Third District late in June caused great
personal suffering and financial loss to residents of the Harrisburg and
Wilkes Barre areas.

But, viewed in the perspective of the entire District,

the effects were less pronounced.

Philadelphia and New Jersey suffered

only minor transportation delays, property losses along their river fronts,
and depressed retail sales due to the rainy weather.

Crop destruction

may result in slightly higher commodity prices this fall.
Before Third District activity was temporarily depressed by
the flood, strong demand for recreational services was reported by one
of this Bank's directors.
shore were very busy.

Motels and restaurants along the New Jersey

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Output and employment in the District are continuing to expand,
and unemployment is beginning to decline.

New car sales have not risen

as much as in the nation, but activity in residential construction has
recently accelerated.

Steel firms are experiencing a strong and steady

order pace; and large banks reported relatively slack loan demand over
the June tax date.
Nonfarm payroll employment in the District is continuing to
expand at a moderate pace from the trough of last fall, but it is still
below the previous peak reached in late 1969.

The overall employment

performance in the District is influenced by the large proportion of
manufacturing employment, which is 11 percent below the previous peak.
The District's insured unemployment rate began to decline in June,
following a sustained plateau from January through May.
In other areas of activity, new car sales thus far this year
in the District have risen only about one-third as much as in the nation.
In the Greater Cleveland Area, new car sales for the first half of 1972
were down U percent from the year-earlier level.

Residential construc-

tion contracts in the District were exceptionally strong in April and
May, following weakness earlier in the year; and nonresidential construction contracts are beginning to strengthen.
Preliminary results of our latest survey of District manufacturers indicate that the recent strengthening in business activity
continued during June.

Respondents indicated strong gains in new orders,

shipments, and backlogs.

Moderate inventory accumulation, which began in

May, was sustained last month.
rise in June.

Employment and hours also continued to

The percent of firms paying higher prices rose slightly in

June to a level just below that prevailing prior to Phase I.

Survey-

participants expect no slackening in the pace of business or in the
rate of inflation during July.
One director, whose firm produces industrial equipment,
mentioned that his company has not increased employment even though new
orders in the second quarter were up 20 percent from the first quarter
(following a "disastrous" second half of 1971).

During the slack period,

production workers were diverted to maintenance and repair jobs.

This

director also indicated he felt "apprehensive" about orders for the
third quarter and noted that there was no indication of inventory building
by his firm's customers.
Economists from three major steel companies in the District
report a strong and steady order pace, but they expect the usual seasonal dip in July.

Appliance industry demand for steel is still strong

although the auto industry's steel orders have been lower than expected,
given the production rate.

One economist thought the auto companies were

importing more steel than usual.

The economists reported that they ex-

pect a step-up in demand from the auto industry for August delivery,
however.

Steel demand for oil pipes remains weak, and heavy construction

demand is well below the seasonal norm.

Customers' stocks of steel are

still very low, but as yet there is no rush to rebuild inventories.
On the financial side, the increase in business loan demand at
large banks was less than a year ago over the June tax date.

Bank contacts

suggested that improved corporate liquidity and competition from commercial paper contributed to this pattern.

The bank respondents expect

loan demand to strengthen as inventory building begins and as the economic expansion proceeds.

One country bank director reported that his bank

was experiencing strong loan demand and that the bank was buying Federal
funds for the first time in years.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Because of the holiday, the number of responses to our regular
survey was considerably less than normal, and the results should be read
with this in mind.

Although the uptrend in District business activity

reported in recent surveys continues, manufacturers report some decline
in shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders.

Further increases in

retail sales—especially automobile sales—are reported.

Employment and

hours worked per week in the manufacturing sector are reported as increasing.

District bankers also report increases in employment.

Con-

struction activity continues to increase, and bankers report increases
in the demand for all types of loans.

In general, businessmen and bankers

are optimistic about the outlook for economic activity in the District.
Responses from manufacturers indicate some decline in shipments,
volume of new orders, and backlogs of orders.

Declines were reported by

producers in such important District industries as chemicals and synthetic
fibers.

Manufacturers report little change in inventories, and inventory

levels relative to desired levels are rated as about right by most manufacturing respondents.

On balance, current plant and equipment capacity

is reported to be inadequate.
Both banking and retail respondents report continued increases
in sales.

Reports from bankers indicate that automobile sales are espe-

cially strong.

Twelve of 16 bankers reported increases in automobile

sales in their areas, and the remainder reported no change.

Trade and

service respondents indicate no change in inventories.
In general, manufacturing respondents report increases in both
employment and hours worked per week while trade and service respondents

report little change.

Both trade and service and manufacturing respon-

dents reported increases in wages paid.

Prices received are reported

as down in manufacturing and unchanged in trade and services.
Bankers report that activity in residential and nonresidential
construction continues strong.

Approximately one-half of the banking

respondents reported increases in construction activity.

Bankers report

that the demand for all types of loans remains strong, with the demand
for consumer and mortgage loans being especially strong.
Cool weather and excessive rainfall are reported to have caused
substantial damage to agricultural crops in the District.

Many farms and

other businesses also suffered severe damage from the recent flood.
Bankers and businessmen in the District continue to be optimistic
about the outlook for District business activity.

More than 80 percent

of the banking respondents report that they expect business activity in
their area to increase in the next three months.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Descriptions of economic activity and the economic outlook
generally run from good to booming.

Out of the many reports received,

only one, from an Alabama director, reported sluggish economic conditions.
Economic strength appears to be widely based in construction, manufacturing, and commercial activity.

Only one director reported apprehension

over the inflationary consequences of election-year spending and the
increased Federal deficit.
Tourist activity is up strongly.

Disney World has upped esti-

mated 1972 attendance from 10 to 12 million and is expanding its labor
force by another 1,700 to handle the flood of visitors.

Disney World

is partly responsible for increases in motel occupancy and increased
attendance at tourist attractions throughout the Southeast.

Hotel

occupancy on Miami Beach was 84 percent in the first five months of 1972,
compared with 80 percent in the comparable period last year.

Attendance

at other Florida tourist attractions is up from 20 to ^0 percent.

An

auto-train service, which transports people and their cars from Washington,
D.C., to a town near Orlando, is proving popular, and the company providing
this service has recently purchased 33 domed passenger cars from a West
Coast railroad.
A special survey of the Georgia tourist industry indicates that
business is up at least 10 percent this year.

Visits to Georgia Welcome

Centers were up 29 percent in the first five months of 1972.

The historic

Savannah Foundation reports tours up 50 percent above a year ago.

Atlanta's

Stone Mountain Park has experienced a 12- to 15-percent increase in attendance.

However, attendance is up only marginally at Six Flags Over

Georgia, an amusement park offering services in competition with Disney
World.

Rock City, a tourist attraction in Chattanooga, Tennessee,

reports that attendance in the first two weeks of June was 25 percent
above a year ago.
Both residential and commercial construction are strong.

All

areas of Florida report a construction boom, and there are numerous
reports of new motel, residential, and industrial construction.

Construc-

tion is slated to begin in August on a 31-story, 500-room hotel in
Atlanta.

The size of this hotel is a major change from earlier plans

that had called for a hotel about half that size.

The city of New Orleans

has swapped land with a development firm that plans to construct a $150
million riverfront hotel complex.
Announcements of new plants and plant expansions continue to be
numerous.

Plans were recently announced in Mobile, Alabama, for a

"mini-port" to handle general and containerized cargo trade with the
Caribbean and South America.

A major agribusiness firm is building a

plant in Florida to process mushrooms.

Insulating wallboard will be

manufactured at a new plant to be built on the Georgia coast.

A machinery

manufacturing firm is building a plant in Meridian, Mississippi, and a
business machines company is locating a distribution center in a planned
community southwest of Atlanta.

Plant expansions have been announced for

a brewery in Jacksonville, an electric range manufacturing plant in
Tennessee, and a water meter plant in Alabama.

However, an on-again

off-again $100 million expansion of a Lake Charles petrochemical plant
has been indefinitely shelved, reportedly because of a shortage of
natural gas and a negative legislative attitude by the State of Louisiana.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Business optimism is growing stronger in the Seventh District,
and the view that the economy is in a vigorous expansion seems widespread.
It appears to he taken for granted that this expansion will continue at
least through the first half of 1973.

Firms continue to report they need

higher prices because of upward pressures on costs, but they are constrained by the Price Commission and competition.

Companies are cautious

about adding to payrolls, and most are planning to hold employment stable
or to raise it only modestly.

The pattern is similar in inventories,

with most firms intending to hold inventory increases to moderate amounts.
Restraint is less pronounced in the capital spending area, with most companies planning to boost capital spending this year.

The demand for

commercial and industrial loans is moderately strong.
Increased optimism, evident from conversations with individual
businessmen, was the general theme of the speakers at a recent annual
Business Outlook Conference which drew attendance from all over the
District.

The primary difference of opinion among the speakers discuss-

ing the overall outlook was with regard to the second half of 1973.

For

that period, forecasts ranged from incipient recession to continued, even
accelerating, growth.

Virtually all commentators expected higher interest

rates by the end of 1972, particularly short-term rates, and that rates
would hold at these higher levels or climb further in 1973.
In specific areas in which detailed forecasts were made, the
outlook presented for plant and equipment expenditures was the most optimistic.

It was predicted that a capital spending boom was now in its

initial stages and would show no significant signs of tapering off until

early 197^-

Forecasters predicted auto sales for 1972 to be 10.6 million

units, and that 1973 would see a slightly higher level, with domestic
manufacturers holding on to the gains in market share which have been
evident in recent months.

The forecast for housing was for a general

slowing down, but with starts still exceeding 2 million units this year
and only slightly below that level in 1973was forecast for the mobile home market.
sales—other than autos—also was strong.

Continued but slower growth

The outlook presented for retail
However, the expectation was

that this strength would be concentrated in durable goods.

Nondurables

would show little gain except for that resulting from price increases.
The participation of District producers of capital goods in the
improvement seems to have broadened in the last month.

Increases in sales

are beginning to be noted in heavy construction equipment and over-theroad trailers—trends not evident earlier in the year.

The one capital

goods area reporting no sign of improvement was railroad cars.

A local

manufacturer reported that if it were not for a small order received in
January, they would have closed down everything except repair operations.
This firm has not received enough requests for quotations to give them,
any hope of significant improvement before the last quarter of the year,
if then.
Among the various consumer durable products, sales of recreational vehicles at both the retail and manufacturing levels have been
very strong.

One area manufacturer reported that his company's sales

were nearly double last year's, and that shipping facilities to meet
promised deliveries were becoming a bottleneck.
Strikes by various crafts have slowed construction in the
Chicago area.

The elevator constructors's strike was concluded July 9

after 100 days, and short strikes by the masons and carpenters have caused
delays on several major projects, with one major building now about three
months behind schedule.
Livestock prices continue at exceptionally high levels in response to strong consumer demand.

Although meat supplies will be increas-

ing seasonally over the next several months, recent estimates of livestock
numbers have caused many observers to expect only modest price declines
during the remainder of the year.
Crop conditions generally are reported "excellent" across the
Midwest, suggesting a near record fall harvest.
generally are near their highs for the year.

Nevertheless, crop prices

The pending grain agreement

with Russia (announced over the weekend) has provided considerable support
to the market.

Settlement of the dock strike in Japan would provide

further support.
Conversations with bankers in this District suggest that the
demand for commercial and industrial loans is moderately strong, but there
is no indication that an upsurge is developing.

Except in Detroit, where

demand has been sluggish all spring and remains so, the banks that were
reporting the strongest demand earlier have experienced some weakening
recently, while the others seem to be doing better.

Borrowing over the

June tax date generally was less than had been expected, and lack of
inventory building is widely mentioned as a source of weakness.

Competi-

tion for loans appears to be very strong among bankers, and we hear many
comments that national customers are staying in the commercial paper
market.

We have heard a number of comments from banks about the aggresive

operations of the largest Chicago banks via "cap" term loans.

While

loanable funds are still generally adequate, the major Chicago banks added

substantially to their outstanding CD* s last month, and one bank indicates
that it may have to seek CD money much more aggressively if inventory
investment is stepped up as expected.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The uptrend in business activity continues in the Eighth Federal
Reserve District "but at a moderated pace, according to a sample of leading
businessmen.

Factory orders continue to expand, and a few firms have

hired some additional help.

An increasing number of firms report that

output is approaching capacity levels and that plans are being made for
plant expansion.

Construction has apparently leveled off.

Retail sales

at major department stores have declined in recent weeks in contrast to
a fairly strong uptrend from January through May.
Most manufacturing firms in the District report rising sales and
production.

Chemical firms, for example, report large increases in fiber

and plastic sales in the second quarter of this year and some gain in
industrial chemicals for the first time in more than a year.

Defense

plants and textile and electrical equipment manufacturers reported further
gains in output and sales in the second quarter.
Output relative to capacity has been inching up for several
quarters, and managements at most District firms are beginning to plan
for increased investment.

One of the largest manufacturing firms head-

quartered in the District reported that new investment had declined for
two years, but that 1972 would be the low point as a major increase was
planned for next year.

A number of smaller firms also reported plans

for investment in new plants and plant enlargement.
Although those surveyed reported employment as stable, their
estimates of employee numbers reveal that employment has actually increased.

Nevertheless, some areas of the District report a relatively

high rate of unemployment.

Included among such areas are Southern Indiana,

with an unemployment rate ranging from 6 to 12 percent, and the inner-city
portion of the St. Louis metropolitan area.
Construction remains high throughout most of the District, but
it has apparently leveled off in recent weeks.

Residential construction

remains at a high rate throughout the District.

Commercial construction

is at a high rate in most of the District, except for the St. Louis area
where such construction is at a lower rate, and an excess of office supply
space is reported.
Major department stores in St. Louis report a sizable decline in
sales during June.

Part of the decline is attributed to cooler and drier

than normal weather conditions.

These conditions resulted in reduced

sales of air conditioners, lawn mowers, and other garden equipment.

Some

pickup in sales is expected as soon as weather conditions return to
normal.
Crop conditions in the Eighth District are generally good.
There are a few areas where crops are suffering from drought, but such
constitute only a small percent of the farming community.

Corn production

is expected to be down from the very large crop of last year, but soybean
production should be well above year ago levels.

The outlook for farm

income is very good, with higher prices and a higher level of production
in prospect.
Savings inflows into District savings and loan associations have
continued strong in recent weeks, but time and savings deposit growth at
commercial banks has tapered off, following very rapid gains earlier in
the year.

Loan demand at District member banks continues sharply up.

Short-term interest rates have begun to rise, and long-term rates are
expected to rise in the near future.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Most bank directors and major Minneapolis/St. Paul retailers
reported favorable gains in second quarter retail sales and are optimistic about consumer outlays in the third quarter.

In the Black Hills,

tourist traffic has returned to normal after being disrupted by flooding
in early June.

Bank directors suggested a variety of reasons for recent

low business inventories.

Meanwhile, labor disputes have disrupted eco-

nomic activity in Minnesota.

In the opinion of the bank's directors, a

tax increase will be necessary next year.
A telephone survey of large Twin Cities area retailers indicated that most second quarter sales met earlier expectations.

Four out

of five respondents reported sales up between 5 and 10 percent from a
year ago, and they expect comparable third quarter advances.

Two

retailers did report, however, that cool weather had restricted sales
of seasonal merchandise.

The sales of one discount store chain failed

to achieve expectations, and its year-to-year second quarter sales gain
was slight.

This retailer attributed his poor second quarter to contin-

ued softness in the economy and increasing competition.
A telephone survey of Twin Cities area meat and grocery firms
revealed strong consumer demand, especially for meat.

Food retailers also

indicated that future meat prices will depend on overall supplies, as
consumer demand is assured, and most felt that higher prices would not
significantly reduce sales.

This survey, taken just before the announce-

ment of the President's limits on food handler margins, revealed that,
in this area, margins were already being curtailed—especially at the
retail level.

Outside the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area, Bank
directors reported that most retailers had realized their earlier optimistic expectations and had a good second quarter.

Directors from both

South Dakota and Montana attributed favorable second quarter sales to
high livestock prices and look for further retail sales gains in the
third quarter.

A North Dakota director reported his area's second

quarter retail sales matched expectations and stated that prospects of
a good grain crop in his area denoted a strong third quarter for consumer
spending.

Although retail sales in his area were high, however, one

director indicated that second quarter sales did not meet expectations,
but he is optimistic about retail spending in the third quarter.

A

director from the upper peninsula of Michigan said that cool weather had
curbed second quarter spending in his area.
Tourism, a major source of retail sales in South Dakota, dropped off sharply after the flooding in the Black Hills on June 9 and 10.
According to a state tourism official, visits to Mount Rushmore dropped
from a normal daily average of 18,000 to 3,000 a day during the week
after the flood.
to normal.

However, by the end of June, tourist traffic was back

Although this June tourist loss is not expected to be regained,

improved activity is anticipated for the remainder of the summer.
Bank directors had mixed reasons why their areas' inventories
have been low in relation to sales.

Small businesses in one area were

said to be keeping inventories down because of the high cost of money.
Other directors mentioned improved management techniques and recent
innovations by farm machinery dealers as attempts to hold down inventories.

A South Dakota director attributed his area's low inventories to

the fact that business had been much better than expected.

According to

another, inventories had been low and would remain so because businessmen
no longer speculate on them.

Due to cool weather in May and June, however,

two directors indicated that inventories of summer seasonal merchandise
had risen in their areas.
Labor disputes in late June and early July have disrupted
District economic activity.

In Minnesota, contractors imposed a lockout

against workers, and work on major construction projects throughout most
of the state has therefore stopped.

In addition, the Northwest Airlines

pilots are on strike, thus idling about 4,500 Minnesota workers.
wage issues are the source of both of these disputes.

Non-

An additional

1,1+00 workers are on strike against the Hanna Mining Company because of
mine safety conditions at three Minnesota locations.
Given the prospects of a large budget deficit in fiscal 1973?
bank directors believe that a tax increase would be necessary next year.
One director stated that Phase II would not be sufficient to contain
next year's inflationary pressures.

Two directors did indicate, however,

that a tax boost would probably not be enacted next year, though another
considered it politically feasible.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Record high cattle prices, a near record wheat harvest with
prospects for improved world prices, and generally favorable crop and
livestock prospects are helping this District's important agricultural
sector contribute to regional economic growth.

Summer tourists appear

likely to continue their habit of spending more than last year, just as
winter sports enthusiasts did this past season.

Loan demand continues

strong and is expected to remain so, but bankers foresee only a moderate
increase in interest rates during the coming months.

Businessmen seem

unguardedly optimistic about the economy, pointing to construction
activity as a key indicator.
Recent rains, while adding valuable moisture for pastures and
growing crops, have had a disruptive effect on the wheat harvest.

Though

virtually complete in Oklahoma—where yields averaged somewhat better
than expected—the harvest in Kansas has slowed with considerable wheat
still in the fields.

Because of the delays, total production in the

nation's leading wheat state may fall a little short of earlier projections.

Nevertheless, barring further delays, the 1972 crop will rank

among the largest on record.

Generally, the prospects for the other cash

crops in the District are excellent.

The recently announced sale of

grain to Russia undoubtedly will provide firmer world grain prices than
otherwise would have prevailed.
Meat prices at both the farm and retail level again have been
attracting national attention.

Since early May, slaughter steer prices

have risen from about $3^.50 per hundredweight to more than $U0, despite
a sharp increase in beef production in May.

Hog prices spurted more than

20 percent to reach the $30 mark, and with farrowings remaining low the
longer-run price outlook continues strong.

These price developments

contributed heavily to the recent increase in the wholesale price index
and likely will create further upward pressures on the consumer price
index.

In the months ahead, cattle marketings are expected to remain

moderately above year-earlier levels, but prices likely will remain
strong due to unprecedented demand not only in the United States but
throughout the world.

The lifting of import quotas on meats is not

expected to result in significantly larger meat supplies, and import
supplies could even decline providing meat prices in world markets do
not weaken substantially.

Both hog and slaughter cattle prices, other

than for seasonal changes, can be expected to remain strong during the
remainder of the year.
Attendance at popular Tenth District recreation areas this
summer promises to continue the upward trend of recent years.

Although

cool weather and a new daily camping fee may have discouraged some visits
to Yellowstone National Park, most popular tourist areas report larger
crowds than last summer.

Contacts in Colorado, Wyoming, and New Mexico

say that businesses catering to vacationers are doing very well and
total spending is up considerably.

In spite of the increased popularity

of camping, the motels and lodges are doing well.
increased sharply.

Gasoline sales have

Some respondents feel that vacationers are still

avoiding expenditures on luxury items such as expensive entertainment
and souvenirs.

On balance, however, businessmen expect this to be "an

excellent tourist season."
Tenth District bankers report continued strong loan demand in
recent weeks.

Real estate and consumer instalment lending are still

areas of steady growth, and higher feeder-animal prices are boosting
agricultural loan volume.

Business loans seem to have firmed after some

weakness in May; national accounts are still not a significant factor,
but strength in construction activity and consumer spending is maintaining
local credit demand.

Most respondents foresee little slackening in loan

demand during the second half of the year, although real estate and
construction loans may soften in some locales where overbuilding—particularly in the multi-family sector—is in prospect.
Several bankers report rather sluggish demand deposit growth
in June, but most report further moderate inflows of time and savings
deposits.

Deposit inflows—especially in the time and savings category—

have been strong enough in recent months to provide adequate funds for
lending needs.

Most banks contacted have not aggressively pursued large

CD money of a very short-term nature.

While one banker is worrying about

disintermediation, most respondents feel that with the funds they have
now and reasonable inflows in coming months, there will be no great
difficulty meeting loan demand at interest rates not too much higher
than current levels.
Directors say their conversations with other businessmen indicate almost no remaining clouds of economic pessimism.

Among the commonly

cited indicators of vigor, major construction projects are emphasized.
The most recently announced of these include a $30 million fertilizer
plant in Oklahoma and

a major expansion (cost not disclosed) of the GM

Assembly Plant near Kansas City.

The president of a large corporation

says that the Price Commission setup is becoming a nightmare—that he has
five people working full time on prices and is considering hiring another
to work in Washington keeping track of things.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The economy of the Southwest is somewhat stronger than a
year ago in the opinion of economic analysts with the Southwest
Regional Office of the U.S. Department of Labor, the District states'
Labor Commissions, and Directors of Business Research at five southwestern universities.
improved economy.

District economic indicators also suggest an

Industrial production, construction contracting,

and consumer buying are all moving upward from relatively advanced
levels.

However, only a slim minority of the analysts contacted feel

that labor market conditions will improve by year-end.
Most of the respondents view the present level of employment
as about the same as it was at the end of last year.

But a few ana-

lysts reporting on Oklahoma and Louisiana feel that the situation has
worsened in those states.

Most respondents indicate that the unemploy-

ment problem in their region is concentrated in the larger cities with
the smaller cities being relatively unaffected.

However, counties with

defense industries, Indian reservations, or large numbers of migratory
farm workers are also feeling the pinch.

For the District as a whole,

defense and oil and gas industries are cited as ones in which unemployment problems are most severe.

However, a number of other indus-

tries are also reported as contributing to the unemployment problem in
the various District states, including construction, retail trade, and
transportation equipment and electrical machinery manufacturing.
Moreover, the respondents' outlook for employment in the
Southwest is not particularly optimistic.

Only 11 percent of the

respondents feel that the situation will improve by year-end, with

67 percent anticipating no change, and 22 percent feeling that there
will be some further increase in unemployment by year-end 1972.
Respondents feel that the closing of established plants is the greatest
source of •unemployment while stating that expected growth in employment
would come primarily from the opening of new plants in their respective
areas.
Those that expect some improvement in the unemployment situation feel that it will be selective—likely to occur principally in
construction, trade, state and local government, and apparel, rubber
and plastics manufacturing.

Those anticipating no change or a worsen-

ing in unemployment emphasize the anticipated growth in the labor force.
They point out that the labor force has increased substantially since
a year ago, reflecting in part returning veterans, entering youth, and
and migration.
District economic indicators continue to reflect growing
strength.

The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index

edged further upward in May to a new record level.

All durable manu-

facturing industries posted gains from April to May to provide most
of the strength in the index.

Oil allowables in all four producing

states of the Eleventh District were left unchanged again for July at
maximum levels.
Department store sales posted significant month-to-month
and year-to-year gains in June.

Registrations of new passenger cars

in Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio rose significantly in
May over the previous month.

Cumulative figures for the first five

months show auto registrations in these four metropolitan areas more
than 12 percent above the 1971 level.

Total employment in the five

southwestern states rose only slightly in May, however, and was accompanied by an expansion of the labor force.

All industry groups

showed year-to-year increases in employment with the largest advance
registered in construction.

The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate

for the five southwestern states held steady at

percent for the

third month in a row.
Texas regained its standing as the nation's leading cattle
feeding state on June 1.

The index of prices received by Texas farmers

during the month ending June 15 rose to a level 18 percent higher than
a year ago.

Higher prices for cattle, hogs, lambs, wool, mohair, and

cotton accounted for the increase.

Total credit at weekly reporting

commercial banks in the Eleventh District rose significantly in June
with sizable increases in both loans and investments accommodated by
a substantial expansion in time and savings deposits.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - S M FRANCISCO

According to our directors, "business activity is continuing
to expand at a satisfactory rate.

Consumer spending is climbing with

higher than usual increases in June reported for retail sales in many
areas of the Twelfth District.
very well.

Automobile sales in particular are doing

Construction activity continues to be an important factor

in the expansion, although signs of weakness are appearing that indicate
a slowing later in the year.
in most District states.

Agricultural prospects are generally good

Financial conditions are little changed with

only minor movements in interest rates reported.
Retail sales are higher in June throughout most of the District,
and in a few cases increases of 12 percent and more occurred over the
previous month.

For example, in Oregon, appliance sales are 12 to 15

percent above last year's level, and Southern California department
store sales rose an impressive 12 percent in June to stand 8 percent
above the previous year.

There are exceptions reported for individual

dealers in Oregon and Seattle, but the consensus seems to be that aggressive retailing efforts are producing higher sales.
Automobile sales are running as high as 20 percent for some
dealers, and most dealers expect current trends to continue.

American-

made cars and trucks seem to be doing best, for there is some indication
that foreign car dealers are actually experiencing declining sales.

One

factor in this latter trend is the advantage of domestic car dealers in
having better resale facilities for trade-in cars.

Sales of recreation-

type vehicles and trailers are reported 20 to 30 percent higher by some
local manufacturers.

Despite the satisfactory level of sales and a feeling of optimism by retailers about future sales prospects, there is no sign of any
major rebuilding of inventory.

Retailers, both small and large, are

still operating with inventories at a minimum level.

They are still

trying to keep inventories down, and, if anything, many are attempting
to find ways to reduce them further.

Optimism about sales is combined

with caution about inventories.
Other factors are helping retailers operate with lower inventories.

A major reason, according to several directors, is that suppliers

are quick to fill orders, thereby reducing the need for inventories.

Ap-

pliance dealers in the Los Angeles area are described as relying on the
close proximity to suppliers to cut down their inventories.

Finally,

retailers foresee no shortages developing that would require a change
in their current policy.
A good year is expected for District agriculture.

Cattle

prices are high and in turn are keeping up the demand for feed grains.
Crop conditions in the Pacific Northwest, Idaho, and Northern Utah are
good, with the notable exception of fruit crops in parts of Washington
and Idaho which had suffered from late frosts.

Southern Utah has been

experiencing a drought, and recent storms have brought only a slight
improvement; in this area livestock and crops have suffered.
Construction activity remains good, especially for singlefamily homes.

Suppliers for the construction industry remain optimistic,

and employment in the wood products industry is high in Oregon and
Washington.

These industries related to construction provide the only

example where inventories are being built up.

Yet there is evidence

in the recent leveling off of California dwelling unit authorizations
that declines in total activity can be expected later in the year.

Overbuilding of multi-units in Oregon also may present problems.
These elements of weakness are not general, and no immediate decline
appears to be likely.
Most bankers see little change in financial conditions.
Demand for loans is strong in the Seattle area and rising in Oregon
after a period of stability.

Trends in deposits in most states are

mixed, with both increases and decreases reported.
in interest rates have taken place.

Only minor increases

