CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

April 11, 1973

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 16
Seventh District - Chicago page 19
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 25
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 32
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*

This month's district Red Book reports indicate that the current
vigorous expansion is increasingly straining capacity.

Raw material short-

ages, lengthening delivery times and difficulties in finding skilled labor
are emerging.

Inflation is again the major economic concern with recent

price increases rekindling inflationary fears.
All districts reported continuing gains in economic activity,
with most Banks describing business conditions in terms like "robust"
(Atlanta), "expanding at a rapid pace" (Cleveland and Dallas), and "strong"
(Minneapolis).
The labor picture, however, varies sharply among districts.
Dallas reports the unemployment rate dropping to 3.6 percent, while the
First District is still experiencing unemployment rates above 6 percent.
Philadelphia reports modest gains in employment, while Chicago, Cleveland,
Dallas, Atlanta, and St. Louis have tight labor markets with significant
skilled labor shortages.
Growing raw material shortages and lengthening delivery times
were also mentioned by most Banks.
products and nonferrous

Shortages of petroleum products, wood

metals were cited by New York, while gasoline

rationing was noted in parts of the Atlanta and Dallas districts. The Dallas
Bank reports that oil companies believe that rationing is a "definite possibility" and Chicago reports that fuel shortages in the Midwest are the "worst
in the world" with oil firms refusing new customers and placing ceilings on

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.]

sales.

The concern expressed by a New York director that "widespread raw

material shortages —

rather than plant capacity —

seemed likely to lead

to production bottlenecks over the coming months" appeared evident in many
Bank reports (Boston, Kansas City, Cleveland, St. Louis, Chicago, and Atlanta).
High levels of construction activity were described by several
Banks.

Residential construction is described as strong (Atlanta, Chicago, St,

Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco) despite rapid price increases (Kansas City
and Atlanta) and recent increases in mortgage rates (Kansas City, Cleveland,
and Chicago).

Commercial construction is reported as heavy by Atlanta,

but "spotty" by St. Louis,and Dallas notes a recent decline in contract
awards.
Capital spending by business is a major source of strength. New
plant construction and expansions are reported (Atlanta, St. Louis). Boston
reports that the machine tool industry is experiencing rapidly rising orders
and backlogs double those of a year ago.

Chicago and Cleveland report that

steel mills are operating at full capacity and that "near-boom conditions"
exist in manufacturing in their districts.

Chicago reports that one large

steel producer has started rationing, because orders exceed capacity.
Most Banks reported mounting concern about inflationary pressures
and many district reports noted dissatisfactions with Phase 3 (Boston,
New York, San Francisco).

The feeling that Phase 3 has triggered "a new

wave of inflationary expectations" (New York) and that inflation was again
the major economic problem was widespread.

Philadelphia reports that two-

thirds of surveyed firms are currently encountering rising costs for raw
materials and over half are charging higher prices for their goods.

Boston

notes that skyrocketing price increases for materials appear to be coming
from medium-sized firms which are not being carefully scrutinized under
Phase 3 rules.
District reports on agriculture do not indicate any immediate
alleviation in the supply-demand imbalance.

Heavy rains are reported as

delaying plantings (Kansas City and St. Louis) and hampering the movement
of livestock to market (Kansas City), while transport delays have held up
grain shipments (Chicago).

Dallas, however, reports favorable conditions

in the Southwest and the shifting of acreage into crops in short supply.
Cleveland, Chicago, and Kansas City report that farmers responded to the
meat boycott by withholding supplies, thus keeping up prices, but that
this may lead to heavy marketings in the coming weeks.
Bank loan demand was described as very high (San Francisco, Chicago,
Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, Boston).

Reactions to the proposed dual

prime rate were mixed, but those commenting saw administrative complications.
San Francisco notes concern that the two-tier system will be "the first
step toward a complex system of selective credit controls," while Kansas
City and Minneapolis report concern that the community's size or whether
it is a national or regional borrower be taken into account in defining
large and small businesses.

FIRST DISTRICT -- BOSTON

New orders are reported as very strong in virtually all business
lines, with capital goods orders especially heavy.
and little inventory building is occurring.
large price increases by suppliers
ing inflationary psychology.

Supplies are very tight

Concern was expressed about

and the lost feeling that we are lick-

Bank directors were worried about heavy loan

demand, both in terms of the lowness of the prime rate and banks' inability
to attract demand deposits.
The machine tool industry

is reported as doing very well.

One

large manufacturer of capital goods reports that new orders are very, very
good,and that backlogs are double those of a year ago.

Despite the fact

that the unemployment rate in Connecticut is close to 6 percent and over
6 1/2 percent in Massachusetts, capital goods manufacturers in both states
are experiencing problems in getting skilled workers or even apprentices.
Excellent foreign and commercial orders for helicopters have raised prospects for one aerospace manufacturer, although the defense industry in New
England is still suffering from cutbacks in defense spending.
to one director associated with a large conglomerate, everyone
difficulties in getting supplies.

According
is having

From a situation not too long ago when

delivery was almost overnight, there are now delivery waiting times for
everything from packaging materials to machinery.
Sky-rocketing price rises by suppliers were noted.

These price

increases appear to be concentrated among moderate-sized firms (those employing hundreds rather than thousands of employees) which are not being carefully scrutinized for price increases under Phase 3.

Our directors feel

that the lack of enforcement power for following guidelines is the problem.
One director also reports a return to the psychology of hoarding, shortages, and creating artificial shortages.

As an example of the latter, he

notes that the paper industry is no longer making certain lower grades of
paper, forcing buyers to pay for higher grades of paper than they need.
Bank directors report heavy loan demand.

One large Boston bank

director expressed the opinion that some business firms are drawing down
loan commitments

at the bargain prime rate to buy CD's in New York.

An-

other bank director noted that he has had to use the discount window quite
heavily to meet the legitimate loan needs of his business customers because
he cannot attract demand deposits with current interest rate ceilings.
Savings deposit

inflows in March, however, were reported as strong, revers-

ing February's performance.
The monetary policy recommendations of our academic correspondents, Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Wallich, fell into three distinct categories.
billion

Samuelson, citing Alan Greenspan's projection of a $20

boom in inventory investment in 1973, urged a more active policy

of "lean against the wind."

He suggested a monetary growth rate of under

3 percent for the next two months.

Wallich, who felt that the expansion

is still reasonably well balanced, urged that policy tighten "a notch," specifically that monetary growth be in the 3 to 5 percent range. He argued that
recent price developments could be viewed as a bulge, due to the transition from past decontrol or to anticipated future recontrol.

Eckstein,

concerned with the lagged impact of policy, advised a 5 to 6 percent money
growth target.

Sensitive prices, he reminded, are an indicator which has

moved early in a cycle and, if history is any guide, will soon begin to

decline.

He felt the greatest risk at present would be that the Federal Re-

serve will overreact to this development which, he estimated, will have only
a modest impact on final list prices.

More importantly, the wage round

settlements have not as yet deteriorated, despite other price behavior.
Eckstein warned that bank loan demand over the next few weeks (and again
in June) will be unseasonably large due to tax payments.

He believed that

obligations are exceptionally large and have been underestimated by the
Treasury.

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

The second district directors that were recently contacted continued to point to a strong business outlook.

Consumer spending and

business plant and equipment outlays were said to have remained at a high
level, and the devaluation of the dollar in general was expected to lead
to an improved international trade balance.

However, there were continued

reports of further tightening in labor markets, of growing shortages of
fuel and raw materials, and of imbalances between the demand and supply
of food which current consumer resistance to high food prices would do
little to correct.

As a result, concern over mounting inflationary

pressures, and skepticism over the capability of Phase 3 to cope with
such pressures, continued to be expressed.
Retail sales were reported as generally strong, and it was
noted that the income

tax refunds now being paid would provide added

stimulus in the months ahead.

One director felt that the currently high

level of auto sales -- which he characterized as of boom proportions ——
in part reflected some "buying ahead" in anticipation of higher prices
resulting from the additional antipollution and safety equipment scheduled
for the 1974 and 1975 models.

As in previous months, a number of directors

reported that retail sales were stronger in the suburban shopping areas
than in innercity outlets.

One director noted the recent softening of

consumer confidence, probably reflecting concern over inflation, indicated
in some recent surveys; however, this director felt that consumer spending
would nonetheless be strong.
The trend of business plant and equipment spending was also
characterized as strong by a number of directors.

A similar assessment

was implicit in reports of the Buffalo branch directors, who observed that

while there seemed to be a pervasive gloominess among businessmen in their
area, these same businessmen were forecasting continued strength in their
own companies' performances.

The chairman of the board of a large oil

company noted the adverse effect of environmental controls on capital
outlays in the petroleum industry, which were severely hampering the
construction of deep ports to accommodate super tankers, new drilling
operations, and the construction of the Alaska pipe line.
A number of directors reported that employment has continued at
a high level in their area, with the availability of certain types of
workers falling short of demand.

A senior official of a large upstate

manufacturer felt that the job market in general was gradually tightening,
with skilled workers in short supply.

Two upstate bankers characterized

employment as at a very high level, with continued tight market conditions
expected for the balance of the year.

Another respondent noted that un-

employment in the Buffalo area still remained relatively high, but looked
for this situation to improve as steel and auto plants increased hiring.
However, most directors commenting on the employment outlook for students
this summer took a gloomy view of prospects in that area, partly because
of cutbacks in federally funded student summer employment programs.

Some

of the directors observed that substantial youth unemployment over the
summer was one of the most serious problems facing cities in their areas.
The senior official of the large upstate manufacturing firm, however, felt
that the outlook for student employment this summer was probably the best
since 1969.
There were also further reports of growing raw material shortages,
including petroleum products, wood products, and nonferrous metals.

In

the latter context, the president of a multinational nonferrous metals
producing corporation reported there were indications that "hot money"
had moved into the future markets for such metals.

The same director

also stated that widespread raw material shortages -- rather than plant
capacity -- seemed likely to lead to production bottlenecks over the
coming months, and that the energy crisis was the single most important
problem on the economic horizon.
Concerning the impact of the recent dollar devaluation, a
New York City banker reported that this move would tend to produce a
"one shot" increase in his institution's earnings by virtue of its effect
on income from its overseas investments.

He expressed concern, however,

over the extent to which this development might give rise over the long
run to more widespread use of controls on the international flow of funds.
The official of the oil company reported that the recent international
monetary steps should eventually help improve the country's trade balance,
although he felt labor costs and productivity remained the crucial factors
in any lasting improvement.

According to this director, one immediate

effect of the devaluation has been to exert significant upward pressures
on oil import prices.

Similarly, the president of a multinational non-

ferrous metal producing firm stated the devaluation had heightened the
pressure on raw material prices, particularly those of nonferrous metals.
Against this background, concern over the prospects of mounting
inflationary pressures in general continued unabated.

The New York

banker felt that Phase 3 appears to have triggered a new wave of inflationary
expectations, and stated that inflation was currently the major economic
and financial problem facing the Nation.

Another director felt that the

elimination under Phase 3 of the day-to-day administrative delays in granting

price increases was contributing to the rapid rise in prices (and would
also contribute to a sharp increase in profits).

According to most of the

Buffalo branch directors, growing consumer resistance to high food prices
by itself would not have a lasting effect.

However, the directors felt

that: recent moves by the Administration to increase the supply of feed
grains and imported beef should tend to bring about a levelling of prices
by the last quarter of the year.

THIRD DISTRICT —

PHILADELPHIA

Third district business conditions are favorable and are expected
to continue improving.

Inventory investment is increasing and local busi-

nessmen expect it to continue upward for at least six months.
penditures are holding steady.

Capital ex-

The employment picture is improving.

duction is strong and construction is continuing at a high level.

Pro-

Area

bankers have or can get funds to lend, but most are not aggressively seeking loan applicants because of the unfavorable prime rate.

On the darker

side, inflation still plagues district businessmen.
Manufacturing activity remains brisk.

Forty-seven percent of the

respondents to this month's business outlook survey report increases in new
orders and sales, while 52 percent report increased shipments.

However,

the percentage of local firms experiencing decreases in production has
increased somewhat from last month.

The outlook is even brighter on the

six month planning horizon; nearly 60 percent of the executives foresee
increases in new orders and shipments.
The third district is experiencing continued modest gains in employment.

While the majority of businesses contacted see no change in the

labor situation, a large and increasing minority report taking on additional
employees.

Over 80 percent report that the length of their average work-

week is unchanged, and 75 percent foresee
workweek

six months hence.

no change in the length of their

Looking further into the future, small improve-

ments on the employment front are expected to continue into fourth quarter
1973.

One-quarter of the responding firms plan to increase hiring by then.
Inventory investment is still increasing. Forty-three percent of the

manufacturers surveyed report increased inventories over last month.

These

respondents foresee continued gains in the next six months too.

Most

firms anticipate increased capital expenditures six months from now.

But

the number of firms predicting an increase in their plant and equipment
expenditures is down slightly from a month ago.
Area bankers contacted say that their demand deposits are up
slightly above what they normally experience during this season.
deposits are about flat.

Savings

Two banks said disintermediation was holding back

growth in their savings deposits.

All the bankers contacted indicated that

they could get funds by selling CDs

—

but they also noted that they were

not anxious to do so because of the unfavorable downward pressure on the
prime rate.

Business and consumer loans are up slightly.

Mortgage loans

are flat at the same high levels as past months.
Inflationary pressure is still heavy.

Two-thirds of the surveyed

firms are currently encountering rising costs for raw materials, and over
half are charging higher prices for their goods.
expectations are even higher.

Long range inflationary

Over 80 percent of the firms expect to be

paying higher prices, and 64 percent expect to receive higher prices, in
the next six months.

FOURTH DISTRICT ~

CLEVELAND

Economic activity in the district is continuing to expand at a
rapid pace, but prices are under increasing upward pressure, and reports
of shortages of skilled labor and materials are more numerous.

Conditions

in the manufacturing sector remain particularly strong, with lengthening
lead times and shortages becoming more of a problem.

The steel industry

is operating at full capacity, and will continue to do so throughout the
remainder of the year.

Reports from business and financial executives

reflect growing concern about the duration of the current rapid pace of
economic expansion, particularly in view of the inflationary situation
and the view that monetary and fiscal policies are becoming more restrictive.

Cleveland banks recently raised interest rates on time and savings

deposits.

Finally, farmers in northern Ohio are conducting their own

meat boycott.
The near-boom conditions in the district's manufacturing sector
(mentioned in last month's report) continued in March, according to early
returns from our monthly survey of district manufacturers.

Purchasing

agents in the greater Cleveland area complained that Phase 3 controls are
not tight enough, and that price increases are widespread.

March was the

third consecutive month in which the overwhelming majority of firms
paid higher prices; such price increases have not been reported for three
successive months since the early 1950s.

In addition, buyers reported

that lead times are lengthening markedly and that shortages of materials
are multiplying.

Skilled labor is difficult to find, and firms are

forced increasingly to expand overtime and some are going to a six-day
workweek.
At a recent meeting in the bank, a number of chief executive
officers, representing securities firms, manufacturers, and retailers in
the Cleveland area expressed concern over inflation and economic prospects
for next year.

The security firm executives indicated that the weakness

in stock prices is reflecting the inflationary climate and tightening
monetary policy.

They were apprehensive that there could be another credit

crunch and, perhaps, a recession.
Economists from three major steel companies in the district
report that their mills are operating at peak capacity.

One noted that

orders are coming in at a rate 30 percent higher than shipping capabilities, which is pushing lead times out.

Some customers have been trying

to place orders for fourth quarter delivery, but the company will not
accept orders that far ahead at this time.

Another steel firm reports

that pollution controls are partly responsible for restraining production;
some of the firm's steel furnaces are inoperative because they cannot meet
the clean air standards.

A third steel company reported that shipments

are on a controlled distribution basis and order acceptance is being limited to prevent serious overbooking.
The three economists expect steel imports to decline during the
second half of 1973.

Steel customers report that foreign producers are

reluctant to make commitments for the second half because of strong world
demand.

Some foreign steel items —

particularly those in heavy demand

are now more expensive than domestically produced items.

—

In addition, the

recent no-strike bargaining agreement between the United Steel Workers
and ten major steel companies (which assures an uninterrupted flow of steel)
is expected to curb imports, and to eliminate the need for inventory stockpiling as a strike hedge.
During the past two weeks, Cleveland banks increased interest
rates on consumer-type savings accounts by one-half percent to the regulation Q limits (banks had lowered their rate on savings in April 1971).
Mortgage rates have generally moved up one-quarter percent (in some instances before the deposit rate adjustment, and in other cases afterwards).
One bank contact suggested that increases in mortgage rates were in anticipation of a freeze on interest rates.
In the agricultural sector, farmers in northeastern Ohio conducted their own boycott last week by withholding their steers, hogs, and
lambs from the market.

Sales declined by 50 percent at the regular weekly

stockyard auction in Cleveland, and cattle prices were bid up $3 a hundredweight.

FIFTH DISTRICT -- RICHMOND

Results of our most recent survey of businessmen and bankers
indicate that business conditions in the district continued to improve
in the past month.

More than 50 percent of the manufacturing respondents

reported increases in shipments, backlogs and new orders.
were reported to have increased substantially.

Retail sales

Banking respondents reported

a high level of demand for loans, especially consumer and business loans.
Construction activity remains at a high level throughout the district.
In general, businessmen and bankers are highly optimistic about the economic
outlook for the district although the degree of optimism among bankers is
somewhat lower than last month.
District manufacturers continue to report rising business activity.
More than 50 percent of the manufacturing respondents reported gains in
shipments, new orders and backlogs.

While gains were fairly widespread,

producers of steel and synthetic fibers appear to be experiencing especially
robust gains.

One large synthetic fiber producer commented on a recent

unexpected increase in the world demand for synthetic fibers, which
increased the output of his firm.

Reports from furniture manufacturers

are mixed, although labor shortages continue to plague the producers.

All

manufacturing concerns producing materials directly related to construction
activity are experiencing high levels of demand for their products.
While nearly 60 percent of the manufacturing respondents reported
a decline in inventories, most believed that inventories were at appropriate
levels.

On balance, retail respondents reported increases in inventory

levels during the last month.

Forty percent of the manufacturing respondents

indicated that plant and equipment capacity was lower than they would like
it to be given current business conditions.
Manufacturers continue to experience little change in employment
and slight increases in hours worked per week.

More than one-third of

the banking respondents reported increases in employment in their area.
The tight labor supply situation was mentioned by several banking respondents located in the Carolinas.

Wage and price increases were widespread

with more than one-third of manufacturing and trade and service respondents
reporting increases.
Retail sales are reported to be strong in the district.

Two-

thirds of the banking respondents reported that retail sales in their area
had improved during the past month.

All of the retailers responding to

this month's survey indicated gains in sales over the previous month.

In

general, retailers appear to be very optimistic about the outlook for
continued increases in sales.
Reports from bankers indicate that loan demand continues strong
throughout the district.

In particular, the demand for consumer and

business loans appears to have gained momentum in recent weeks.

Increases

in consumer loans were reported by 75 percent of the banking respondents,
while 60 percent reported increases in the demand for business loans.

Con-

struction continues at a very high level throughout most of the district.
Because of sharply higher farm prices and weather-delayed harvest
of many 1972 late season crops, January cash receipts from farm marketings
were up 28 percent over a year earlier.
Businessmen and bankers continue to be optimistic about the
general economic outlook.

While the degree of optimism among banking

respondents is down from last month, more than one-half of the banking

respondents expect improvement in business activity in their areas in the
next two or three months.

SIXTH DISTRICT —

ATLANTA

Economic activity remains robust.

The outlook for commercial

construction appears particularly strong, and several new major plants
have been announced.

There is a growing consensus among businessmen

that labor shortages are increasing and that resource and material shortages are worsening, causing delayed deliveries and increased costs. Businessmen foresee little relief from labor and resource shortages.
The outlook for commercial construction continues strong.

Two

office buildings and a warehouse are planned in Atlanta suburbs, and a
five-story bank building is to be built in Savannah.

Several hospital

expansion projects have been announced, and a large number of highway
construction projects are planned.

The State of Louisiana has announced

plans to build an $18 million school of veterinary medicine.

A $2 1/2

million shopping center is to be built in Tennessee, and an Atlanta area
shopping center will be substantially expanded.

More motels have been

announced, including a 12-story motel near the Atlanta Airport, a multimillion dollar beach front facility at Pensacola, a 170-room budget motel
in Nashville, and 7 Ramada Inns in various district locations.

A $600,000

ice skating rink will be built in the Atlanta area.
Residential construction is reportedly strong in New Orleans,
Atlanta, and Jacksonville.
rise in north Atlanta.

Four 22-story condominiums will eventually

Costs of homes are inflating so fast in the New

Orleans area that builders are unwilling to quote prices even four or five
months in advance.
as the year goes on.

Some builders expect residential construction to slow
The rate of growth of residential construction is

reportedly slowing in the Orlando area.
Several major new plant announcements have been made recently,
including a $30 million plus paperboard plant in Alabama, a $30 million
improvement and expansion of a Louisiana chemical plant, a $20 million
plant in Alabama to produce air-cooled gas engines and electric-generating
sets, and a plant to manufacture electrical goods in east Tennessee.

A

Japanese firm that manufactures zippers is planning to locate a plant in
central Georgia with eventual employment of 2,500.

New clothes manufac-

turing plants are scheduled for Tennessee and Louisiana.
is building four miniplants in Atlanta.
ping containers will be built in Jackson.

A box fabricator

A $4 million plant to build shipTwo large businesses in the

Pensacola area are issuing $125 million in industrial revenue bonds for
pollution control equipment.
Shortages of skilled labor have been reported by firms in Louisiana,
Georgia, and Florida.

One Florida banker reports an increase in the number

of labor disputes, with wage increases being the main issue.

A telephone

company executive says that his firm plans to hire 500 workers in the New
Orleans area in the coming months.

They expect to find it difficult to

hire skilled workers and therefore, are hoping to find semiskilled workers
who can be trained for higher-skilled slots.

A Georgia insurance executive

pointed out that the labor turnover rate in his business rose sharply last
year.

Textile and cement industries in central Georgia are having diffi-

culty finding workers and are increasing purchases of productivity-increasing equipment.
Material shortages are evidently becoming more widespread.
companies in Atlanta, Columbus, and Macon, Georgia

Bus

are having difficulty

in obtaining diesel fuel.

A retailing firm is limiting gasoline purchases

at its south Florida stores to 10 gallons per customer because of difficulties in obtaining supplies.

A heavy construction equipment manufacturer

notes that many of his purchase orders to suppliers have been put on allocation and that continued expansion of the economy will, in his view, make
the problem worse.

A paper industry executive claims that his suppliers

are trimming out marginal products in order to cut costs.

A Georgia real

estate developer says that materials can be obtained but only at exorbitant prices.

There has been widespread flooding in the district, and a

recent tornado in north Georgia did $113 million in property damage.

SEVENTH DISTRICT —

CHICAGO

The business upsurge continues in the seventh district. Virtually
all industries and areas are participating.

Reports of shortages —

materials, supplies, components, and skilled and trainable labor —
spreading.
tinue.

raw
are

The rise in employment has accelerated and is expected to con-

Upward pressures are building on wages and salaries.

Except for

products and services of large firms, prices appear to be rising at a
faster pace.

It is generally expected that monetary policy will not be

so severe as to cut off the expansion of 1973.
The tightening of the labor market in this region since the turn
of the year has been striking.

Labor turnover has increased rapidly, caus-

ing some managers to "double up" on requisitions.

Job hopping has increased

especially for those who had been held back for two years by lack of alternatives.

Night shifts are often undermanned, especially in large cities.

Steel firms in the Gary area are sending recruiting teams to other areas
for the first time in many years.

Firms with reactivated apprenticeship

programs complain that it is hard to get men to stick.

Informed observers

expect the typical labor settlement this year to increase
7.5 percent on average.

compensation

Cost-of-living adjustments and dental benefits

will be sought in several negotiations.

The UAW is pushing "voluntary

overtime," a change which motor vehicle, farm and construction equipment
producers maintain would drastically increase their costs.

Insistence on

voluntary overtime could lead to a "collision course."
The capital expenditure boom appears to be in its early stages.
Order lead times for some equipment have stretched out to four or more

times last year's quotations. (For example, certain machine tools that had
been available in six months now require a two-year wait.) Some manufacturers
of hydraulic excavators, materials handling equipment, and moveable cranes
have stopped taking orders (presumably because of the need to quote firm
prices).

Some equipment assembly operations have been slowed to await miss-

ing parts.
Some firms, large and small, are weighing decisions on expansion
projects that require new buildings.

One large firm has extended its plan-

ning horizon on capital outlays beyond 1974, even though a business slowdown is assumed likely for early 1974.
The steel market is running away with new orders far in excess
of capacity.

(Doubtless, some panic buying is occurring.)

Estimates

of shipments for 1973 have been raised to 103 million tons or more.

One

large midwest steel producer has stated that it has started a program of
"controlled order acceptance," a polite term for "rationing."
ers are seeking U.S. sources.

Steel import-

The price differential on imports has nar-

rowed or vanished, and availability has been curtailed.
Oil companies insist that price controls are hampering their operations and are intensifying shortages, especially in attracting supplies
to areas of stringency.

Fuel shortages in the Midwest are said to be the

"worst in the world" because refining capacity is not sufficient here to
satisfy demand, and because direct access to imports is limited.

No new

refineries are under construction, and prices of imports equal or exceed
U.S. prices.

Most major oil firms are restricting sales of gasoline by

refusing new customers and by placing a ceiling on sales to customers.

Some large oil firms that do not have refineries in the Midwest are shrinking their dealer organizations here.
Agricultural loans of large Chicago banks are double year-ago
levels, mainly because of larger loans to cattle feeders and for grain
storage. (Transport bottlenecks have delayed grain shipments.)
of fertilizer are limited.

Supplies

Reports tell of shortages of farm tractors

with order times on the popular larger tractors out to six months.
The meat boycott apparently reduced meat sales substantially
last week, but there has been little effect on prices.
packing plants have sharply reduced operations.

Several district

Farmer's withholdings

of animals could cause heavy marketings in the next few weeks.
Permits for new housing units in the Chicago area were far
above last year's high level in January and February.
especially strong, but home permits were also up.
to be cutting back on plans
lumber.

Apartments were

Some builders are said

because of shortages of materials, especially

Premium prices are being paid for lumber, well above announced

increases.

Conventional mortgage rates have gone from 7 to 7 1/2 percent

in the Chicago area in the past six weeks.

Savings inflows to S&Ls have

slowed from last year's record volume.
Business loan demand at banks remains very strong, beyond expectations at the start of the year.

Large banks would like to cut off the

shift from the commercial paper markets, but are not always able to tell
which loan applications are involved.

Starting in February, life insurance

companies experienced a sharp rise in net disbursements on policy loans.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

A group of businessmen in the eighth district are optimistic
that the business uptrend of recent months will continue through 1973.
Retail sales at major department stores rose throughout the district in
March.

Manufacturing activity continued up, and more firms reported

operations at capacity levels than a month ago.
number have made plans for plant expansion.
relatively high level.

Also an increasing

Construction remains at a

Employment continues to rise.

Loan demand at banks

and savings and loan associations continues to grow faster than savings.
Following a lull in January, seasonally adjusted retail sales by major firms
in the eighth district turned up in February and continued upward through
March.

The rise was more widespread in March than heretofore.
Manufacturing activity continued to expand in March, and output

is now approaching reported capacity levels in most industries.
comments were:

Typical

industry is operating at full capacity, the supply situation

is very tight, we need additional capacity for many items, and employment
is at a peak with present mill capacity.
In the eighth district a strong upward movement in capital
spending on plant and equipment is apparently underway.

Plans for increasing

capital investment in 1973 over 1972 levels were reported by electrical
equipment, paperboard and chemical manufacturing companies.

Demand for

paperboard containers, however, is still expected to rise faster than the
productive capacity for another two years.

Industrial expansion is most

pronounced in Arkansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Tennessee.

There has

been very little industrial expansion in St. Louis during the past three
years.

Eighth district construction continues at the relatively high
level reached more than a year ago.

Residential building is at a high

level throughout the district, but commercial and industrial building is
quite spotty, varying from generally high in the southern portion of the
district to sluggish in St. Louis.

Building materials are reported to

be in very tight supply over most of the district, with deliveries six
months or more behind schedule in some locations.

Part of the problem

reflects the sharp increase in demand for freight cars which became noticeable
with the step-up in grain deliveries to seaports for export.

In part, however,

it reflects a sharp increase in demand for raw materials such as pulpwood
and sawtimber.
Employment has continued up in recent weeks, but the lack of more
manpower is reported to be limiting real output in an increasing number of
communities.

Some of the businessmen interviewed reported that all people

wanting and willing to hold a job are now working.
Bankers reported that loan demand was very high and deposit growth
was slowing.

Upward pressure on interest rates continues.

However, those

interviewed reported that quoted rates had not been increased on consumer
installment and real estate loans.
Many farmers are pessimistic about planting 1973 crops as a
result of the excessive rainfall and flooding in recent weeks.

Some have

estimated that it will require 10 days or more of sunshine after rainfall
ceases and the water recedes from the flooded areas before machinery can
be used in the fields.

On the optimistic side, however, are the high prices

for farm products and the expected high farm incomes this year.

Inflation continues to be a major topic of concern among businessmen as well as among consumers.

Most businessmen foresee little abatement

in the rate of inflation from the trend rate of recent years.

NINTH DISTRICT —

MINNEAPOLIS

Economic activity so far this year has matched expectations, and
bank directors look for business to remain strong for the rest of 1973.
District retailers report sizable first quarter sales gains and expect
business to remain good.

District labor markets have tightened consider-

ably in recent months and some manpower shortages are beginning to emerge.
One director looks for only a modest expansion in livestock production in
his area this year, while another anticipates a noticeable increase.

Most

directors foresee some further advances in interest rates and view the twotier prime rate proposal favorably.
According to our directors, no noticeable erosion of consumers'
confidence has occurred.

Businessmen generally look for business to remain

strong throughout 1973, but they are uncertain about the economic outlook
for 1.974.

Inflation is generally considered this year's major threat to

the district's

economy.

A primary concern in the district's agriculture

areas, however, is that the Administration's efforts to curb food price
increases could reduce farm income.
A telephone survey of large district department/discount stores
and automobile sales managers indicates that district retail sales remained
strong in the first quarter of 1973.

Large retailers with outlets located

primarily in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area reported first
quarter sales gains ranging from 8 to 12 percent over the first quarter
of 1972.

Year-over-year increases in the number of autos and trucks sold

during the January-February period ranged from 9 percent to 28 percent

among the regional automobile sales managers surveyed.

District retailers

and automobile sales managers expect brisk sales growth in the months
ahead.

Retailers state that a late Easter this year should boost second

quarter sales gains, and both retailers and automobile sales managers are
counting on the Federal income tax refunds to have a noticeable impact on
sales.
The district's unemployment rate has declined approximately one
percentage point since last fall and some labor shortages are starting
to emerge.

Minnesota job vacancies in manufacturing, for example, in

early 1973 were three times as great as they were a year ago.

Two direc-

tors find that skilled labor is becoming difficult to hire, but unskilled
workers are plentiful.

Another director states that fewer workers are

applying for jobs at his firm's plants.

A South Dakota director reports

shortages of both skilled and unskilled workers and states that a lack of
farm laborers could hurt agricultural production in his state.
Directors' views concerning livestock production in 1973 vary.
A South Dakota director looks for only a modest expansion in livestock
production for several reasons.

Older farmers in his area would rather

remain liquid than tie up funds in livestock production, while younger
farmers have difficulty obtaining necessary capital.

Uncertainties sur-

rounding pollution control requirements in South Dakota also mean that
farmers are unclear about the costs involved in expanding livestock production.

Furthermore, current market conditions have dampened farmers'

enthusiasm to expand their production, and memories of hog overproduction
in 1970 and 1971 tend to make farmers cautious.

On the other hand, a Montana

director looks for a sizable increase in his area's livestock production.

Although directors' responses vary, most agree that commercial
bank interest rates will climb further.

Commercial bankers in one direc-

tor's area believe that interest rates could advance another one-quarter
to one-half of a percentage point.

One director thinks that interest rates

won't peak until late summer or early fall, and another that the Committee
on Interest and Dividends will largely determine future interest rate movements.

One director expects interest rates to remain at their present

levels.
Some directors endorse a two-tier prime rate, while others express
reservations.

One twin cities area director indicates that his bank has

already implemented a two-tier prime rate and is charging 6 3/4 percent on
loans over $500,000 and 6 1/2 percent on loans under that amount.

Another

director feels that the two-tier prime rate is a "great thing" because it
provides a break for the small businessmen.

In implementing a two-tier

prime rate, two directors are concerned about defining "large" and "small"
businesses and believe the community's size should be a factor in determining whether a business is considered large or small.

One director also

wonders how loans already tied to the prime rate will be handled under a
two-tier scheme.

TENTH DISTRICT —

KANSAS CITY

Residential construction activity is going on at a rapid pace
inmost tenth district cities, especially for single-family structures.
The rising cost and short supply of some construction materials are
being felt by some builders and customers, but funds remain available -though more expensive.

Savings inflows to savings and loan institutions

continue to be strong, as does mortgage loan demand.
banks are also experiencing strong loan demands.

District commercial

Better weather conditions

will probably bring increased livestock shipments, and the likelihood of
a temporary dip in meat animal prices.
Executives of home builders associations in a number of district
cities, representatives of several savings and loan associations, and some
home builders, were surveyed to acquire additional information about the
residential construction sector, and its financing.

Aside from being slowed

somewhat by bad weather, residential construction activity is generally
strong in major urban centers of the tenth district -- with the exception
of Albuquerque.

Activity is stronger in single-family unit building than

in multi-family structures, and there is still apparently no overbuilding
of the former.

There is a great deal of speculative building, and some

tendency for a shift from custom toward speculative building, as contractors find little trouble in selling the latter.

In Kansas City, for

example, speculative builders generally have no inventory, with many units
sold! before completion.
The impact of the withdrawal of Federal subsidies has varied
among district cities.

The slowdown in construction activity reported

for Albuquerque is attributed largely to the end of Federal subsidies for
low income housing, and a lesser anticipated effect is reported from Omaha
and Tulsa.

All respondents stressed the rising cost of construction materials,

especially lumber, and its influence on the price of houses.
some materials are in short supply.

Furthermore,

Lumber is not only expensive but hard

to get in many places, particularly in the types and grades desired.
are also reported as hard to get in Omaha, Albuquerque, and Tulsa.

Bricks
Increases

in the price of concrete and the possibility of a cement shortage were also
mentioned.

On the other hand, both builders and builders association

executives described funds as readily available, although getting more costly.
Spokesmen for various savings and loan associations corroborated
the rapid pace of home building activity and most of those surveyed believe
that it will continue to be strong for a while.

Mortgage loan demand and

commitments were reported as "up," "way up," "out of sight" by most respondents,
with Denver being the major geographical exception.

Mortgage rates have already

been increased in recent weeks by at least one-eighth to one-fourth of one
percent by institutions in several district cities.
is anticipated if mortgage loan demand remains high.

A further "inching up"
Savings inflows were

very good in the first quarter, although some concern was expressed for
the future.

No serious disintermediation has been experienced yet by the

institutions surveyed.

However, one respondent called disintermediation

"a definite threat in the rest of 1973," and another is worried about a
large amount of deposits he considers "vulnerable."
Loan demand at tenth district commercial banks continues to be
strong in almost all categories.

Exceptionally strong demand has caused

some banks to concentrate more heavily in commercial loans.

The prime rate

has risen to 6 1/2 percent at all survey banks, but there were few reports
of credit rationing or tightening of nonprice loan terms.

Nevertheless,

several banks have become more diligent in enforcing compensating balances
requirements, while others felt that rationing was imminent.

Most banks

have relied heavily upon purchases of Federal funds, CDs, and maturing
securities to provide funds to accommodate loan demand.

Outflows of demand

deposits, savings deposits, and consumer-type time deposits have been larger
than is typical for this time of the year.
Reactions by tenth district bankers to the proposed dual prime
rate were mixed.

Some bankers felt it would be wise to differentiate between

national and regional borrowers, as credit demands are often quite different
for the two groups.

Others expressed the view that credit-worthiness --

not the size of the borrower -- should be the criterion for establishing
loan rates, with a single prime rate serving as a benchmark.

Virtually all

bankers interviewed agreed that the dual prime system might be difficult to
administer.

The consensus seemed to be that, under the system, funds would

still be available to meet the needs of small borrowers even when higher
rates existed on loans to large borrowers.
Unusually heavy rains during March proved to be a mixed blessing
for farmers and ranchers throughout the district.

While valuable moisture

was added to the soil for the new wheat crop, many of the low spots in
the fields were flooded and heavily damaged.

However, most, if not all, of

this loss will probably be offset by higher yields in the undamaged portions
of the fields.

As a result of the wet weather, very few farmers have been

able to start the field work that must be completed before the spring crops

can be planted.

Further delays will likely reduce corn yields and perhaps

induce some substitution of soybeans.
The weather has also greatly impaired the movement of livestock
to market, partly explaining the strong prices for cattle and hogs prior
to the boycott.

The boycott apparently has had an effect on the market,

and producers have responded to reduced sales by shipping significantly
fewer animals to market.

On the whole, prices have not weakened substantially.

An end to the boycott and better weather conditions will probably bring
fairly heavy shipments of livestock, causing meat animal prices to dip
rather sharply until this backlog is marketed.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

The economy of
at a rapid pace.

DALLAS

the eleventh district is continuing to expand

Industrial production in Texas again rose to a record

level in February, and total employment in the five district states continued to expand.

Construction activity eased slightly in February, but

remained substantially above its year-earlier level.

District department

store sales increased further in March, while new automobile registrations
declined slightly in February.
The biggest concern of economists employed by business and financial institutions in the district appears to be the threat of renewed inflation.

They do not attribute much of this concern to the introduction

of Phase 3, however.

The economists working for industrial firms indicated

that the cost of goods used in their firms' production processes might increase somewhat as a result of Phase 3, but that prices of goods sold by
their companies would not increase any faster because of the adoption of
Phase 3.
Reflecting the growing tightness of labor markets in some areas
of the district, several respondents indicated that their coapanies are
experiencing some difficulty in obtaining skilled employees.

None of the

respondents indicated any problems in obtaining bank credit, although
interest rates were expected to continue rising.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index rose
sharply in February as the manufacturing sector continued to surge.

None-

theless, mining decreased for the fifth consecutive month and utilities
increased only slightly.

In manufacturing, only two industry groups

—

petroleum refining and primary metal products —
in February.

failed to show an increase

The strongest production gains were reported In transporta-

tion equipment, textile mill products, and stone, clay, and glass products.
All industries are producing over year-ago levels.

In mining, the only

reported increase in output was that of metal, stone, and earth minerals,
as crude petroleum, natural gas, and natural gas liquids production all
dropped in February.

Utilities increased only slightly, as the drop in

natural gas distribution almost entirely offset the increase in the distribution of electricity.
Although the Texas Railroad Commission permitted the Texas fields
to produce at maximum levels again in April for the thirteenth consecutive
month, the State's oil production has been declining since Its peak in
October last year.

Part of the decline in January was attributed to weather,

which will also be a factor in the expected drop for February.

Moreover,

although exploration has increased recently, the efforts have not been great
enough to replace withdrawn reserves resulting from the heavy production
over the past year.

In spite of some government assurance that there will

be no widespread rationing of gasoline this summer, rationing has become
a reality in some areas and the oil companies feel that widespread rationing is a definite possibility.
Seasonally adjusted total employment in the five southwestern
states continued to rise in February while the area's labor force fell
slightly.

The unemployment rate dropped sharply to 3.6 percent in Feb-

ruary from a revised 3.9 percent in January.

Both manufacturing and non-

manufacturing industries shared in the monthly employment rise.

Major

gains were reported in durable manufacturing, construction, and government
employment.

All industry groups reported year-to-year gains in employment.

The value of construction contracts awarded in the five district
states fell in February from the month-earlier level.

A sharp decline in

nonresidential building was the cause of the overall drop, as both residential building and nonbuilding construction posted slight increases.
Despite the monthly fall, the cumulative value of contracts awarded this
year remained substantially higher than last year.

Texas followed the

district trend, although registering a small year-to-year increase.
Sales of department stores in the district continued to rise
above year-ago levels in February.

Cumulative sales for the first three

months of the year were significantly above the level for the corresponding period last year in all five metropolitan areas for which data are
regularly published.
largest increases.

San Antonio, Houston, and Austin reported the
The total number of new automobile registrations for

the four largest metropolitan areas of Texas —
Houston, and San Antonio —

Dallas, Fort Worth,

fell in February from the January level. Al-

though Dallas and Fort Worth reported increases, these were not great
enough to compensate for the declines in Houston and San Antonio. Nevertheless, the cumulative sales of new automobiles this year were still
almost 20 percent above last year.
Agricultural conditions in the Southwest remain favorable, and
district farmers are planning to shift more acreage away from the production of upland cotton and into crops of short supply such as feed grains,
rice, and soybeans.

Winter wheat is progressing quite well and prospects

are good for an excellent crop.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors report that the present economic expansion remains
strong in the twelfth reserve district, with major growth indicators in
most district states running ahead of the national average.
remains the major economic concern:

Inflation

Some directors advocate more restric-

tive fiscal policy and stronger Phase 3 price controls; others believe
that price pressures will ease, especially for agricultural and timber
products, in the second half of the year.

Bankers expect further

increases in short-term interest rates, but they foresee no serious liquidity
problems.

A number of bankers commented on distortions introduced into

financial markets by the CID's efforts to control the prime rate.

General

expectations are for continued strong growth with rising prices.
Consumer and business investment expenditures are reported to
be high in all district states, and to be providing the main impetus for
high overall growth rates in the West.
California and in the Pacific Northwest.

Growth is especially strong in
In Oregon, the usual seasonal

increase in unemployment did not develop this year, and the unemployment
rate is below that for the Nation as a whole.
Sound area of Washington are excellent.

Prospects for the Puget

Boeing Aircraft is increasing

production, and payrolls are growing at Washington's defense facilities.
Local agriculture, timber production and port activity also are experiencing
an excellent year.

Consumer spending is reported to be setting new records

with department store sales in some localities 10 to 15 percent above last
year's levels.

Automobile sales also are high and would be still higher

if dealer inventories were larger.

Construction activity in the district still shows no signs of
decline.

Recent high levels of residential and nonresidential building

are being maintained, with apartment construction being the only area of
weakness reported.

A manufacturer of builders' equipment reports difficulty

in meeting current demand.

However, another director thinks that recent

cutbacks in government spending and subsidies will slow down construction,
especially construction of low-income housing, dams, and flood control
projects.
Bankers report that loan demand by both businesses and consumers
is very strong.

No serious liquidity problems are expected, though many

banks have been forced to sell short-term securities and bid up short-term
CD rates to avoid a liquidity squeeze.

Some bankers are concerned about

the prospect of interest rate controls, and about the possible instigation
of a two-tier prime rate system. -The latter is seen as the first step
toward a complex system of selective credit controls.

Higher interest

rates paid on time deposits are expected to squeeze earnings, because
loan rates are not expected to rise enough to offset these costs.
The major short-run policy concern of our directors is the control
of inflation, although a majority of them believe that price increases will
moderate in the second half of the year, with increased agricultural production being an important element in the adjustment.

Two directors

reported that increased acreage will lower grain prices, and other
directors think that meat prices also will fall as the result of increased
supplies.

Similarly, a director in Oregon forecasts that timber prices will

begin to fall in mid-year, and by the end of 1973 market prices will be
significantly lower.

A minority of directors see no slowing of price inflation, and
are especially worried about coming wage settlements.

One described

Phase 3 as "a failure" and feels Phase 2 was ended too soon.

These

directors advocate the imposition of stronger controls, and feel that a
tax increase also is needed.
Only two directors singled out international conditions as a
major source of concern.

