CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 14, 1973

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 9
Fifth District - Richmond page 12
Sixth District - Atlanta page 14
Seventh District - Chicago page 16
Eighth District - St. Louis page 19
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 22
Tenth District - Kansas City page 25
Eleventh District - Dallas page 28
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 31

SUMMARY*

This month's District Red Book reports, on balance, describes the
current and prospective pace of business activity as very strong, in some
cases reaching boom proportions.

Consumer and business investment spending

showed impressive strength, and construction remained at a high level.
Employment was rising.

On the negative side, evidence of increasing strains

on productive capacity was emerging, with widespread lengthening delivery
schedules and growing shortages of labor as well as materials.

Prices were

rising and serious doubts were frequently expressed regarding the probable
effectiveness of Phase Three in controlling inflation.

Countrywide, little

concern was expressed over recent international financial developments.
All Banks reported continued advances in economic activity.

The

assessments ranged from "boom", "near boom", and "most vigorous in many
years" (Kansas, Cleveland and Chicago), to a somewhat more restrained
expectation of continued expansion at least until mid-1973 (San Francisco
and Dallas).
Reports of strength in both consumer spending and in business outlays
for plant and equipment were widespread.
are expecting a banner year.

Atlanta reported that many retailers

San Francisco characterized consumer spending

as generally "vigorous", especially for automobiles and durables, and a number
of major retailers in the Richmond District reported sales to be considerably higher than year ago levels.

Similar reports emanated from most other

Banks.
Plant and equipment outlays were reported as especially strong
(San Francisco), brisk (Atlanta), and continuing at a high level (Philadelphia).

[Asterisk:Prepared

at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]

A number of Richmond District manufacturers indicated current plant and
equipment capacity to be at lower than desired levels.

Further evidence of

strong capital spending was provided by a number of reports of large order
inflows in the capital goods industry, including among others, the Boston,
Cleveland, Chicago and St. Louis Districts.

A number of Banks also reported

a high level of commercial construction, in some instances (Atlanta) reaching
boom proportions.
On the darker side, the brisk pace of economic activity has led
to mounting strains on productive capacity. Most Banks reported rising
backlogs of orders—in some cases to record or near record levels—and
lengthening of delivery times.

Similarly, there were frequent reports of

actual and anticipated shortages of a wide range of basic raw materials,
including steel, chemicals and construction materials (notably lumber)—and
of semi-finished and finished products as well.

The employment picture

has tightened further, and shortages of skilled and semi-skilled labor
were reported by a number of Districts.
Against this background, concern over the prospects of a heightening
of inflationary pressures was widely reported to be on the rise. For
example, the Philadelphia report states that inflationary expectations are
high and rising, and some respondents in the St. Louis and New York Districts
deemed inflation to now be the chief current economic problem.
expressions of concern appear in most other reports.
are pointed to by well over half of the Banks.

Similar

Indeed, rising prices

In this context, considerable

doubt was expressed about the effectiveness of Phase Three in controlling
inflation, particularly on the wage side.

Dallas reports that the introduction

of Phase Three had caused a number of its respondents to alter their expectations
regarding prices, which they now foresee rising much faster than previously
thought likely.

Turning to the credit scene, most Districts reported a strong
demand for bank loans, especially consumer loans.

Several Districts reported

a slowing down in the rate of deposits, and growing banker concern over
disintermediation was mentioned by several Districts, including Philadelphia,
Dallas, Kansas and Boston.
In general, little concern was expressed over the domestic impact
of the recent international financial disturbances.

Respondents in the

San Francisco and New York Districts felt that the recent devaluation of the
dollar should help stimulate exports.

FIRST DISTRICT—BOSTON

Our business directors report that business continues to be very good
in all lines, but a bank director notes growing fears of disintermediation.
Business is reported as so good that firms have been unable to build
inventories to desired levels. Machinery lines especially are under pressure.
Order backlogs for heavy machinery are reported by one director as the highest
in company history, and another director notes that his machinery division is
sold out through the end of the year.

Concern was voiced about inadequate

facilities to handle machinery orders and about complaints from customers over
long delivery times.

Aircraft orders from the airlines, general aviation, and

the military are reported as up for both new designs and replacement engines.
One manufacturer of general aviation aircraft notes that order backlogs are
at record levels.
In the consumer goods area, a manufacturer of boats and campers notes
that the industry is expecting a very good year.

Tire sales are strong , and

there is less worry now in the industry about a major strike.
One director noted that the devaluation was going to raise metal prices
and that the company would have to raise the prices of its nickel-based products and other superalloys.

This director mentioned a rumor about Phase Three

controls which would prevent a company from passing on devaluation changes by
scrutinizing costs in its overall operations, including foreign divisions, rather
than continuing the present practice of separating out domestic operations.
Pressures in the financial area were noted by a bank director.

Savings

deposits slowed dramatically and just covered dividend payments in February,
raising fears of disintermediation.

The drop in savings flows was especially

noticeable in deposits of over $50,000 where rate ceilings continue to prevent
banks from effectively competing for funds.

This New Hampshire banker noted

that business loan demand remains strong and that his bank is fully loaned.
A business director mentioned that renewed concern about a credit crunch has
led a number of firms to take down big lines of credit at commercial banks just
in case they cannot use

the commercial paper market.

Another director,

however, noted that rising interest rates this year will not have the cost
impact that they did in the last credit crunch, because the cost of new debt
will not be substantially higher than the present imbedded cost of debt.

In

the last period of monetary restraint, when the cost of new debt was over 7
percent and imbedded debt costs were 3 percent, borrowing substantially raised
business costs.
This latter director also expressed the opinion that the current
hysteria about inflation, as evidenced in the stock market, is unfounded.
While prices will rise more this year than in 1972 and wage contracts will
be higher under Phase Three than in Phase Two, he felt that unions would not
be seeking exorbitant wage increases for fear of bringing back Phase One-type
controls.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Shapiro were available for
comment this month.

All felt the major problem for the economy is to get

Phase Three "off the ground".

Shapiro criticized the strange and contradictory

statements about Phase Three which have been made by members of the Administration.
He urges greater clarification.

He cited the relatively flat yield curve as

evidence that "people with money do not have inflationary expectations".

Due to

a lot of bad luck (weather conditions and blight) and high income elasticity
of the demand for meat, Samuelson doubts prices can be held to the stated goals.
Specifically, the 5.5 percent wage standard is not possible to achieve, given
the recent and likely future path of the cost of living.

On the other hand,

cost-push inflation is not something that the monetary authorities can or
ought to do a lot about, according to Samuelson.

Samuelson also felt it inadvisable to be committed to a dollar parity
rate at: the cost of tighter interest rates than would be justified on the
grounds of domestic policy.

While Shapiro would have preferred to have let

the dollar float, he urged the United States to stand firm in not supporting
the dollar, forcing other countries to take either goods or dollars.
The general monetary policy prescriptions were the same as in previous
reports.

Samuelson argues there is reason to be tighter now than may be

appropriate in eight months; Eckstein continues to advocate steady reserves
growth.

Given the minimum amount of "creeping inflation" we can expect,

Samuelson believes that the long-run target growth rate of nominal gross
national product (GNP) must be at least 7 percent and that a 5 percent rate
of growth of Ml would squeeze the real system.

Eckstein warmly applauded

Chairman Burns's recent statement before the Joint Economic Committee.

In a

memorandum to his subscribers, Eckstein cited approvingly the statement that
"the Federal Reserve does not intend to permit severe stringencies to develop
in the credit markets, or try to correct for every error in public or private
policies".

Nevertheless, he expressed some concern that financial stringency

will develop and urged the system to monitor carefully the financial system to
see "where it breaks" since "it breaks different places every time".

Past

"crunches" appeared after a period of restraint, when the Fed did not anticipate
the degree of stringency which did develop.

He has confidence that "we have

learned how to apply the monetary brakes gently".

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

The Second District directors and other business leaders contacted
recently remained generally optimistic about the prospect for business activity
over the foreseeable future.

And, the respondents in general felt that the

recent devaluation of the dollar would have a favorable impact on the country's
economy.

However, concern over the balance-of-payments situation remained very

much in evidence.

Phase III was not expected to modify the rosy corporate profits

outlook, but considerable doubt was expressed regarding its workability with
respect to wage controls.

Evidence of increasing strains on productive capacity

were noted, and widespread concern was voiced over prospects for controlling
inflation.
Regarding the recent devaluation of the dollar, several bankers did
not anticipate that this move would have an immediate effect on their own
business but felt that the economy generally would benefit over the longer
run as more United States products are sold, both domestically and abroad.
A senior official of a large multinational manufacturing firm headquartered in
upstate New York predicted that the devaluation would stimulate foreign sales
of multinational companies, with an accompanying reduction in the country's
international balance of payment deficit later in the year.

The vice chairman

of a large non-ferrous metal producer stated that the recent foreign exchange
moves had been "helpful" to his firm.
Some respondents, on the other hand, were more restrained and
others expressed concern over the uncertainties that they felt continued to
surround the current international financial situation.

The president of a

large multinational petroleum producer stated that the devaluation had no

major immediate impact on his firm.

Similarly, the president of a lead

importing corporation felt the devaluation did not "involve" his firm very
much.

Further, the owner of a large fruit growing concern—a director—stated

he did not expect the devaluation to have any effects on the fruit growing
business nor on any agricultural lines oriented to domestic consumption.

As

noted, a number of respondents expressed general concern over the balance of
payments picture, citing the need for reform of the international monetary
system.

A number were especially concerned over the "Japanese situation", with

this view most strongly expressed by one respondent who declared that "the
Japanese are the heart of the problem".
Turning to the domestic picture, it was the consensus of the
Buffalo branch directors that Phase III had not altered the favorable outlook for corporate profits this year.

Also, those directors did not expect

Phase III to result in any significant shift in plant and equipment spending.
They noted the uncertainties created by the new approach, but felt that the
elimination of the "red tape" associated with Phase II more than made up for
the unfavorable effect of these uncertainties.

On the other hand, some

respondents were quite dubious regarding the wage side of the control program.
An upstate banker, a director, felt that a "double standard" was being used—
one for organized labor and a more stringent one for non-union workers.

The

lead importer mentioned above stated he expected Phase III to "break down"
in the area of wages.

The non-ferrous metal producer felt the new program had

contributed to a seven week strike in his firm's southern facilities inasmuch
as the firm had been close to signing a contract when the "Phase III bombshell
hit".

With respect to shortages of raw materials and manufactured goods,
most comments on specific products focussed on shortages of lumber products.
In part, these shortages were attributed to the export of wood products as
a result of the price control program which, according to the respondents,
made such exports more profitable than domestic sales.

Also, reduction in

wood product supply and rises in production costs were attributed to new
ecology standards and to the activities of conservationist organizations.
Apart from the wood products industries, however, the directors saw no direct
indication of shortages and no evidence of inventory stock piling in anticipation
of such shortages.

But they felt that higher prices and longer delivery

schedules pointed to increasing strains on productive capacity.
Against this background, many respondents expressed alarm over
the possibility of a return to surging inflation. Most Directors cited
this prospect as one of the major problems they foresaw on the economic and
financial horizon.

The opinions of other business leaders were perhaps best

expressed by the chairman of a large financial institution who commented
"everything is tending toward inflationV.

THIRD DISTRICT—PHILADELPHIA
General business conditions are very favorable and improving in
the Third District.

Production activity is surging ahead strongly and is

expected to continue to do so for at least the next six months.

Labor

markets are bullish, as many firms hire more workers and extend the length
of their average workweek.
is up significantly too.

The employment outlook for the next six months
Investment in inventory and plant and equipment

is boosting the area economy, with plant and equipment increases mentioned
more frequently than increases in inventory investment.
recovering nicely from a lull after Christmas.

Retail sales are

On the darker side,

however, inflationary expectations are high and rising.

And, bankers are

complaining about the Regulation Q interest rate ceilings.
Production activity is moving up strongly:

71 percent of the

respondents to this month's business outlook survey report increases in
their new orders, and 67 percent report increased shipments.

Virtually

none of the local manufacturers are currently experiencing decreases in
production.

On the six-month horizon, the production outlook is even

brighter; almost 80 percent of the firms contacted expect increased shipments.
Employment in the Third District has improved significantly since
last month.

One quarter of the firms are increasing their number of employees,

and one quarter are increasing the number of hours in their average workweek.
Over 70 percent report no change in their number of employees or the length
of their average workweek.

The situations should improve further; half the

firms report plans to hire more workers in the next six months.

Plant and equipment spending plans continue high at the level
reported last month.

Slightly over half the firms report plans to increase

their investment in plant and equipment in the next six months.
Investment in inventory is increasing, at over a third of the
firms responding to the survey; most of the rest report no change in inventories.

This increased inventory investment is expected to be short-

lived, however.

Six months in the future almost as many firms report plans to

decrease as to increase their inventories.
Local retailers report that consumers are spending liberally again
after a lull following Christmas.

Autos are selling very well.

Inflationary

expectations are high and rising.

Over a third of the firms participating

in the survey report increases in the prices they charge and the prices they
pay.

During the next six months over three fourths of the respondents expect

to pay and to receive higher prices; this is a significant increase in
inflationary expectations over last month.

Virtually no firms report decreases

in current prices or the prices they expect six months hence.
Area bankers report that demand deposits, time deposits, and savings
deposits are all growing slowly.

They complain that Regulation Q interest

rate ceilings are hindering their ability to get deposits.

Demand for

mortgage loans is good, and these loans can be made if they are sought, but the
bankers report that mortgage loans are increasingly unattractive as interest
rates in other areas rise above the mortgage ceilings.
business loans are up nicely.

Consumer loans and

However, one banker pointed out that his bank

was suffering a loss of 60 basis points on all loans made at the prime rate
when it is compared with the bank's weighted average cost of the capital.

FOURTH DISTRICT ~

CLEVELAND

Economic activity in the District seems to be approaching nearboom proportions, according to the recent performance of key economic indicators and comments from businessmen, directors, and economists.

The inter-

national currency situation does not appear to have affected business
sentiment.

Expansion in the manufacturing sector continues at a robust pace;

the major sources of strength are the steel, automotive, and machinery
industries.

Residential construction is at a record high, while nonresidential

construction contracts rose in January to the highest level in four years.
Recent: gains in payroll employment continue to be somewhat stronger in the
District than in the nation, and there are widespread reports of shortages
of skilled labor.

Some of our directors are concerned about the likelihood

of further acceleration of inflationary pressures and about the possibility of
a slowdown in economic activity during 1974.
Our monthly survey of manufacturers indicated that economic activity
in the District's manufacturing sector was increasing in January at the fastest
rate in the nine-year history of the survey.

Returns received so far this

month show that new orders, shipments, backlogs, and inventories all posted
substantial additional gains in February.

Also, the proportion of firms ex-

periencing increases in delivery time, employment, the workweek, and prices
paid reached record highs.

(The pervasivene-ss of recent price increases is

substantiated by the latest report of purchasing agents in the Cleveland area—
92 percent reported paying higher prices in February than in January, the
highest figure since August 1956.)

Comments of our industrial directors emphasized the strength of
new orders and backlogs in their firms.

Those associated with capital goods

and consumer goods areas mentioned that business has been extremely good,
both they and their customers are having difficulty in building inventories.
Several of the directors reported that they plan to keep a tight rein on
their inventory situation, however.

Some of the directors were of the

opinion that part of the strength in new orders was the result of numerous
capital goods customers placing advance orders because they fear shortages
later this year.

Concern was also expressed about the effect of recent price

behavior on the large number of major labor negotiations scheduled through
1973.

Some of the directors are also becoming concerned about the prospects

for a reduced pace of business activity in 1974.

One director whose

diversified firm has record orders in all areas of its business, mentioned
specifically that he expects a drop off in business next year and is
therefore avoiding an overextension of plant capacity.
Economists from major firms in the area are also reporting ebullient
business conditions, and they are projecting a sustained high level of operations—at or near capacity—through 1973.

One economist with a large machine

tool firm in Cleveland said that orders have risen more sharply since
September than for any comparable period in the twenty-five years he has
been with the firm. Lead times have lengthened significantly.

Last

September, this firm was quoting six-month deliveries; now they are on a
fifteen-to eighteen-month basis.

Thus, the management of this firm is

extremely optimistic over the prospects for production well into 1974.

Economists in the steel industry report that the recent volume of
orders has been close to a record high, and orders are expected to strengthen
in the months ahead.

Production is likely to continue at the practical

limits of capacity through the balance of this year.

Steel consumers will

have difficulty in stockpiling later this year (anticipating next year's
labor negotiations) because of capacity limitations.

Industry sources also

report: that a substantial portion of the planned capital spending for 1973
will represent pollution control equipment, while spending for modernization
and additions to capacity is still well below recent years.
Another economist said that output in both basic chemical and
plastic products has been at capacity, and will remain so for the foreseeable
future.

The only problem on the near-term horizon in this area is expected

to come from the energy shortage, particularly electric power during the
peak power-consuming months in the summer.
Reports from bankers reveal a tightening in loan terms, especially
for real estate (higher downpayments and shorter maturities).

In addition,

finance companies are moving out of commercial paper and back to the banks.
The largest banks in Pittsburgh and Cleveland report that their large accounts
headquartered in these two cities, and for whom they are the principal
bankers, have not yet come in to borrow significant amounts for investment
purposes.

The bankers still expect such a surge in credit demand and

attribute the softness in this area to date to strong corporate cash flows.

FIFTH DISTRICT—RICHMOND
According to businessmen and bankers responding to our most recent
survey, the Fifth District economy continued its upward momentum during
the past month.
ago levels.
expand.

Retail sales were reported to be considerably above year-

Manufacturers' shipments, new orders, and backlogs continued to

Demand for credit continued to grow, with the demand for consumer

loans being especially strong.

Construction activity was reported to be at

high levels despite substantial increases in building costs in recent weeks.
Generally, businessmen and bankers are confident that the economic outlook
for the District is favorable.
Reports of continued strength in the manufacturing sector were almost
universal in this month's survey.

Shipments, new orders, and backlogs were

reported to have increased substantially.

Except in hosiery lines, textile

production and sales remained strong; a short supply of synthetic fibers is
causing some problems for the industry.

Foreign investment appears to be

increasing significantly in the District, most notably in the Carolinas.

Several

foreign firms have recently started manufacturing operations in the Carolinas
or announced their intention to do so.
While inventories reportedly declined further in the past month, most
respondents believe that inventories are at appropriate levels.

Some retailers

reported recent upward adjustments in inventory levels to bring them in line with
increased sales expectations.

A number of manufacturing firms indicate that

current plant and equipment capacity is at lower than desired levels.
Manufacturers reported that employment was unchanged from recent high
levels and that hours worked per week had increased slightly since the last
survey.

A sizable number of banking respondents reported increases in employment

in their areas.

As in the past several surveys, a shortage of labor was the

most common problem mentioned by respondents.

Insured unemployment rates are

reported to be less than 1 percent in some areas, and numerous firms are said
to be advertising heavily in an attempt to attract workers.

Numerous firms

reported increases in both wages and prices received since our last survey.
Several respondents cited sharp increases in building costs in recent weeks.
The retail sales picture in the District remains very favorable.
Several major retailers reported that sales are considerably higher than yearago levels, with sales of women's apparel being especially strong.

Generally,

retailers appear to be optimistic about the outlook for the spring season.
Demand for all types of loans remains strong in the District.

Demand

for consumer loans is apparently stronger than the demand for business and
mortgage loans.

One large bank reported that February was the best month that

his bank had ever had for consumer loans.
to favorable weather conditions.

This was attributable, in part,

Both residential and nonresidential construction

activity increased in the last month.
In the District farm sector, realized gross and net income per farm
reached record levels in 1972.

Average net income in the District amounted to

$4,069 per farm, 19 percent above a year earlier.
District businessmen and bankers remain confident about the general
economic outlook.

Nearly two thirds of the banking respondents expect

improvement in business activity in their areas in the next two or three months.

SIXTH DISTRICT—ATLANTA
Businessmen and bankers expect a robust expansion of economic activity
to continue.

A boom appears to be developing in commercial construction.

There

is upward price pressure on autos and furniture and construction materials.
Scattered shortages of construction and manufacturing workers are reported.
In the past month, plans for a large number of hotels and motels have
been announced.

Among the largest projects are a 31-story hotel for Atlanta, a

33-story hotel for Nashville, and a 19-story hotel for Jacksonville.

Two new

budget motel firms have sprung up in Atlanta with plans to build six motels in
various locations in the District.

A luxury motel chain has also been founded

in Atlanta; its first project will be a motel near Orlando, and additional projects are planned in three other District locations.

In addition, there have

been several announcements of smaller motels.
There is much other prospective commercial construction.

Announcements

include: a twelve-story bank building in Jacksonville, an $18 million airline
company facility in Atlanta, twin ten-story towers in Tallahassee, a $12 million
civic center in Huntsville, a $100 million commercial-residential project in
Jacksonville, a $4 million office building in Atlanta, a $3.5 million office
building near Clearwater, and four shopping malls.
Announcements of residential construction projects continue to be
relatively few. Accommodations for up to 22,000 residents will be built within
Disney World.

A $6 million condominium is planned for Jacksonville.

However,

residential construction contractors are worried about labor shortages and
rising prices of materials and land.

Because of a gas shortage, a brick producer

in Tennessee had to cut production, and normal delivery delay has now extended to

sixteen to twenty weeks.

A scarcity of concrete blocks and lumber is reported.

One Florida real estate dealer fears a "condominium crash" because of overbuilding.
Announcements of new plants and plant expansions continue brisk. A
Tennessee banker reports that businessmen are being less conservative about
capital expenditure projects, and new-plant inquiries are at the highest level
in three years in Tennessee.

A $24 million newspaper plant will be built in

Tampa.. A tire company is expanding its plant in Huntsville, and three new
industries are planning to locate there.

There have been several announcements

of relatively small plants that will manufacture building materials and shoes.
Retail sales are reported to be strong, and many retailers are expecting
a banner year.

One auto dealer in Tennessee said that inventories are scarce.

He reports that popular models are selling at sticker prices or even above and
that dealer profit margins should double this year.

In order to get cars, one

dealer offered to buy thirty luxury cars from another dealer at $750 per unit
above dealer cost.

A furniture dealer reports strong consumer demands have

pushed up prices and strung out deliveries.

Newspaper and radio advertising

revenues in the Nashville area are described as "remarkable".
areas are looking for a robust 1973.

Some tourist

Some national chain stores are reportedly

reluctant to increase prices and are willing to shave markups.
A few aerospace and defense-related layoffs have been announced, but
labor shortages continue.

Construction and manufacturing laborers are in short

supply in several areas, and hotel jobs in Atlanta are going unfilled.

The job

market for college graduates has picked up appreciably at the University of
Tennessee and at the University of Jacksonville.

SEVENTH DISTRICT —

CHICAGO

The general economic picture in the Seventh District is the most
vigorous in many years, certainly since early 1968.
goods are rising at a faster pace.

Prices of industrial

Reports of shortages of skilled or

trainable workers are increasingly common.

Lead times are stretching out,

very sharply in some cases, and there are indications of a cumulative impact
on orders as firms attempt to assure their lines of supply.

Inventories are

low, and attempts to rebuild inventories relative to sales are unsuccessful
in many cases bacause of rising shipments.

Considerable confusion exists on

the part of those who attempt to reconcile various official statements on
Phase Three.

The tendency here is to discount reports emanating from

eastern centers that a significant slowdown, even a recession, is probable
by the fourth quarter—assuming, some add, no critical "money crunch".
Except for higher prices of imports, the dollar devaluation and
the continuing international monetary crisis have been taken calmly by Midwest businessmen, so far as we can determine, and have not influenced domestic
plans or expectations.

Those selling abroad often have plants abroad or use

licensees. Despite increasing foreign demand and more competitive United
States prices, there is little interest in pushing foreign sales.

Businessmen

point out that a large share of foreign trade, both in imports and exports, is
in "noncompetitive" items.
Each month additional firms report that they have joined the mainstream of the vigorous business uptrend.

This has been most significant re-

cently in the case of capital goods associated with expansion rather than

renovation, such as overhead cranes.

Mining equipment, which had been in

a slump, has revived again.
Despite nagging concerns of various sorts, business sentiment
is ebullient.

Nothing is so conducive to "confidence" as rising sales and

orders accompanied by rising profit margins.

A typical report shows

sales up 15 percent and profits up 25 percent last year, with similar
gains expected for 1973.
For fear of "rocking the boat" there will be great reluctance to
"get tough" in upcoming union negotiations.

The 5.5 percent (or 6.2 percent?)

wage guideline is looked upon as a dead letter for union negotiations.
Earlier hopes that some unions would be satisfied with cost-of-living adjustments plus some fringes, such as dental care or voluntary overtime, appear
to be fading.

Aside from current needs, firms facing possible strikes later

this year will try to build inventories to strengthen their bargaining
position.
In addition to rising output, sales, orders, and employment, purchasing agents report longer lead times and increasing quality problems.
Higher prices are being paid for a long list of items, both hard and soft
goods from both foreign and domestic sources.
as "shocking".

Lumber prices are described

The Chicago report for February shows 87 percent paying

higher prices, up from 60 percent a year ago and above the 83 percent peak
month for 1969.

In the Milwaukee group, 81 percent paid higher prices in

February, equal to the proportion in the peak month of 1969.
The steel market is booming.
second quarter for cold-rolled sheet.

Some mills are booked through the
Some quote August delivery.

Steel

importers who are unable to get assurance of adequate supplies from foreign

sources are having difficulty getting booked on United States schedules.
Some importers and some United States mills have stopped taking on new
customers.

It appears that United States steel mills could not supply

all United States needs in 1973.

Perhaps 10 million tons of imports will

be required, even if the United States industry operates at capacity in 1973
with shipments of 100 million tons.
Availability of trained, or readily trainable, workers is said to
be limiting output increases in some industries.

A typical list of shortage

occupations includes "electricians, auto mechanics, appliance repairmen,
welders, machinists, tool and die workers, pipe fitters, and plumbers".
A composite list could be extended to include almost any recognized skill.
Additional firms complain about lack of availability of components,
especially metal fasteners, castings, forgings, bearings, but also more
elaborate parts such as drives, couplings, and electric motors.

Spokesmen

say that business is the strongest since "1968" or "1966", 'In ten years",
even "since World War II".

Part of the problem has been the closing of

smaller plants and a rather sudden reduction in availability of foreign supplies, especially from Japan.
Construction may show weakness later in the year.

New project

developments have been slowed by environmental factors, overbuilding in
some areas, financial problems, and fuel shortages.

But currently, demand

for all building materials is very strong, and many items are on allocation
or critically short.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District continued
strongly upward and fears of accelerating inflation intensified in February and
early March, according to a selected group of businessmen.

Retail sales rose

throughout the District with the exception of the St. Louis metropolitan area.
Manufacturing activity expanded further.
throughout most of the District.
generally declined.

Construction continued at a high level

Employment was up, and the unemployment rate

Banks reported further upward pressure on interest rates.

Retail sales at department stores in the Eighth District were generally
well above year-ago levels in February and early March.

The uptrend of the past

year apparently continued throughout the District except in the St. Louis area
where department stores reported little change in sales from a year ago.
is consistent with other economic trends for the St. Louis area.

This

For example,

even though the unemployment rate has fallen, employment in St. Louis declined
about 2 percent in the past twelve months and at an annual rate of about 2
percent for the past three years.
Businessmen indicated widespread strength in the manufacturing sector.
Representatives of all manufacturing firms interviewed reported rising output
and siiles.

Sales by major chemical firms in the District continued to exceed

year-ago levels by 10 to 15 percent.

A representative of the aircraft manufactur-

ing industry reported that orders for passenger planes are moving sharply up and
that production is being geared to higher levels as a result of the larger
incoming orders.

The paper and paperboard-container industries are still

operating at capacity, and representatives report that there will be little
expansion in the near future as little construction of additional productive
capacity is currently underway.

The clothing industry likewise reported that

plants were operating at capacity levels and that few plans were being made for
plant: expansion.

Employment is increasing, however, at some of the clothing

plants.
Construction continues at a very high level throughout most of the
District.

Contractors in northeast Mississippi are four to seven months behind

their schedules and must wait six months to get delivery of bricks.

Some

builders in eastern Arkansas are postponing projects because of excessive demands
for construction resources.

Building is beginning to increase in St. Louis,

where it has been at a relatively low level since 1970.
Employment continued to "inch up" throughout the District, and the
unemployment rate continued to decline.

Most firms reported some additions

to their work force, and some manufacturing establishments reported that a
second shift of production workers was being used.

In general, labor markets

continued to tighten for both skilled and unskilled workers.

The January

unemployment rate was down in most of the District, and it declined sharply in
St. Louis where the rate was relatively high throughout last year.
Representatives of financial firms reported further upward pressure
on most interest rates in recent weeks.

Bank deposits have continued to rise,

and saivings at savings and loan associations continued up but at a somewhat
slower rate than last fall.

Loan demand has continued sharply upward.

Sav-

ings and loan associations in St. Louis were lenders of funds outside the area
last year, but they now report that local demand is picking up and fewer loans
will be made elsewhere.

Mortgage rates remain stable but are expected to rise

later in 1973.
Agricultural conditions are generally favorable to farmers, with the
exception of those operators who lost a large percentage of their 1972 crops

because of unfavorable harvesting conditions.

With the recent sharp increases

in prices of farm commodities, there is sufficient incentive for expansion of
output and larger crops are in prospect for the current year.

Financing, how-

ever, may be somewhat more difficult for those farmers with low equities as a
result of higher production costs and "tighter credit markets".
Inflation continues to be a major topic of discussion among businessmen.

Such expressions as "now inflation is the chief economic problem" and

"how do I hedge against the declining value of the dollar" were frequent during
the recent survey.
food costs.

Most of those interviewed expressed concern about rising

NINTH DISTRICT —

MINNEAPOLIS

Bank directors are concerned whether Phase Three will be able to
restrain price increases.

One director feels that meat prices are at or near

their peak but sees no large decline until 1974.

Some directors report inventory

overbuilding, while others reveal that excess inventories are not a problem.
Farm production will be up this year which will place some strain on District
farm suppliers.

District manufacturers anticipate sizable sales gains in 1973.

Given the recent announcements concerning food price increases and the
dispute between the Administration and organized labor over the 5.5 percent wage
guideline, bank directors generally express concern about the Administration's
ability to control inflation during Phase Three.

Two directors indicate that

people expect the rate of inflation to increase without question.

One feels

that Phase Three has lost its grip on the economy, unless the Administration
takes some firm action to restrain wage and price increases.

Another director

states that uncertainty over Phase Three will not be dispelled until "flexibility"
with respect to the 5.5 percent wage guideline is clearly defined.

A Montana

director reveals that prices of products purchased by his area's businessmen
have been rising quite rapidly, and an upper Michigan director expresses concern
over increasing food costs.

One director, however, feels that it is too early

to assess the impact of Phase Three, and another discloses that several businessmen in his area are not concerned about price increases.
With regard to food prices, one director believes that the peak for meat
prices has been reached or is near. Many farmers, he believes, are currently
refraining from marketing cattle in order to take advantage of expected price
increases, and as these cattle come to market in the near future some decline in
prices will occur.

However, he does not expect a pronounced drop in beef prices

until next year, since many farmers will hold heifers off the market later this
year in order to be able to produce more cattle in 1974. Uor does he anticipate
any large drop in hog prices this spring but believes hog production should
expand noticeably by next fall which will dampen pork prices.
Directors' opinions regarding inventories are mixed.

A Twin Cities

area banker indicates that firms surveyed by his bank have not reported any
inventory buildup and have generally not experienced a lengthening in delivery
times, and a major Twin Cities area retailer indicates that his firm is not
experiencing inventory problems.

While a Twin Cities area manufacturer reports

no speculative inventory buildup, he reveals that certain materials are becoming
scarce and that delivery times are lengthening.

Some danger exists, he believes,

that demand may not be adequate to absorb rising inventories in the future.
In the construction industry, according to another director, speculative inventory
building is occurring.

A South Dakota director discloses that slow delivery

times are encouraging his area's businessmen to build up their inventories, while
another director states that salesmen encourage businessmen in his area to
increase their purchases in order to avoid future shortages.

Several other

directors report that their areas' businessmen have not experienced inventory
problems or difficulty in procuring goods.
District farmers are planning to increase production this year which
could place some strain on suppliers of fuel, fertilizer, and other crop-raising
inputs. A recent newspaper survey of farm cooperatives discloses that Midwest
farmers face a tight supply of fertilizer and fuel. Also, a major railroad may
be unable to meet 40 percent of the demand for boxcars to haul fertilizer.
According to a bank director, a critical shortage of farm machinery parts is
anticipated in South Dakota, and reports reveal that farm machinery is becoming
difficult to obtain in Montana and South Dakota.

For example, the delivery time

on a new tractor is now between six to eight months in South Dakota.

Our first-quarter industrial expectations survey discloses that District
manufacturers look for sizable sales gains in 1973 with durable goods sales
rising faster than nondurable goods sales. First-quarter sales are expected to
be up 12.2 percent from a year earlier, followed by gains of 10.9 percent and
9.5 percent in the second and third quarters, respectively.

In the fourth

quarter of 1972, District manufacturing sales increased 16.7 percent, which
surpassed the 12.8 percent advance anticipated three months earlier.

TENTH DISTRICT ~

KANSAS CITY

Boom conditions prevail in the Tenth District.

Growth continues in

all major sectors, with the possible exception of residential construction.
The agricultural sector is especially strong with a large volume of output
being marketed at record high prices.

Recent sales gains, reinforced by heavy

orders, are encouraging manufacturers to build up inventories of materials.
Shortages are thwarting their efforts somewhat, driving up prices and lengthening lead times.

Transportation difficulties are slowing grain deliveries,

causing country elevators to borrow heavily at a time when banks are experiencing very strong loan demand from other sources.

Bankers are concerned about

disintermediation; businessmen criticize the uncertainty, and doubt the effectiveness, of Phase Three.
Purchasing agents throughout the District continue to add to their
inventories.

Many buyers complain of lengthening lead times and late deliveries.

They grumble about especially short supplies of sheet steel, textiles and
paper, castings, petroleum derivatives, copper materials, and certain plastics
and chemicals.

Machine tools also are more and more difficult to come by, as

are electric motors, glass bottles, refrigeration controls, pressure gauges,
and radio-TV components.

One agricultural supplier cannot get enough 1,000

gallon fuel storage tanks as farmers buy up those available, apparently
planning to hoard gasoline so as not to be caught short again.
Prices of some materials have increased sharply in recent weeks.
cost of goods bought abroad jumped up following the devaluation.

The

Most other

big price increases appear to reflect market forces; they are confined largely
to products of those industries operating at capacity.
however, are increasing.

Virtually all prices,

Purchasing agents are optimistic about business this

year, but they doubt that Phase Three will effectively curb inflation.
worry about 1974, because "recession follows inflation".

Some

Boxcar shortages have severely restricted grain movements from
country positions to terminal ports for exporting.

Many elevators are unable

to deliver grain in accordance with contractual agreements that were negotiated
several months ago.

Some penalties have been assessed for failure to make

delivery, but by and large the exporters and processors are taking a lenient
stance because of the transportation bottlenecks.

Nonetheless, the inability to

deliver grain has created huge credit requirements to refinance inventories and
to meet higher margin requirements on short hedges in the future market because
of high grain prices.
Commercial banks and banks for cooperatives (BCs) have reported sharp
increases in loan demands from country elevators.

Two of the BCs headquartered •

in the District indicated that outstanding loans are roughly

double those of

a year ago, with about 40 percent of the increase coming in the last two months.
Even if the marketing channels should open soon, which appears doubtful, any
reduction in the amount of credit outstanding for grain will be largely offset
by normal seasonal increases in loans to finance farm supplies.

On balance,

most country elevators are expected to come out of the current situation intact
due to the availability of credit when it was needed.
Besides the extraordinary loan demands of grain elevators, District
commercial bankers report very strong loan demand from other sectors.

Commercial

and industrial, consumer instalment, and agricultural loans have all been expanding at greater than normal seasonal rates in the past month.

Respondents cited

the vigorous pace of economic activity as a major source of loan demand, but a
number mentioned specifically the impact of higher prices on the nominal financial
needs of borrowers.

In particular, sharply higher prices paid have greatly

increased loan requirements for livestock feeding and other agricultural

activity.

Several banks reported that, because of relative interest costs,

larger national firms had borrowed from banks instead of selling commercial
paper.

A month ago this was an insignificant factor in the lending activity

of Tenth District banks, which have relatively few large national accounts and
are called upon for such financing to a greater extent during periods of tight
credit, and misaligned rates.
Total deposits at large District banks rose moderately in February,
roughly in line with the normal seasonal pattern.

However, this came about

through a somewhat unusual combination of sizable demand deposit outflow
(primarily from state and local government accounts), a miniscule inflow of
consumer savings deposits, and a large increase in certificates of deposit (CDs).
Despite their apparent success in selling large CDs, more bankers seem concerned
about disintermediation than was true a month ago.
market: rates had already affected their deposits.

A few asserted that rising
A greater number felt that

the maintenance of present Regulation Q ceilings, along with restraints on
lending rates, would put them in a difficult position in the near future.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

DALLAS

The economy of the Eleventh District continues to advance as 1973
unfolds.

Industrial production in Texas rose to a record level in January, and

total employment in the five District states continued to expand.

Construction

activity in the District states also increased in January, and District department stores sales showed monthly as well as year-to-year increases in February.
New automobile registrations fell in January but were still well ahead of their
year-earlier pace.

The results of a recent survey of our directors who are

bankers indicate that business in the Eleventh District is likely to improve
still further over the next six months but that inflationary pressures are
also likely to mount.
Most responding bank directors feel that business conditions in
their communities have improved over the past three months and are likely to
continue improving over the next six months.

While the majority foresee little

change in the rate of increase in consumer prices during the first half of 1973,
most believe that the rise in consumer prices will accelerate in the second half
of the year.

The majority also indicated that the introduction of Phase Three

caused them to alter their expectations with respect to future price movements,
and they now believe that prices will rise much faster than previously anticipated.

About half the directors improved their expectations of future business

conditions because of the recent devaluation of the dollar.

The remaining half

indicated no change in their outlook.
Most respondents expect short-term market rates of interest to increase
over the next six months, but only a few expect substantially higher short-term
rates.

The majority anticipate little change in long-term rates, although some

expect a moderate increase in these rates.

None expect either category of rates

to be lower.

Almost none of the respondents anticipate that the prime lending

rate will rise above 7 percent at either midyear or the year-end.
In reply to questions relating to their particular banks, our directors
indicated that business, consumer, and mortgage loan demand strengthened moderately during the last three months.
essentially unchanged.

Only agricultural loan demand remained

Most respondents did not essentially change their willing-

ness to make mortgage and agricultural loans during the last three months.

A

few were even more moderately willing to make consumer and business loans.
Taking into account their expectations for loan demand, our directors
generally rated funds either very available or moderately available at their
banks.

Slightly more than half are aggressively seeking large certificates of

deposit (CDs).

While the majority were paying less than 6 percent for 30- to

89-day large CDs, most were paying between 6 and 7 percent for CDs with
maturities beyond 89 days.

The Directors split half and half as to whether

they expect disintermediation of savings and time deposits in the coming six
months.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index rose to a
new high in January after easing slightly the month before.

Both the manufactur-

ing and mining components increased, while the utilities components fell
slightly.

In manufacturing, both durable and nondurable goods industries shared

in the monthly rise.
Oil allowables for the District states were left unchanged in February,
permitting maximum production of crude oil except for a few fields in Texas that
are partially restricted for conservation reasons.

With the prospect of gasoline

shortages in the near future and the difficulty of getting enough low sulfur
crude from abroad, refiners in the District are finding themselves in a
production bind.

Seasonally adjusted total employment in the five southwestern states
rose substantially in January.

Nevertheless, the unemployment rate remained

at 4.1 percent slightly higher than a year ago.
The value of construction contracts awarded in the five southwestern
states continued to rise in January.

Both residential and nonresidential build-

ing in the five-state area rose from December levels, while nonbuilding construction
fell moderately.
Sales of department stores in the District continued to rise above
year-ago levels in February.

Cumulative sales for the first two months of the

year were significantly above the level for the corresponding period last year
in all five metropolitan areas for which data are regularly published.

The

total number of new automobile registrations for the four largest metropolitan
areas of Texas —

Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio —

fell in

January from the December level, although the San Antonio area reported a
slight increase.

Nevertheless, the level in January is still more than 30

percent higher than in January a year ago.
Agricultural activities in the District have been hindered by cold
and wet weather conditions.

However, the winter wheat crop is making good to

excellent growth as moisture is adequate.

Farmers of the five District states

sold nearly $7.3 billion of farm products in 1972.

This is 15 percent above

1971 and established a new record for cash receipts from farm marketings.

This

higher cash flow level has been reflected in increased expenditures for land
and capital items.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

In the opinion of our directors, the present expansion in the
national economy will continue at least through mid-1973.

Consumer spending

and business investment expenditures are seen as being particularly strong.
Construction activity remains on a high plateau, with commercial building
showing considerable strength, but a significant decline in home building
is expected by midyear.

Combined with the overall optimism, there is con-

cern on the part of some directors about inflation and the effectiveness of
Phase Three in restraining wage increases.
Most directors believe that a vigorous economic expansion will continue throughout the first half of 1973.

Others think that a slowing will

occur in the second half of the year, and some believe that the turning point
will be delayed until 1974.

Estimates of the growth in GNP range from 9 to

10 percent annually, with the real increase being from 5 to 7 percent.
Consumer spending, especially for automobiles and durables, is
described as vigorous in most areas of the District.

Retail sales in

California, for example, are thought to be running 10 percent above last year's
level.

Plant and equipment expenditures are rising in most areas.

Spending

is increasing for pollution-control equipment as well as for expansion of
productive capacity.
Overall construction activity shows no signs of slowdown, although
a decline is expected in the second half of the year.
this strength largely to commercial construction.

One director attributes

He estimates that this

type of construction accounts for 25 percent of the increase in completions
in the San Francisco Bay area and for 15 percent in southern California, compared with 8 percent nationally.

Part of the recent jump in California

building permits is ascribed to attempts to start projects before new
environmental controls take effect.

Whether commercial building activity

will be sustained is not certain; one large bank expects a substantial
decline in commercial construction in the San Francisco area because of
aerospace and government cutbacks.

Several directors also expect a signi-

ficant slowdown in residential construction by midyear.

Contrary to most

observers, some directors think that the building mix will shift more to
apartments, and away from single-family residences.
Inflation is viewed as a serious problem by many directors.

There

is some doubt about the effectiveness of Phase III, especially in restraining
large wage increases in upcoming major union-contract negotiations.

Some

directors urge a more restrictive fiscal policy as a means of reducing the
burdens on monetary policy.
A few directors feel that international conditions are causing
considerable uncertainty and disrupting trade patterns.

Most directors

expressed little, if any, concern over the recent devaluation of the dollar
and believe that it should help stimulate exports.
Agricultural prospects are viewed as favorable for most crops, and
reportedly have contributed to higher farm investment expenditures and a
strong demand for land.

Feeder cattle prices are at record highs.

High

prices have encouraged heavier plantings of wheat, potatoes, and feed grains,
but lower prices are expected by some directors later this year if export
demand should fall.
Bankers generally report strong loan demand, both by businesses
and consumers.

Although a few report deposit runoffs and rising loan-deposit

ratios, most bankers think they can meet their customers' loan demands without
experiencing major liquidity problems.

One bank estimates a 13 percent in-

crease in its business loans for the year, but also expects a late-year slowdown in real estate and consumer loans.

Interest rates are expected to be

higher, with short-term rates rising the most.

The higher rates paid on time

and savings accounts may not be matched by higher lending rates, and therefore
several bankers expect a profit squeeze.

