CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

FEBRUARY 7, 1973

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 15
Seventh District - Chicago page 18
Eighth District - St. Louis page 22
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 25
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 32
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*

On the whole

the economy continues strong.

Manufacturing activity

is rising in most areas and is expected to continue upward.
kets are tightening and some labor shortages are reported.

Labor marInventory

investment is reported to be rising only slightly, but plant and equipment spending is increasing as some manufacturers find themselves operating
at near-capacity levels.

Residential construction is continuing at a high

level in most districts.

Commercial construction is rising according to

some reports.

Retail sales generally remain strong.

Farmers are making

larger than average incomes despite various operating problems.

However,

on the darker side, inflationary expectations are rising significantly.
Bankers report some credit tightening and frequently mention rising
interest rates.
Production activity is rising.

Most districts report increases in

new orders, shipments, order backlogs or similar barometers of manufacturing activity.

Some districts (St. Louis, Richmond, Boston) talk of

strong increases in output.

Durables manufacturers are mentioned with

more frequency than non-durables producers in the various districts' discussions of rising manufacturing.

The Richmond districts' furniture manu-

facturers are operating at a high level of output despite labor shortages.
San Francisco reports that activity at Seattle's Boeing facilities are
picking up.

Cleveland refers to "dramatic increases in orders for machine

tools."
Labor markets are tightening in some places.

The Dallas report

spealcs of "particularly buoyant" employment opportunities.

[Asterisk:Prepared

Labor shortages

by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.]

are reported in central Florida.

In St. Louis labor markets are "very

tight" and employment for Research and Development personnel is picking
up.

No general labor shortage appears to exist, however.

example, reports no shortage of skilled labor.
shortages and pockets of high unemployment.
delphia aren't presently increasing.

Minneapolis, fo

Boston reports both labor

Manufacturing jobs in Phila-

Cutbacks in the Federal budget are

mentioned as a possible cause of unemployment pockets in some locales.
Most districts discussing inventories (New York, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Richmond) report that spending from this sector is not bullish.
New York mentions "no discernible change in inventory."

Cleveland talks

about: inventory investment leveling off at a lower level.
Plant and equipment spending is on the rise.

The steel industry and

consumer durables manufacturers in Cleveland's district are expected to
expand their facilities.

Chicago reports that an informal survey there

revealed that manufacturers in the following fields are operating near
full capacity:

paper, petroleum, refining, machine tools, appliances,

furniture, color television, trucks, recreational vehicles, electric
motors, construction machinery, flat rolled steel, foundries, tool and
die shops, lumber, gypsum board, insulating material, fertilizer and certain chemicals.

Many firms in Philadelphia's monthly survey are currently

reporting plans for increased plant and equipment outlays.
Residential construction is expected to rise or at least continue
unabated in most districts.

Minneapolis conducted a telephone survey of

HUD officials and found that "the freeze on subsidized housing should not
effect district homebuilding in 1973, but could dampen residential construction in 1974 and 1975."

However, Atlanta and Dallas do refer to

diminishing rates of housing starts.

San Francisco expects that its high

level of construction may turn down.

The reports on non-residential con-

struction are mostly bullish.
The outlook for retail sales is generally good, although some districts do report that sales are still recovering from a lull that followed
holiday buying.

San Francisco's sales expectations are optimistic and

they point out that tax refunds should boost consumers' spending this
spring.
Inflationary expectations are rising on a broad front.

Chicago

reports that the oil companies there are not entering into their usual one
or two-year contracts with oil truckers and other large users because of
expected price rises. Philadelphia reports that the

respondents to its

survey report significant increases in their expectations about prices
for the second month in a row.

Minneapolis reports that some labor unions

there plan to disregard the 5.5% wage guideline.

New York reports that a

number of its respondents are so concerned about inflation they think that
price controls are probably necessary.
Most bankers across the nation are experiencing rising loan demand
from businessmen and consumers.
signs of diminishing.

Applications for mortgages also show few

Some Boston bankers are being more restrictive in

granting lines of credit.

Time and savings deposits are providing a

small amount of new funds in most of the cases reported.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

New orders for capital equipment and consumer durable goods are
continuing to advance strongly, according to our directors.

Labor

shortages are reported as well as continuing pockets of high unemployment.

District bankers expect strong loan demand in the coming months,

but are extremely worried about the competition from new accounts.
Our directors expect 1973 to be a very good year for the capital
goods industries.

Manufacturers of capital equipment see the projections

finally being confirmed with substantial orders.

Aerospace continues

to be an exception in the vibrant capital goods industry.

Not only are

defense orders down, but commercial aircraft orders are below that expected
three to four years ago.
Orders for consumer durables, especially those related to autos and
travel campers, were noted as being very strong.

Orders for nondurable

consumer goods were reported as lackluster, but January is an off-season
for these products.
Retail sales in Connecticut continue to be severely depressed by a
three-month-old bus strike in six major cities in the state.

At the moment,

according to our director from Connecticut, there does not appear to
be any early resolution to the conflict.

If it continues for another 60

days, and retailers miss Easter sales after losing some Christmas business,
small retailers in Connecticut will be in a severe financial squeeze.
Some of our directors report difficulties in hiring new staff, both
skilled and unskilled workers.

However, pockets of unemployment with

unemployment rates in excess of 10 percent exist in the District.
District bankers expect strong loan demand in the coming months, with
upward pressures on interest rates.

Requests for bank loan commitments

are continuing to grow, but not at an abnormally high rate for this stage

of the cycle.

However, some banks are becoming more restrictive in

granting lines of credit.

Bankers in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New

Hampshire are very concerned over the potential competitive effects of
new accounts on their demand deposits.
All three of the outside correspondents contacted this month, Professors
Eckstein, Samuelson, and Dr. Shapiro, favored a monetary growth target of
6 percent.

There was disagreement about the cause of the recent sharp

increases in short-term money rates.

Eckstein and Shapiro argued that the

rapid rise in short rates was not sustainable, not being justified on the
basis of fundamentals.

They attributed the sharpness of the rise to concern

about the course of inflation in general, and the willingness of the Federal
Reserve to control monetary growth in particular.
Eckstein strongly criticized the high rates of growth of RPDs and the
monetary aggregates over the last few months, and suggested that this "poor
management" stemmed from placing too much attention on operational problems
(the implemenation of Regulation J) in relation to the more basic policy
problems.

He felt that the emphasis on aggregates in recent years has been

successful, and repetition of the attempt to manage interest rates would lead
to an abrupt halt in monetary growth as in the 1966-69 era.
prescription was for a smooth 7 to 8 percent growth in RPDs.

His policy
Shapiro advo-

cated a 6 to 9 percent growth in RPDs on the grounds that this would
stabilize inflationary expectations in a favorable way and produce
stability in long rates.
Samuelson did not believe that uncertainty about monetary management
has contributed to the increase in short rates.

He attributed the rise to

exceptional strength in the economy which, in keeping with his philosophy
of a.n "activist, swinging" monetarv policy, led him to the recommendation
that monetary policy needs to be tighter in the near term (4 percent money

in February) than it needs be in the intermediate term (6 percent in most
quarters).

He also stressed rate flexibility, suggesting that a run-up

now could be followed by a leveling off or decline in the future.
Dr. Shapiro pointed to two factors relevant to the interpretation of
inflationary pressures later this year.

First, several steps have been

taken to increase the supply of food which will alleviate the upward price
pressure 3 to 9 months from now.

Secondly, he cautioned not to generalize

from the first few major settlements under Phase III.

This warning was

based upon John Dunlop's espoused preference for a case by case approach.
The average collective bargaining settlement will be composed of wide
extremes, rather than the blanket application of a fixed, permissable
standard.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

In the view of this Bank's directors and other business leaders
contacted recently, the Vietnam accord may have a beneficial psychological influence on consumer confidence, but in general is not
expected to have any major economic impact.

The respondents reacted

cautiously but favorably to Phase III, which was viewed as heralding
eventual elimination of wage and price controls.

They also approved

of the Administration's budget policy, but in general felt it would
be difficult to implement in the face of Congressional pressures.
Little noticeable change in business inventory policies was reported.
The Second District directors generally agreed that most of the
"peace dividend" accruing from the Vietnam settlement had already
been realized, with a number of the directors pointing to the insignificant involvement of American troops in the war over the past
several months.

These directors, moreover, did not look for a result-

ing cut in Federal spending, both because of expected United States
economic help to North and South Vietnam and increased military pay.
One director, however, felt that defense expenditures during fiscal
1974 could be "significantly" reduced through a reduction in military
personnel.

He said this might occur since, with the changeover to an

all-volunteer army, the actual number of volunteers may fall short of
the levels planned in the defense budget.
The respondents in general reacted rather favorably to the modificacations of the wage-price controls under Phase III, viewing it as an
important step toward the eventual elimination of price and wage controls.

In this context, several directors felt these changes were particularly
welcome in the light of the distortions and inequities that were emerging under Phase II.

a number of respondents, however, recognized that

inflationary pressures continued strong and that some form of controls
was probably still necessary.

One director, a senior official of a

large oil corporation, stated that wages and prices may increase somewhat faster under Phase III, but that the rise could be held to modest
proportions if sound monetary and fiscal policies are pursued.

However,

another director, a banker, thought that the Administration's estimates
of inflation were somewhat optimistic, and saw inflation during 1973
in the range of 3 to 5 percent, and probably closer to the higher figure.
Several respondents stated that the results of forthcoming major labor
negotiations would play an important role in determining the success
of the program.
All of the directors reacted favorably to the Administration's
budget strategy.

A number referred to the need for fiscal restraint

in the light of the current economic situation.

The Buffalo branch

directors felt the strategy would gather widespread public support.
These directors, however, along with the head office directors, had
reservations regarding the Administration's ability to keep expenditures in line with the proposed budget in the face of Congressional
opposition.
Most directors did not report any discernible change in inventory
buying policies.

The president of a nationwide retail firm expressed

the view that retail firms were not accumulating inventories as a
hedge against inflation at this time.

On the other hand, the president

of a large metals producing firm did report that there was now evidence

of inventory accumulation in metals in anticipation of further price
increases.
The director associated with the oil industry said that petroleum
inventories were severely depleted as a result of very strong demand,
a leveling off in domestic production, and inadequate levels of imports.
Against this background, he fears the nation may be facing a serious
gasoline shortage later in the year.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Most businessmen contacted report little change in current business
conditions in the Third District, but the six-month outlook is more
optimistic.

New orders and shipments are up after a temporary lull

which followed the Christmas rush.

Current employment opportunities are

flat, but the six-month outlook for hiring is good.

Most of the

respondents to this District's survey are satisfied with their current
level of inventory, but many expect to increase inventories within six
months.

Plant and equipment investment is increasing.

continues strong.
are flat.

Housing demand

Demand for bank loans continues to expand but deposits

These positive factors are partially offset by inflationary

expectations, which have risen significantly for the past two months.
According to the respondents of this Bank's monthly Business Outlook
Survey, production activity in the Third District is rising slowly again
after it temporarily slowed after Christmas.

About 20 percent of the

firms responding to the Survey report increases in their new orders and
new shipments.

Most other respondents report no change in their production,

but looking into the future most area businessmen are bullish.

Sixty-five

percent of the respondents to the Survey currently expect increases in
their new orders and shipments within the next six months.
Employment opportunities in this District are flat.

Over 80 percent

of the firms report no current change from last month in their number of
employees or the length of their average work week.
prospects for the coming months are brighter.

But, employment

Over 40 percent of the

responding firms expect to increase their number of employees, and a

fourth expect to increase their average work week within six months.

This

is a significant increase in the six-month employment outlook over what
was reported one month ago.
Most area businessmen report that they are not currently expanding
their inventories.

However, within the next six months half the respondents

to this Bank's Survey do expect to increase them.

Plant and equipment

spending plans for the next six months are the same as they were last
month—half the firms plan to increase their investment and a third expect
no change.
Construction activity in the Third District is recovering from local
delays caused by a cement workers' strike during December.

Most of the

construction underway in this District is residential rather than
commercial or governmental.
Inflationary expectations rose again this month.

A fourth of the

Survey respondents are paying or receiving higher prices this month
while the rest report no change.

In the next six months two-thirds of

the firms expect to receive higher prices and three-fourths of them
expect to pay higher prices.

This is the second month in a row in which

inflationary expectations rose significantly.

Most of this increase is

on the respondents' six month horizon rather than in the current month,
however.
Third District bankers report that both their savings deposits and
their demand deposits are up only slightly, after allowing for the
seasonal fluctuations.
are needed.

The bankers say they must buy CDs if deposits

Two of the bankers contacted pointed out that there was a

negative spread for funds acquired in the CD market at current rates

(after adjusting for reserve requirements) and then loaned at the prime
rate of 6 percent.

One large bank reported a "tremendous" monthly

increase in its business loans.

The other banks report continued good

demand for business, consumer and real estate loans.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The consensus of about 40 economists—mainly from important
industrial firms and commerical banks in the District—who attended the
Fourth District Business Economists Round Table Meeting held at the Bank
on January 26 is that gains in GNP, both in current dollars and in real
terms, will moderate during the year.

The rate of inflation is expected to

accelerate, and there are indications that capital spending will remain
strong throughout 1973.
The median forecast of the business economists is for a GNP of $1,264
billion in 1973, with real growth of 6.1 percent and an increase in the price
deflator of 3.4 percent.

A further upward surge in prices is expected dur-

ing; the first quarter, generated largely by food and fuels, but also by
the Phase III program.

Some support for this view has been provided already

by the Cleveland purchasing agents' report for January, which shows a sharp
increase in the percent of firms paying higher prices.

On the other hand,

some of our industrialist directors reported that they have instructed
all divisions of their firms to operate on the Phase II basis until the
rules of Phase III are clarified in order that their companies do not become
cases.
The consensus of the business economists is that by the fourth quarter
of 1973 real GNP will be expanding at less than 4 percent, inflation
will be at a 4 percent rate, and unemployment will average 4.8 percent.
Several reasons were offered for the projected slowing of the expansion
during 1973:

gains in consumer spending are expected to be somewhat less

during the first two quarters of the year than the increase during the final
quarter of 1972, and even less vigorous gains are projected for the second
half of 1973.

An implicit assumption was that consumers would save a large

share of tax refunds.

In addition, the group was concerned about the

fact that consumer spending for durable goods has been high relative to
disposable income and that consumers have been taking on installment debt
at an unsustainable pace.

Accordingly, the economists expect the burden of

debt repayment will begin to impinge on outlays for durable goods.

For

example, the median forecast of nine economists whose firms depend heavily
on the auto market calls for total new car sales this year to be at virtually the same level as in 1972.

Consumer spending for appliances and

household furnishings is also expected to taper off in the second half,
reflecting the group's projection of declining residential construction
expenditures beginning in the second quarter.
Gains in inventory investment are expected to contribute less to the
rise in GNP during the first two quarters of 1973, and inventory investment
is projected to level off during the second half of the year.

The econo-

mists also foresee a worsening of the net export deficit in the current
quarter, reflecting the relaxation of oil import quotas.

Most of the

group expected an improvement in the deficit during the balance of the
year, however.
Nonresidential fixed investment is the only major sector where growth
is expected to remain strong throughout 1973.

Dramatic increases in

orders for machine tools lend support to the expectation of a strong year
for capital spending.

A machine tool firm in Cleveland said its new

orders in the fourth quarter of last year had doubled from the year earlier quarter, which in turn were up significantly from the final quarter
of 1970.

One of our directors reported that his machine tool firm booked

enough new orders in the month of December alone to carry the company's
business through 1973 and into part of 1974.

A change in the composition of capital spending is also expected
this year, with larger shares going to manufacturing and to expansion of
plant capacity; these changes are expected to benefit the steel industry.
Demand for flat-rolled products, used mainly in autos and appliances, is
peaking now, while demand for heavy products should be increasing over
the months ahead.
The business economists also held an extended discussion about the
energy crisis.

There was general agreement that this nation will con-

tinue to face severe problems in meeting its energy requirements during
the next three to five years.

The near-term implication is that this

nation will have to rely increasingly on fuel imports until long-run
solutions are effected.

Concern was expressed over the impact of this

situation on the balance of payments.

Also, it was agreed that over the

near-term, prices of fuel and energy will rise substantially, businesses
will continue to face disruptions of fuel supplies, and the Federal
Government will become increasingly involved in the energy field.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Results of our latest survey of businessmen and bankers suggest
that the Fifth District economy retains a strong upward momentum.
Manufacturers' shipments, backlogs, and new orders registered strong
increases over the past month, although production is being impeded
by labor shortages in some areas of the District.

Retail sales,

including sales of automobiles, advanced over the previous month.
Employment showed little change from recent high levels, but hours
worked per week increased.

Residential construction was unchanged,

while nonresidential construction increased.

Bankers and business-

men continue to be optimistic about the economic outlook in the
District.
Our latest survey shows continued widespread strength in the manufacturing sector.

There was a substantial rise in the number of manu-

facturers reporting increases in shipments, new orders, and backlogs.
Increases in new orders and backlogs were especially pronounced.

Furni-

ture manufacturers are still plagued by labor shortages, and textile sales
and production appear to be especially strong.

While inventories report-

edly declined further in the past month, inventory levels relative to
desired levels are judged to be about right by most respondents.

Numerous

manufacturing respondents reported that current plant and equipment capacity
is lower than desired.
Manufacturers reported little change in recent high levels of employment and additional increases in hours worked per week.

On balance, banking

respondents believe that employment in their areas has increased since the
last survey.

Unemployment rates as low as 1-1^ percent were reported in

some local labor market areas.

Increases in wages and prices received were

experienced by a sizable number of manufacturers and retailers.

The retail sales picture in the District continues strong.

Despite

a sharp decline in the number of banking respondents reporting increased
retail sales in their areas, on balance, bankers believe that retail sales
showed further gains in the past month.

Contacts with retailers indicate

that they remain optimistic about the outlook for retail sales.
Banking respondents reported continued increases in the demand for all
types of loans.

Although loan demand appears to be strong throughout the

District, demand for loans in North Carolina appears to be especially brisk.
Banking respondents reported no change in residential construction in their
areas and additional increases in nonresidential construction.

A large brick

producer in the District recently announced major expansion plans.
Unfavorable weather conditions plagued District farmers throughout much
of the 1972 crop season, lowering yields per acre and damaging fruits and
nuts, especially peaches.

Nevertheless, farmers' January-November 1972 cash

receipts from farm marketings registered an 8 percent gain over a year earlier.

Livestock receipts were up 9 percent, and those from crops 7 percent.

Farmers' January plans for the 1973 planting season point to increases in
feed grain and soybean plantings, and decreases in cotton and wheat.
District businessmen and bankers remain optimistic about the general
economic outlook.

More than 50 percent of the banking respondents expect

an improvement in business activity in their areas in the immediate future.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Businessmen remain confident about the near-term outlook.

The word

"boom" is being used more often in describing current conditions.

Resi-

dential construction may be weakening, but much commercial and industrial
construction is planned.

Labor shortages are reported in central Florida.

A shortage of natural gas has caused some temporary plant closings.
Residential construction may be leveling off.

In recent months,

there has been a reduction in announcements of new projects.

In Mobile,

a decline in residential construction is reported, especially in the multifamily area.

Along the Mississippi Gulf Coast, hardly any housing starts

have been reported in the $18,000 or below category because of high foreclosures on inexpensive homes.

Apartment and condominium starts are pre-

dicted to decline in the Nashville area.

One of the few new residential

projects announced recently concerned possible development of expensive
homes and condominiums on an island off Georgia.
Commercial construction remains very strong.

Plans for a $35 million

office building have been announced for a site opposite the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta.
Jacksonville.
eventually.

Sears will build a $30 million catalogue center in

This huge facility will employ 1,000 initially and 2,000

A $28 million Federal building and an $18 million hotel have

been announced for Nashville.

Hospital expansions totaling $14 million

are planned for cities in east Tennessee.
is planned for Orlando.

An $8.5 million office building

A sharp increase in retail sales is reported to

be the reason for announcements of new shopping centers in the Mobile area.
The drugstore division of a nationally known retailer will open at least
ten outlets in the Atlanta vicinity.

Other announcements include:

a

$4 million motel near Atlanta; a 4-story office building in an Atlanta
industrial park; and a shopping center in a north Georgia city.
Industrial development also continues at a rapid pace.
glass manufacturing plant is to be built in east Tennessee.
should eventually employ 500.

An $18 million
This plant

An Alabama utility will construct an $18

million general services complex.

There has been a rash of relatively

small new plant and plant expansion announcements for middle Tennessee.
Businesses are reported moving into central Florida at a rapid rate.
An electronics firm plans to build a $4.75 million plant near Tuskegee,
Alabama.
plant.

A major expansion is planned by Armstrong Cork at its Pensacola
Other announcements include:

an electrical parts plant in north

Georgia; a plant to manufacture containers in Atlanta; a plywood plant
near Jacksonville; and a motor home plant in Alabama.
Florida's tourist industry is prosperous.

Attendance is up 15 to

18 percent over a year ago at Walt Disney World and other central Florida
attractions.

However, a glut of motel rooms is reported in the Disney

World-Orlando area where thousands of motel rooms are currently under
construction.
The only uncertainty in the employment picture is the effects of
possible cutbacks at military installations.

The Atlanta army depot

will be laying off 1,300 civilian personnel, but an increase in employment
at Atlanta's Fort McPherson is expected to partly offset this.

Extreme-

ly wet weather in much of the District has hindered construction and other
outdoor work and produced some temporary unemployment.

Unemployment in

the New Orleans area has been reduced by increased industrial and tourist
activity and a pickup in offshore drilling activity.

Unemployment rates

in areas of central Florida are below 2 percent, and shortages of construction and agricultural labor are reported.

A Florida director reports that:

"The citrus industry is slow

in getting its harvesting operations going.

Labor is the big problem.

With what appears to be the largest crop in history, fruit pickers are
short.

The transit seasonal labor force does not appear to be as large

as in previous years.

The big problem:

the crop has been late in

maturing and as a result a large percentage is now maturing at a rapid
rate, much faster and in such quantity that the present labor force
cannot harvest before the crop starts falling from the tree."
A shortage of natural gas has caused some temporary plant closings
in Louisiana and Alabama.

Plants whose contracts with pipeline companies

are about to expire cannot get assurances that they can renew.

Supplies

of jet and diesel fuel are also reportedly critically short in Louisiana.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The expansion in the Seventh District is vigorous and all but
universal.

The capital expenditure outlook is exceptionally strong.

Reports on retail sales indicate that January continued the strong pace
of December.

Phase III has allowed greater flexibility, but most larger

firms continue to act as though they are still under restraint.

A con-

sensus of informed opinion in this region indicates output is being
pressed to capacity in many sectors, and that restrictive monetary and
fiscal policies are desirable.
Larger firms are proceeding cautiously under the "voluntary" controls of Phase III.

They remain uncertain of the new structure, and do

not wish to be called to account by Congress or the Administration and
have to "justify" their actions.
The fuel crisis reported in the January Red Book worsened in the
next 10 to 12 days.
production.

Shortages of natural gas and fuel oil were hampering

The greatest concern was over supplies of diesel fuel that

threatened to reduce intercity truck traffic significantly.
two weeks, however, the fuel crisis has receded.

In the past

Partly, the improvement

reflected steps taken to direct supplies to areas where shortages were
most severe, and partly the greater flexibility in pricing permitted after
January 11.

Most important, however, was the turn from abnormally cold

to unseasonally warm temperatures.

(Pussy willows have been seen sprout-

ing in the Chicago area.)
The fuel problem has not disappeared and a critical situation is
expected again next winter; perhaps even in the next several weeks if the
weather changes.

Gas utilities have received permission to refuse

additional commercial and residential customers.

Despite an 8 percent

increase in prices of distillates, prices of imports are still about onefourth higher than U. S. prices and U. S. oil companies are not bidding
aggressively for additional foreign supplies.

Oil companies, moreover,

are not entering into the one to two year contracts normally offered to
truckers and other large fuel users.

Some industrial construction proj-

ects have been cancelled because supplies of natural gas or oil cannot be
assured.
The energy crisis would be much less significant if nuclear power
was becoming available as scheduled.

Availability of nuclear power, now

and potential, has been adversely affected in three ways:

(1) some

operating plants are not allowed to produce at full capacity, (2) at
least: one plant that is ready to generate power is being held back by
litigation, and (3) some projects "planned and sited" are not being constructed because of environmental disputes.
An informal survey finds the following industries operating at
effective capacity, although not in all operations:

paper, petroleum

refining, machine tools, appliances, furniture, color television, trucks,
recreational vehicles, electric motors, construction machinery, flat
rolled steel, foundries, tool and die shops, lumber, gypsum board, insulating material, fertilizer, and certain chemicals.
complain that "our suppliers can't keep up with us".

Some large firms
Some also worry about

the inefficiency of 7-day weeks, and problems of quality control under
"forced draft" schedules.

The problem of estimating capacity utilization

rates is very complicated and some published rates (such as those for oil
refineries) are said to be much too low, for a number of technical reasons.

Capacity estimates in some industries include high-cost facilities that
owners have no intention of activating.
Construction should be at a high level again in 1973.

Residential

construction, especially apartments, has been holding up well in this
area.

Prices of used homes are rising.

The freeze on subsidized units

did not surprise makers of construction machinery and building materials.
Subsidized projects already approved will hold such construction near the
recent pace for the next year.

Contracts for manufacturing and commer-

cial buildings have been very strong in recent months.
Job opportunities are excellent for skilled metalworkers, mechanics,
draftsmen, engineers, accountants, stenographers, social workers, nurses,
and other hospital workers.

Demand for executives has increased substan-

tially.
Teachers are in substantial oversupply.

Nevertheless, teachers have

been striking (illegally) for higher wages and other conditions.

As a

result of a long strike in January, the starting salary of Chicago teachers was raised to $9800 for a 39-week year.
Many employers expect "reasonable" labor contracts in 1973.

But the

Pay Board recently approved a 13 percent pay raise for Chicago longshoremen, retroactive to last April.

This contract calls for further increases

of 11 percent in April 1973 and a 10 percent rise a year later.

(The

1974 wage for these unskilled workers would be $8 per hour, including
fringes.

Other unions are well aware of these terms.)

A January survey indicates acreage will be up 7 percent for corn and
5 percent for soybeans.

These increases may be boosted by revisions in

the wheat and feed grain programs that will provide more acreage for corn

and soybeans.
from elevators.

Transportation bottlenecks are slowing movements of grain
Delayed unloadings at ports are partly responsible.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The Eighth District economy continued strongly upward in January
according to a selected group of businessmen.
ahead of year-ago levels.
expand.

Retail sales were well

Manufacturing output and sales continued to

Rising bullishness in the capital goods industries was especially

noticeable.
season.

Construction generally remained at a high level for the winter

Employment rose moderately, and businessmen reported very tight

labor markets over most of the District.

Demand for credit continued to

outp2ice the growth of loanable funds causing upward pressure on interest
rates.

As a result of the January freeze, some farmers were able to resume

crop harvesting, but many will experience substantial losses because of the
poor harvesting season.
Retail sales in January were well above year-ago levels throughout
the District.

Leading department stores, however, indicated that sales on

a seasonally adjusted basis have tended to level off since December.
Manufacturing continued strongly upward in January.

A major chemical

firm reported that its sales were 10 percent ahead of January a year ago,
and that sales of plastics and related products were up 12 to 15 percent.
Sales of paint, coatings, and wallcoverings were also up sharply.

Many

firms cannot obtain the quantity and quality of raw materials desired.
Pulpwood and semifinished products for the paper and paperboard industries
were reported in short supply and being rationed.

Similar shortages are

also in prospect for light crude oil, a raw material for many chemical
products.
Although sluggish until recent months, reports indicated that the
capital goods industry is beginning to boom.

Sales of electrical equip-

ment for manufacturing firms and welding and cutting equipment for both
domestic use and for export were up sharply.

Business investment plans are apparently being revised upward as a
result of the rising levels of sales and orders.

Whereas last year few

firms reported plans for new capital investment, many now report plans for
new plants and plant expansion.
While construction remained at a generally high level over most of
the District, it was quite spotty, varying from very high to low, depending
on the availability of building supplies and weather conditions.

Residen-

tial building was reported at a relatively high level in all the major
District cities.

All types of construction was booming in northeast

Mississippi, but unfavorable weather and material shortages have brought
construction to a standstill in southeast Arkansas.
Employment was increasing throughout the District.

Most manufacturing

firms reported moderate increases in production workers, and some report
additions for research and development purposes.
very tight over most of the District.

The labor market remained

The unemployment rate in the Dis-

trict is generally well below the national average with the exception of
St. Louis and Fort Smith.

Businessmen reported an especially tight labor

market in western Tennessee, and that unemployment was virtually nonexistent in southern Kentucky.
The District agricultural situation varies from very good to very bad
depending on local weather conditions during harvest.

Farmers were unable

to harvest a sizable percent of their cotton and soybean crops in southeast Missouri and northwest Arkansas and may face major losses.

In most

other parts of the District, excellent crops have been harvested and sold
at high prices.
Credit demand in the Eighth District has increased.
rising interest rates on all types of loans.

Banks reported

Savings and loan associations

reported that inflows of savings had tapered off.

Interest rates charged

by savings and loan associations remained stable in January, although rates
are expected to rise during the year.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

According to bank directors' reports, some acceleration in price
increases is anticipated as a result of the shift to voluntary compliance
in Phase III.

In general, District businesses have not experienced dif-

ficulties in hiring skilled labor.

No immediate curtailment in District

business activity is foreseen as a result of recently announced cutbacks
in Federal programs.

Due to temporary factors, the demand for short-term

agricultural credit increased in the fourth quarter, and is expected to
ease in early 1973.
The consensus among bank directors is that price increases under
Phase III regulations will be somewhat greater than if the more restrictive Phase II rules had remained in force.

A District manufacturer

associated with the construction industry revealed that prices of inputs
purchased by his firm have already risen since the imposition of Phase
III.

Furthermore, some unions negotiating with his firm have indicated a

willingness to abide by the 5.5 percent wage guideline, while others plan
to disregard it.

Another director anticipates prices to rise, but so far

his firm has not encountered any price increases.

Unless the government

effectively jawbones, in one director's view, Phase III will not hold
down price increases.
Although isolated instances were cited, no widespread shortage of
skilled labor exists in the District.

A Duluth banker indicated that

some skilled labor was becoming difficult to hire in his area, and a
Montana director disclosed that in his area building trade workers were
in short supply.

Another director stated that experienced workers were

not available in his area and employers were hiring younger and more

inexperienced workers.

One director reported that his firm had not

encountered any skilled labor shortages but noted delivery times of steel
products had recently been extended.
The recently announced freeze on Federal subsidized housing and cutbacks in agricultural programs are not expected to have any immediate,
pronounced impact on District economic activity.

According to a telephone

survey of District HUD officials, the freeze on subsidized housing should
not affect District homebuilding in 1973, but could dampen residential
construction in 1974 and 1975.

Also, several directors reported the

freeze on subsidized housing could curtail some future homebuilding in
their areas.

District farmers currently are enjoying a relatively high

level of prosperity, so the cutback in farm programs is not expected to
have any immediate serious impact on District agriculture.

However, in a

South Dakota director's opinion, the farm conservation programs have been
quite successful and stopping these projects will be detrimental to his
area.

The termination of FDA programs announced in the President's 1974

budget, a Duluth banker indicated, could adversely affect northeastern
Minnesota.

In another director's view, the recently announced cutbacks in

Federally supported construction projects could take the edge off many
areas' expected expansion in business activity this year.
According to our latest agricultural credit conditions survey,
fourth quarter demand for short-term agricultural credit at many District
commercial banks advanced after declining earlier in the year.

Part of

this increase can be attributed to a dramatic increase in farmer spending
in some areas, as farmers incurred expenses prior to January 1 in order
to reduce 1972 income taxes.

Also, District farmers strategically post-

poned marketings to defer income taxes until next year which delayed loan

repayments.

These developments, however, are considered temporary and

short-term agricultural loan demands are expected to ease in early 1973.
Fourth quarter demand for long-term agricultural credit was quite strong
and may even strengthen further in the first quarter.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

A check of a number of Tenth District firms involved in the energy
field elicited mixed responses regarding their capital expenditure plans.
Petroleum refiners report no plans for increasing on-line capacity either
in the immediate or near-term future.

At the same time, electric power

companies in the District will be adding considerable generating capacity
as a result of completion of large capital projects begun some time ago,
with further expansion planned over the next 3-5 years.

Elsewhere,

investment plans suggest optimism over the near-term outlook.

For Dis-

trict farmers and ranchers, 1972 was their most prosperous year ever,
and, while the first half of 1973 appears very strong for agricultural
income prospects, sharply higher production costs will likely temper
these gains somewhat.

A reflection of strength in the farm sector was

evident in loan demands at District banks in January.

Demand was strong

in most categories with increases reported in loans to farmers and particularly in business loans.

Most bankers felt that the vigor of the

current economic expansion, rather than the rise in interest rates from
competing lenders, was the primary explanation for strength in loans.
However, increases in competing interest rates were cited by some bankers
as the cause of some minor time and savings deposit runoffs.
The hard winter's drainage of fuel supplies prompted inquiries
regarding the capital expenditure plans of major oil producers and power
companies.

Tenth District petroleum refiners report no plans to increase

plant capacity during 1973, nor any projects underway that will increase
on-line capacity in the near future.

Several refiners say that, while

inadequate capacity is a major problem, it is directly related to the

lac'k of an assured crude oil supply.

One of the refiners hopes to start

construction on a new refinery within 3 to 5 years, but its location will
depend entirely upon the availability of crude oil.

Although refiners are

not expanding, they are spending considerable amounts for pollution control and equipment replacement.

Refiners explain part of the recent

shortage of heating oils and gasses as being a consequence of price
ceilings which discouraged production of these hydrocarbons in favor of
gasoline.

Increasing incidents of fuel oil shortages are appearing in

the District as cold weather continues.
Despite shortages of petroleum fuels, electric power companies in
the Tenth District continue to plan new facilities that will use natural
gas as the primary fuel.
District.

Only one nuclear plant is being built in the

Pollution abatement requirements have forced one power company

to retire a coal-fueled plant.

Capital projects to be finished this year

will add between 25 and 50 percent to generating capacity, and continued
expansion is planned over the next 3-5 years.
Judging from a check on the investment plans of other kinds of businesses in the District, increases over last year would seem to be the
rule.

The airlines are riding the business cycle, as are the aircraft

producers.

Some of the airlines are buying more planes than they ordered,

thanks to a gamble to build speculatively by Boeing and others.
tion activity is expected to remain steady this year overall.

Construc-

These pros-

pects are apparently good enough to encourage related businesses, such as
suppliers of structural materials, to make capital outlays for expansion
and cost reduction.

Even where profits are severely constrained by com-

petition, such as for a major metal mining-refining outfit operating here,

the outlook is evidently sufficiently optimistic to stimulate expenditures
for expansion and replacement.
Recent farm income estimates indicate that District farmers and
ranchers enjoyed their most prosperous year ever in 1972.

Buoyed by

sharply higher crop and livestock prices, District cash receipts from
farm marketings grew to $10.8 billion, a 14 percent gain over 1971.
Heavily oriented toward the cattle industry, which experienced continued
growth and stronger prices last year, District cash receipts outpaced the
10 percent growth rate for the nation as a whole.
In the coming months, the prospects for District farm income remain
especially strong.

On January 1, the number of cattle on feed was 5 per-

cent above a year ago, and with prices averaging about $8 per hundredweight higher than January 1972, a significant boost in District income
can be expected.

Actually, the bright outlook for farm income encompasses

nearly all sectors.

Following the 5 percent spurt in December, for exam-

ple, farm prices rose another 5 percent in January to a new record high.
However, while this development will help to underpin the income prospects
over the first half year, sharply higher production costs during the same
period will temper the income gains in the District to some extent.
Loan demands were strong in most categories at District banks in
January with increases reported in loans to farmers and particularly business loans.

When asked whether the strength in business loans could be

partly due to the rise in commercial paper rates, most bankers responded
in the negative.

District bankers pointed out that only their largest

customers have ready access to alternative sources of short-term funds,
such as the commercial paper market.

One banker noted that even though

the data appeared to suggest that bank borrowing became more advantageous

during January relative to use of commercial paper, this impression might
be misleading.

His bank, for example, had effectively increased the prime

rate to 6-1/4 percent without public announcement, the official prime rate
at that bank remaining at 6 percent.

Most bankers related the strength in

loan demand by farmers and businesses to the vigor of the current economic
expansion.
Tenth District bankers are beginning to report time and savings
deposit runoffs due to the increases in competing interest rates.

So far

the drops have been minor, and are not expected to become a serious problem unless interest rates rise substantially further.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The most recent indicators of economic activity in the Eleventh
District show somewhat mixed changes.

In December, the Texas industrial

production index declined slightly and, although total employment in the
five southwestern states continued to increase, the unemployment rates
edged upward.

Nevertheless, construction activity in the District

rebounded in December and District department stores sales continued to
rise in January.

New automobile registrations declined slightly in

December but were still well ahead of their year earlier pace.
The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index eased
slightly in December from its record November level.

Production in

both the manufacturing and utilities sectors edged downward while mining
recorded a slight increase.

Within manufacturing, nondurable goods

production was essentially unchanged, but durable goods output declined
as sizable decreases were recorded in the production of stone, clay, and
glass, electrical machinery, and furniture and fixtures.

The drop in

utilities output was the result of a reduction in the distribution of
electricity, while the increase in mining was centered in the natural gas,
and metal, stone and earth minerals industries.
Production in January was probably adversely affected by the weather
as unusually cold temperatures reportedly caused mechanical problems that
cut crude oil output in some fields.

Temporary curtailment of natural

gas distribution also forced some refineries to shift to other fuels,
reducing output and efficiency.
Seasonally adjusted total employment in the five southwestern states
rose in December for the sixth consecutive month.

Nevertheless, growth

in the labor force outstripped the gains in employment, causing the
unemployment rate to edge up to 4.1 percent from 4 percent in November.
Manufacturing employment was particularly buoyant as both the durable
and nondurable goods sectors reported strong gains from November.
Nonmanufacturing employment experienced a more moderate increase despite
a sizable rise in service employment.
Construction activity in the five southwestern states, as measured
by the value of contracts awarded, rebounded slightly in December, ending
a three-month decline.

Residential building fell for the fourth consecu-

tive month, reaching the lowest level of activity since February.

However,

a sharp increase in nonresidential building and a more moderate increase
in nonbuilding construction more than offset the residential building
decline.

The cumulative value of contracts for the District states for

the 1972 year was nearly a fourth higher than in 1971.
Sales of department stores in the District continued to show yearto-year gains in January.

In the five metropolitan areas for which data

are regularly published, San Antonio and Houston showed the largest gains
over a year ago, while Austin, El Paso, and Dallas recorded more moderate
increases.

The number of new automobile registrations in the four largest

metropolitan areas of Texas—Dallas, Forth Worth, Houston and San Antonio—
fell slightly in December, but were still ahead of their pace a year ago.
Agricultural activity slowed in late December and early January due
to unfavorable weather conditions, and there was light freeze damage to
winter crops.

With the return of milder weather in recent years, most

crops have recovered, and the cotton harvest is now about 90 percent
complete.

The unusually cold weather also resulted in higher than normal

livestock losses.

Subsequent heavy supplemental feeding added further

to the problem of soaring prices of livestock feed.
also of major concern to dairymen.

High feed costs are

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Economic activity is maintaining a steady rate of growth in the
Twelfth District.

Consumer spending is strong, and construction expen-

ditures are still high even though a decline is expected later in the
year.

Phase III of the Economic Stabilization Program is generally

well accepted, despite some uncertainty as to its effectiveness.

The

consensus of our directors is that controls of some kind are needed
for 1973.
After a record level of retail purchases in the last quarter of
1972, consumer spending is somewhat lower but still quite strong.
Retailers throughout the District are optimistic about 1973 prospects,
although profit margins are not satisfactory on some lines of business.
One director thinks that sales of automobiles and other consumer durables
will be weaker later in the year.

However, the large amounts of tax

refunds expected in the first quarter are favorable factors in maintaining
consumer expenditures.
Construction activity is still at a high level but it is expected
to turn down later this year.

A major manufacturer of builders' hardware

reports that sales currently are high, and no downturn is apparent in
orders as yet.

A favorable factor for housing demand is the continued

inflow of funds to savings and loan associations which has kept mortgage
rates stable.

On the other hand, the reduction in Federal housing

subsidies is expected to curtail residential construction.

One large

bank foresees a 20 percent reduction in housing starts in California.
Many agricultural prices are expected to remain near present levels,
but cattle prices may be even higher.

On the other hand, several direc-

tors think that wheat prices may be lower because of the increased

acreage of the coming crop; one director suggested the wheat crop might
be 20 to 30 percent larger this year because of the relaxation of acreage
allotments and this could lead to a large wheat surplus.

Similarly,

increased production of potatoes is expected to result in lower potato
prices.
The rate of economic expansion is highest in Idaho and the Pacific
Northwest which are states benefitting from the strong demand for timber
and agricultural products.

The greater production at the Boeing Company

also is helping the Washington economy.

In California, one bank fore-

casts that the growth rate in that state will be satisfactory, but it
will be below the national trend.

Reduced Government employment and an

expected mid-year slowing in construction and certain classes of durable
expenditures are reasons for this forecast.

The San Francisco Bay area

in particular is likely to experience a slower growth rate.

Our direc-

tors accept the need for continued controls, but there is considerable
variation in their assessments of the impact of Phase III.

Some welcome

the loosening in controls from those of Phase II, especially since continuation of the previous constraints would have caused increased distortions and inequities.

Some think that the new controls cause too

much uncertainty by their vagueness or that they will not be very effective.

Most of the concern centers on the impact on wage settlements

during the coming year.

The consensus seems to be that, even though

Phase III is less restrictive, controls do help in restraining wages.
The forest products industry seems to be particularly sensitive
to the new controls.

The industry price structure is already distorted

by imports and strong demand.

In this industry, the behavior of the

small time producers, who are not controlled, probably will determine

now how prices will rise.

There may be problems, but prices are expected

to level off after an initial surge.

Phase III may also permit higher

wage settlements since forest products unions are likely to press for
wage increases above the 5.5 percent guidelines.

On balance, Phase III

is described as creating a better atmosphere for investment in the industry.
Interest rates, with the probable exception of mortgages, are
expected to rise.

Long-term rates are being held down by various non-

market factors, but short-term rates are likely to rise more than was
expected earlier this year.

An increase in the present 4 percent rate on

passbook savings is a possibility.
credit is high in most areas.

Demand for business loans and consumer

