CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 15,

1974

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY . .

.

.

.

.

. .

First District - Boston

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

.

.S

S

.

.

S

*

. .
S.

.

.

.

.

.

..

Second District - New York..
Third District - Philadelphia

~

Fourth District - Cleveland
Fifth District - Richmond .

SS
S

S

S

S

Sixth District - Atlanta. .

S.

.

.

.

.

.*

Seventh District - Chicago .
Eighth District - St. Louis .
Ninth District - Minneapolis.
Tenth District - Kansas City.
Eleventh District - Dallas. .

.

e

e

.. . . . . .

Twelfth District - San Francisco. .

. ..

e

o

.

e

e

.

. . . ..........

e

e

e

e

. . . . . .

.

i

SUMMARY*
Latest Redbook comment suggests that the recent business slowdown
has bottomed out and that the economy may now be in a mild, though
fragile, recovery.

Heavy demands for capital goods appear to be the

main element undergirding the current level of activity.

Fuel shortages

are reported to have eased substantially, although shortages of industrial
materials, most notably steel, remain a serious constraint on production
growth.

Reports on consumer spending are spotty, with some Districts

reporting retail sales as "good" or "holding up well" while others note
a softening of demand for big-ticket items and a leveling off in sales
of nondurables.

The housing sector is uniformly described as weak and,

in the light of recent interest rate behavior, as likely to weaken further.
All Districts

report persisting inflationary expectations, which along

with recent sharp price increases and fears of acute materials shortages,
are causing large demands for inventory financing.

Current comment

contains many more references than usual to financial stringencies and
liquidity problems, in both the business and banking communities.
The most bullish area of the economy clearly is the capital goods
sector.

Chicago reports that the capital goods boom in the Seventh

District "continues at full throttle" and this theme is echoed in the
reports from Cleveland and St. Louis.

The New England machine tool

industry is also reported as operating at capacity.

Materials and

other shortages, however, are mentioned as seriously impeding output
*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

growth in this sector.

Chicago, for example, notes shortages of metals

(especially steel), chemicals, packaging materials, components, trained
manpower, and transportation as factors limiting output.

Output in the

Chicago District was also reported to have been hampered by strikes.
As regards the consumer sector, several Districts report an
improvement in sales of medium-sized and large automobiles, and Chicago
notes that automobile firms "are pressing for delivery of additional
steel for large car production which has increased."

Atlanta and

Chicago also report increased demand for recreational vehicles.

While

retail sales are in general characterized as good, some Districts note
that price increases account for much, if not most, of the reported gains.
Boston, Dallas, Richmond, and St. Louis report a leveling of sales,
with the last two indicating a softening of demand for big-ticket items.
Reports on inventories suggest efforts in some industries to
build stocks of materials as a hedge against both rising prices and
future shortages.

A Cleveland survey found stocks depleted in some

steel, coal, oil, machinery, chemical, and packaging firms, with
respondents indicating that they would like to rebuild their inventories.
Capital goods producers are said to be unable to build inventories
because of heavy demand pressures and shortages of materials and components.
Minneapolis reports some involuntary accumulation of goods in process
due to materials and component shortages.

In some lines, however, reports

suggest inventory accumulation may be leveling off.

Dallas reports that

retail inventories are being held down while Boston and Minneapolis
indicate that high interest costs may be discouraging stock building.
Also Richmond reports a significant increase in the number of manufacturing
respondents indicating general satisfaction with the current level of
inventories.

Districts reporting on housing indicate continued weakness in
this sector, with prospects that the recent sharp run-up in interest
rates will pinch off any recovery that may have been underway.

Most

Districts report extremely tight mortgage market conditions, with six
Reserve Banks reporting a significant amount of disintermediation at
either thrift institutions or commercial banks or both.

New York

characterizes the disintermediation at Second District thrift
institutions as severe.
All District reports describe business loan demand as "strong"
or "very strong," although Boston and Kansas City indicate some leveling
of demand at a high plateau.

Inventory financing is

as a major factor behind this demand.

generally reported

Most reports suggest that increases

in demands for this purpose are attributable mainly to higher prices

of inventoried goods although some Districts indicate that expanded stocks
of materials are also a factor.

New York and Chicago also report that

delays in construction projects and sizable inventories of unsold houses
Some shifting of capital market

may be contributing to loan demand.

borrowing to banks was also reported as a factor behind business loan
demand by New York and San Francisco.

Several Districts noted increased

demand for accounts receivable financing and a substitution of bank
credit for commercial paper sales, especially by REIT's, as contributing
factors.

Chicago, Richmond, and Minneapolis reported strong demand for

farm credit because of increasing difficulty being encountered by
farmers in arranging trade credit.
Several Districts cite increasing liquidity problems for
businesses as well as for thrift institutions and commercial banks.
Boston and Kansas City report vigorous complaints against tight money

iv

policies in some quarters, with Boston indicating financial stringencies
for public utilities and insurance firms.

A number of Districts report

that banks are becoming increasingly selective in screening loan
applicants and some Districts indicate a growing reluctance on the part
of the banks to finance loan expansion through high cost CD financing.
The agricultural outlook is reported generally good for crops,
but low market prices and high production costs are a problem in the
livestock sector.

St. Louis reports that resulting production cutbacks

could mean higher red meat prices later this year.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The pace of business activity is mixed, with large corporations
reporting strong gains, and small business hurt by shortages and high
money costs.

Utilities are also reported as under heavy financial strains

and a large Boston bank director cites concerns in the financial markets
that the Federal Reserve's "brinkmanship" would cause another Penn Central
crisis.
One large bank director reports that for the last two weeks there
has been concern in the financial community that the price of money has
pushed some borrowers to the breaking point.

He fears that the Federal

Reserve is exercising a degree of "brinkmanship" which will cause another
Penn Central episode.

He believes that it is time for the Fed to ease up

and that the economy could end up paying a high price if the Fed does not.
In addition to disintermediation at thrift institutions, he notes that
insurance companies are very worried about their liquidity problem
caused by heavy policy loan demand.
This Boston banker reports that his business loans leveled off
about 10 days ago.

He notes that there is some evidence that small whole­

salers, retailers, and manufacturers who had been borrowing for inventory
financing

are now trying to pay off their loans because the interest charge

is too burdensome.

(Although his small business prime is 8-1/2 percent,

most small business loans are being made at 11-1/2 percent.)
Despite press reports of public concern about financial markets,
none of our other directors has heard any similar rumors.

One of our

directors, who serves on the Board of a major Boston electric utility, does

report that this utility is facing very heavy financial pressures, in part
because of the large drop in usage of electricity. Another director who is
connected with a major utility also cited problems stemming from unusually
slow growth in usage. Business directors, however, report that their own
businesses are strong especially in machine tools where the industry
continues to operate at capacity.

Consumer lines, however, especially

apparel sales, are soft.
The unemployment rate for New England held steady at 6.7 percent
in March, it rose in Massachusetts to 7.8 percent, and is now 1.5 per­
centage points above a year ago.

Except in Connecticut, unemployment rates

in all the New England states are higher than a year ago.
Among our academic correspondents, Professors Eckstein, Samuelson,
and Tobin were available for comment this month. Eckstein expects a fairly
vigorous recovery (with real growth averaging about 4 percent) over the
remainder of the year.

Even with a recovery of this magnitude, the

unemployment rate is expected to rise to close to 6 percent.

Eckstein

acknowledges that his forecast is at the optimistic end of the range of
forecasters and that most of the risks lie on the downside. The housing
sector is the most dubious part of his forecast.

He assumes that the

Fed "will have to back off by July" as "the financial market can't stand it"
and that the bill rate will fall to about 7 percent in the second half of
1974.

With the bill rate above 8 percent throughout the year, he believes

that no amount of ingenuity by the Federal credit agencies could offset the
consequent disintermediation and that housing starts will fall to about
1.3 million in mid-1975.

His policy recommendation, therefore, is to move

the bill rate below 8 percent.

Tobin is much more pessimistic on the economic outlook and highly
critical of current policy.

He points out that the strength in the latter

part of the year depends on a revival in housing and that, with current
policy, there is no prospect that housing will come back.

Reflecting the

state of lack of confidence, the depressed stock market indicates that the
cost of capital funds remains high.
about prospects for the savings rate.

He also cites Thomas Juster's pessimism
He suggests that the Federal funds

rate should be brought down to about 8 percent.
While Samuelson personally feels we are at the bottom of the
recession, he points to a respectable body of opinion which doubts that.
His primary policy recommendation is to ease until we are sure that the
turning point has been reached.

He grants that there is sufficient strength

in basic industries such as steel and paper to preclude a dangerous down­
ward spiral but is apprehensive about choking off a business recovery before
it is even underway.

While pleased with the latest wholesale price figures,

he speculates that the first quarter inflation rate will be revised upward.

In this inflationary setting, higher-than-normal rates of growth in the

monetary aggregates will be necessary to achieve a recovery.

There will be

a 6 percent "base load" rate of inflation plus whatever catch-up comes from
ending controls plus whatever bad luck we have on items like food and fuels.
It will take a protracted period of time to cut into the basic 6 percent
rate without a recession of a magnitude which, in the present political
climate, "no one is in a position to stand."
inflation gains from a period of stagflation.

He is skeptical about the
The 1969-1970 experience

illustrates that very little is gained from a few years of real growth a
few percentage points below normal capacity growth.

In the present situation,

4
money growth below 8 percent would dampen real output growth and,

if

Franklin bank situation gets more dangerous, even more money might be

the

required.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District directors and other business leaders who
were contacted recently on the whole felt that the recent slowdown in
business activity would be followed by some improvement in the latter
part of the year, although some expressed doubts about this prognosis.
The respondents generally expected further significant price increases.
Consumer outlays remained relatively strong in the New York City area,
but some weakening was noted upstate.

Construction is expected to be

further adversely affected by the rise in short-term interest rates and
the resulting outflow of funds from thrift institutions.

Views regarding

the prospective demand for short-term business credit were mixed but
on balance pointed to a sustained strong demand.
The directors in general agreed that the slackening in
business activity which has occurred in recent months is likely to be
followed by an improvement as the year wears on.

The president of a

large chemical corporation thus characterized the slack in the economy
as minor, and the president of a large nationwide retail concern looked
for some improvement in the second half of the year.

The president of

a multinational nonferrous metal concern expected a moderate increase in
real GNP for the year as a whole.

Another director reported strength

in the airline, semiconductor, and media industries.

An upstate banker

expected continued strong demand for goods and services and expressed
the view that, if inflation can be controlled, the economy would look
much better by the end of 1974 or early 1975.

Several respondents,

however, stressed the uncertainty surrounding the prospects for the
recovery.

Among the businessmen who were contacted prior to the
termination of remaining price controls on April 30, most anticipated

a further surge in prices--led by copper, steel, and other raw materials-­
following the already large increases which had occurred during the
progressive relaxation of controls.

Others expected no explosive surge

in prices as a result of the full elimination of price controls, but
did look for large selective increases in previously controlled areas
and more moderate increases elsewhere.

The Buffalo branch directors

contacted during the past week anticipated a continuation of upward
pressures on prices and wages principally as a result of catch-up price
increases for those industries where price controls had created distortions
and where wage and salary increases were needed to make up for increases
in the cost of living that had already occurred.
Concerning consumer spending, a senior official of an upstate
department store reported some softening in retail sales in western
New York.

However, as noted above, an upstate banker saw a continued

strong demand for goods and services.

Moreover, a recent survey by a

local newspaper of major New York City department stores with branches
in the suburbs revealed that April retail sales in the New York metro­
politan area had been signficantly higher than in April 1973, both in
real and in dollar terms, and that most big-store executives had become
more optimistic regarding the retail sales outlook.
Perhaps the weakest spot in the District's current economic
picture is found in the construction industry.

The respondents expressing

an opinion on this subject generally expected the rise in short-term
interest rates to have a serious adverse effect on residential construction.
The cost of new housing and the shortage of building materials continued

to be cited as adverse factors.

However, according to several local

savings banks, the major adverse factor has now become the unavailability

of funds as a result of "severe" outflows of funds from thirft institutions
to higher yielding money market instruments--notably short-term Treasury
securities.

As a result, thrift institutions have substantially tightened

their already tight lending terms and have become "very selective" in
making new commitments.
Views were mixed regarding the outlook for demands for short­
term credit by businesses.

A number of observers attributed the

very strong credit demands of recent months primarily to inventory
accumulation as a hedge against inflation and shortages.
such demand will taper off.

Some felt that

The majority of the respondents, however,

expected continued strong demands for short-term credit.

Among those

respondents, the president of a large chemical firm thus anticipated a
continued strong demand for credit stemming from the impact of inflationary
pressures on business working capital needs, and another director felt
the same factor would sustain credit demands in the agricultural sector.
The president of a large nonferrous metal producer stated that one
factor contributing to the demand stemmed from the financing requirements
related to the extended delays on major industrial construction projects.
Another director noted that the high rates in the long-term capital
markets were inducing firms to draw upon their bank lines of credit.
The need to finance rising accounts receivables was also cited as a
factor likely to sustain credit demand.

There were also reports that

purchasers of commercial paper have been upgrading their portfolios,
with the result that firms whose credit ratings fall short of the highest
rank have found it increasingly difficult to sell commercial paper.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third Federal Reserve District is showing
some hopeful signs.

The downward slide of business activity experienced

during the first quarter of 1974 has been stemmed, and the local economy
may be preparing for a modest recovery.

Production activity and employ­

ment have both been stable during the last month, and most manufacturers
are anticipating a pickup in the next six months.
already showing strength.

Retail sales are

Rising prices are still a problem for area

businessmen as well consumers, and their long-run expectations are for more
of the same.

Bankers report exceptionally high loan demand and see little

short-term softening in the credit needs of their customers.

Dis­

intermediation is not yet serious, but there is some indication that it
may become more of a problem in the weeks ahead if money market rates
remain high.
According to the executives responding to this month's business out­
look survey of manufacturers in the Third District, business activity in
the local economy has been steady in the last month.

New orders, ship­

ments, delivery times and inventory were all relatively stable.

This

represents progress of sorts since the economy has been in a slide for
the last several months.

Employment is also holding steady with four out

of five businessmen surveyed reporting no change in either the number of
employees or in the average workweek.
The outlook for general business activity in the future, however, is
much brighter.

Over half of the survey's respondents predict that the

economy will be stronger six months from now.

While hopes are high for

increased manufacturing activity, less than ten percent of those surveyed

expect delivery times to increase.

This suggests that the supply

constraints that have been such a problem in the manufacturing sector
for many months may be less binding in the future.

The employment

picture is not expected to improve in the foreseeable future.

The

number of firms planning to hike their payrolls is exactly matched by those
planning to decrease employment during the next six months.

Capital

spending plans remain strong and have increased slightly in each of the
last three months.
recently.

Retail sales in the Delaware Valley have picked up

The depressing effects that the energy crisis has on consumer

buying of general merchandise are reported to have worn off, and business
is brisk.
well.

Virtually all spring and summer merchandise lines are selling

Prices continue to be a difficult problem for area businessmen.

More than eight out of ten claim that they paid more for their purchases this
month than they did last month.

Six out of ten of these businessmen charged

more for the goods they sold to their customers.

Very few of these

executives expect any relief in the next six months.
The region's largest commercial banks are experiencing very heavy
demands for credit.

The bulk for the lending activity has been precipitated

by inventory and capital investment and increasing substitution of bank
loans for commercial paper (especially by the REITS).

The recent Treasury

note issue caused some deposit outflows at local institutions.

However,

the bankers report that disintermediation has been building gradually over
the last month and a half, and they expect it to be a more serious problem
in the weeks ahead unless money market rates drop soon.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Business conditions remain strong in certain basic industries such
as coal, oil, steel, and machinery, but shortages are still hampering output.
Some firms are coping with inflation by increasing the use of escalator clauses.
Inflation is contributing to some hoarding and speculation in inventories.
Recent strength in business loan demand largely reflects the need to finance
higher-valued inventories and rising accounts receivable at a time when real
cash flow is deteriorating.
According to our directors, materials shortages continue to constitute
a major problem.

One machine tool executive reported that nondelivery of

vital components has slowed the entire production process.

A director from a

large business machines firm, however, said that the raw materials situation is
improving.

Another director indicated that basic materials industries are

going to expand capacity significantly (until now, pollution control expendi­
tures have absorbed a high percentage of their capital equipment spending.
One director noted there is no longer an oversupply of large cars, in fact,
it appears that the auto companies may have over-reacted in their shift to
small car production.

Demand in the coal industry is so intense that, according

to one director, "coal at $35 a ton includes logs, bone, slag...anything."
banker reflected that coal machines, which formerly would have been financed
over 5 years, are now financed over 2 years.

One banker was concerned over

increased personal loan delinquencies and the alarming moves of some
individuals to consolidate loans and then take our new lines of credit.
Consumers appear to be maintaining a high level of spending according to
one of our directors associated with a major retail chain.

A

A number of large industrial firms in the District were questioned
on recent developments in pricing policies, working capital positions,
inventory situations, and capital spending plans.

The responses suggest an

increased use of escalator clauses in long-term contracts for products bought
and sold.

Indexing (in one form or another) is also increasingly common in

contracts and orders involving long lead-time items.

The steel industry

continues to quote prices at time of delivery rather than at time of
booking.

A major coal producer said that since last month coal prices have

been quoted at time of shipment with all cost increases based on an
escalator clause.

In addition the firm recently wrote several long-term

contracts calling for upward price adjustments whenever the rate of return
on investment falls below the rate specified in the contract.
positions are mixed.

Liquidity

Some businesses report ample cash positions (steel,

oil, coal, chemicals, nondurable consumer goods).

They have been net

suppliers of funds to the commercial paper and CD markets.

Firms in the

machinery, tire and packaging industries have been borrowing heavily from
banks and the commercial paper market to finance inventories and accounts
receivable.

Virtually all firms report increasing receivables, which they

say is typical during periods of tight money and rising prices.

Several

machinery companies commented on a general tendency for their customers to
delay paying bills as long as possible.

One major oil company by contrast

has reduced its receivables and improved its liquidity position by withdrawing
about 2.5 million credit cards since September, thus forcing its customers
to pay cash.

In turn the firm is required to make immediate payment to the

Arab countries for purchases of crude.

Firms contacted generally want to build their stocks-mainly to
protect current production and sales schedules but in some instances as a
hedge against price increases.

Steel producers would like to rebuild

depleted stocks but find it impossible because of strong customer demand.
Some of the steel inventory accumulation by customers has been price­
hedging according to the steel mills.
in need of coal supplies.
to build stocks.

Steel producers are also desperately

Oil companies have been unsuccessful in trying

Machinery companies report inventories must be built
Shipments are being held up for lack

before production can be increased.
of materials and component parts.

Shortages of raw materials have also

prevented chemical and packaging firms from increasing their inventories
as much as they would like.

Several firms however pointed to the growing

risks of speculating on certain price volatile raw materials.
Capital spending plans are not being altered as a result of current
financial or economic conditions.

Several firms mentioned that shortages of

materials could possibly result in their spending being stretched out.
As a general matter, firms intend to finance fixed capital investment from
external sources of funds.

One steel company with large spending plans said

it would be reluctant to borrow now.

They will first liquidate some of

their marketable securities and use reserves set aside for capital programs
before resorting to external financing at current interest rates.

A

rubber-chemicals producer said high interest rates might adversely affect
spending plans for the tire industry, but borrowing costs are easily
recovered for investment in chemicals and plastic goods because of higher
returns.

The increase in business loans by District banks continues to be
strong, although at a slightly reduced pace from March.

Bankers indicated

that loan demand involves, in large part, takedown of lines-of-credit to
finance inventories and increasing accounts receivable.

The commercial

paper rate differential and delay in going to capital markets also help to
explain the strength in business loan demand.

A number of bankers, however,

report that some loans are not being repaid at stated maturity.

Corporations

are caught in a cost squeeze due to the underestimation of increased costs.
Bankers report a decrease in foreign commercial bank lending and some

slowdown in loans to nonbank financial institutions.

As a general matter,

banks are being conservative and selective in accommodating loan demand by

REITs.
There seems to be mixed opinion on prospects for bank credit.

Some of the bankers contacted see little letup in business loan demand
because businesses will increasingly feel a liquidity squeeze.

Also,

they expect continued heavy demand for financing capital programs.

On the

other hand, a few expect a letup in bank credit as the spread between the
commercial paper rate and the prime rate narrows.

14
FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Results of our most recent survey of businessmen suggest some softening
of recent strong demand pressures in the Fifth District.

Reports from manu­

facturers indicate some easing in the pace of new orders and perhaps also
of inventory accumulation.

The retail sales diffusion index for the District

suggests little change in sales, which is a substantial shift from the sizable
and general increases recorded in previous surveys.

Reports from retailers

suggests that sales of big-ticket items are less buoyant than was the case
earlier in the year.

Bankers continue to experience heavy demand for business

and agricultural loans and, given the high cost of CD funds, many have begun
to screen loan applications more carefully.

Some banking respondents express

serious concern over what they consider to be groundless rumors that banks
will be unable to roll over their CD's.
The survey results from 56 manufacturers showed new orders down in 17,
and up in only 6, which is a significantly worse diffusion than shown in
earlier surveys this year.

Until recently, manufacturers had been reporting

that inventories were lower than desired.

The recent survey, however, shows

that although 15 respondents believed that inventories were too low, an equal
number believed they were too high.

In spite of an apparent softening in

orders, an increasing number of respondents thought that their current plant
and equipment capacity was too low.

This suggests that they do not expect a

continuation of whatever softening of demand may be occurring.

This conclusion

is also supported by the responses on production expectations.

Twenty-one

expect production to expand in the next few months, and only 6 respondents
expect production to decline.
The easing of new orders appears to be concentrated in textiles, apparel,
furniture, electrical equipment and supplies, and lumber and wood products.
Sales of textile producers may have been adversely affected by the inability

of textile converters to find financing.

Primary and fabricated metals

producers, however, appear to have burgeoning orders, as do food processors.
Employment in manufacturing firms is reported unchanged from last month,
and most firms continue to entertain buoyant expectations for future production.
Our retail sales survey indicates that sales may be leveling from
their previously high rates of growth.

Big-ticket items, especially,

be selling somewhat less well than they did in March or April.

seem to

Sales ex­

pectations for the next six months, however, appear to have improved since
last month's survey.
The agricultural outlook for the District remains generally optimistic,
with most crops coming in on time or ahead of time.

Some soft spots may be

developing in livestock production, however, because of declining prices and
high costs.

Because of low market prices and high production costs, some

North Carolina turkey producers are reported to be selling their breeder
flocks and destroying eggs.

While cash receipts of District farmers have been

rising, the increase has lagged behind that for farmers in the nation as a whole.
District bankers continue to report heavy loan demands, with strength
centered chiefly in business and agricultural loans.

Fertilizer dealers

and other farm suppliers are reported to be reluctant to extend trade
credit to farmers and as a result farm credit is apparently being pushed
increasingly into the banking system.

Heavy inventory financing is reported

as the principal factor behind business loan demand.

Bankers attribute most

of the recent increase in inventory borrowing to higher prices rather than
to expanded stocks.

Several large banks reported that they are no longer

making real estate loans and are limiting consumer loan growth to what can
be financed by increases in consumer time and savings deposits.

Bankers

generally show a reluctance to go to the CD market to raise funds at the

current high rates and some indicate that they will accommodate only as
much loan demand as can be financed through "regular" deposit growth.

Most

bank respondents appear to have tightened up their lending practices rather
substantially.

Consumer loan delinquencies, which have risen nationally,

appear to pose no major problem in this District, according to most respondents.
Several respondents were quite exercised over news stories of diminished
public confidence in banks and mentioned the dangers of "groundless rumors"
that many banks will not be able to roll over their CD's.
Mortgage funds have become scarce indeed, as District savings and
loan associations are experiencing sizable deposit outflows.

Preliminary

data indicate the April outflow may have been as much as $100 million.
compares with a $200 million inflow in April 1973.

This

Residential building

and the building supplies industry are feeling the crunch.
Businessmen and bankers in the District continue to express
optimism regarding the six months outlook for business in their local
markets.

But most feel that the national economy will show little growth

over this period.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Inflation seems to be the top item of concern of most businessmen
and directors in the District.

Consumer spending is apparently holding

up well.

However, much of the increase in spending is related to higher

prices.

Record high interest rates are causing commercial banks' lending

rates to bump up against state usury ceilings in some areas.

Although

some soft spots still exist, no new job layoffs of any consequence have
been recorded.

Tourism, particularly in Florida, is now beginning to

improve as gasoline becomes more readily available.

The volume of new

and expanded plants announced during the past month was one of the largest
ever recorded and reflects the pace of capital spending in the District.
On the agricultural scene, bumper cotton crops are expected, although
some crops are behind in their planting schedules.
Inflation is uppermost in the minds of many.

An area businessman,

who surveyed several of his associates, summed it up in typical fashion:
"The general consensus of most businessmen interviewed during the
last thirty days is that they expect higher prices and more and larger wage
demands.

This they expect to lead to more and continued inflation. Most

expressed concern for the condition of the economy but were apprehensive of
the ability of the nation to reverse the trend (i.e., inflation in a short
period of time)."
Retail sales continue to expand as indicated by reports from
Alabama, Florida, and Louisiana.
related to higher prices.

However, most of these increases are

One Alabama businessman suggests that people

are convinced that inflation will continue and, consequently, are purchasing
now rather than paying higher prices later.

The three largest department

stores in the Birmingham area report that sales for the first quarter of

1974 are up by approximately 11 percent from the same period a year ago;
but they indicate that price increases accounted for over one-half of
these gains.

Shortages of wool and wool-blend fabrics may raise apparel

prices but depress overall sales.

Auto sales, particularly in the mid­

to-large size class, have apparently nearly recovered from their earlier
slump, according to reports from around the District.

Used car sales have

also picked up.
Reports from central Alabama and mid-Louisiana indicate a
continuation of strong loan demand.

In Tennessee, rising interest rates

have forced bank loan rates up against ceilings imposed by state usury laws.
Alabama bankers indicate that mortgage loan delinquencies have increased
and are now at record highs.

Consumer instalment loan delinquencies have

also been on the rise in many parts of the District.

Several automobile

dealers have reportedly failed, and some banks are finding themselves in
the car business.
Labor market conditions appear to have stabilized.

Florida's and

Georgia's mobile home and recreation vehicle manufacturers are beginning
to note a pickup in sales and production.

Some mobile home manufacturers

forecast a bright future for their industry for the next ten years because
of the skyrocketing cost of residential construction.

In South Florida,

one electrical parts manufacturer is expecting to add substantially to his

labor force in coming months.

However, in east Tennessee, several large

nationally known television manufacturers expect a downturn in sales and
some job layoffs.

Tourist activity is showing a strong comeback as gasoline

supplies become more available.

In central Florida, Disney World, Cypress

Gardens, and Circus World have reported increases in business in the last

month.

These attractions, as well as areas in south Florida, are forecasting

a good business for the summer months.

They reason that part of the

business lost earlier will come this summer as a bonus.

On a side note,

Tampa has become the first city to receive an NFL football franchise since

the AFL-NFL merger several years ago.

City officials feel that this will

provide a boost for the tourist activity.

In Tennessee, however, attendance

at the great Smokey Mountain National Park remains below par.
Announcements of new and expanded plants were at record levels.
Apparently, the energy shortage has stimulated some of these announcements.
A $3 billion nuclear power generating plant has been announced by the
Alabama Power Company.

Louisiana Power and Light Company announced plans

for the construction of a $1.2 billion nuclear generating station, with
initial operations scheduled for 1982.

Gulf States Utilities announced

plans to build Louisiana's first coal-fired electric generating plant.
will cost $150 million.
in five-year power bonds.
power system.

It

Tennessee Valley Authority recently sold $100 million
The funds would be used for expansion of the TVA

Other new plant announcements are as follows:

a $213 million

container board mill in Mississippi; a $150 million cigarette manufacturing
plant in Macon, Georgia; and a $96 million chemical plant in Mobile, Alabama.
Two large plant expansions were also announced:

a $160 million expansion

of an Alabama aluminum manufacturer and a $100 million plant expansion of a
Louisiana pulp and paper processing plant.

Business investment in pollution

control equipment continued to receive top priority in many instances.
An Alabama paper company reported capital expenditures of $25 million in
April.

Of this total, $18 million is going into pollution control.
Bumper farm crops are expected in many areas of the District.

Tennessee, the largest cotton crop since 1954 is expected.

In

Mississippi also

20

expects a large cotton crop.

Florida's sugar cane industry expects the

second largest crop in the industry's forty-nine year old history.

However,

bad weather has delayed planting of crops in some areas of the District.
One of Alabama's most prominent cattle dealers reports that there is a
definite surplus of beef cattle, and the prices of live cattle are down
nearly 30 percent from earlier highs.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Seventh District capital goods producers report that the capital
goods boom continues at full throttle.

Shortages of metals, chemicals,

packaging materials, components, trained manpower, and transportation
continue to impede output in many sectors, with no improvement in
sight.

A variety of strikes also have slowed output growth.

Fuel shortages

are no longer an immediate concern to businesses and consumers.
sales generally have been better than expected.

Retail

The market for large cars

has improved, and the boom in small cars may have ended, at least tempora­
rily.

Sales of recreational vehicles have increased sharply from the

extremely low level of the start of the year.

Price increases for manu­

factured goods and services have come "thick and fast" since the end of
controls on May 1. Hopes for a revival of homebuilding have been hard hit
by high interest rates and substantial outflows of savings from S&L's
since the last third of March.

Prospects for record crops in the Corn

Belt are excellent with field work well ahead of normal.
Aside from homebuilding, very high interest rates are causing
widespread apprehension.

Apparently to allay fears, the large Chicago

banks made statements on May 13 that emphasized that funds will be
available, although at high cost.

There are private reports that

builders have not repaid construction loans on schedule, because of
large inventories of unsold houses.

Otherwise there is little evidence

that collections on business receivables have slowed.
firms report that collections have improved.

In fact, some

Many firms are experimenting with new escalator clauses to cover
rising costs, having found that existing arrangements were inadequate.
On long lead-time items, one firm has announced that prices will be
advanced one percent per month after the fourth month.

Other firms

have abandoned fixed prices, quoting only "estimated" prices, or, more
commonly,

"price at time of delivery."

Commonly,

business firms that had expected a slump in demand for

their products in the first quarter found that actual results were relatively
favorable.

This is true of both producer and consumer goods.

Although

some businessmen are worried about a renewed decline in the general economy,
they appear to be a relatively small minority.

Nevertheless, there are

persistent reports of small firms hard-pressed because of problems of
obtaining materials and workers and rapidly rising costs.
The increase in the minimum wage on May 1 seems to have been absorbed
without a noticeable impact on the demand for workers.

The recent steel

settlement is said to increase labor costs by 40 percent in three years,
and this package is likely to be demanded in other areas.

There has been

upward pressure on white collar wages and salaries since decontrol.

Many

of the large firms had been following the guidelines "more or less."
New claims for unemployment compensation eased in District states in April,
as compared with the first quarter, but were still above last year in most
localities.

In most areas, these claims have been boosted mainly by lay-offs

in the motor vehicle and petroleum-related industries and do not appear to
have spread in a cumulative fashion.
The most important material shortage clearly is now steel.

Because

of production difficulties earlier in the year many steel deliveries have
been behind schedule.

As a result, allocations to most users have been

reduced for the third quarter.

Output of steel will be lower in the third

quarter because of needed maintenance and vacations.

The auto firms are

pressing for delivery of additional steel for large car production which
has increased.

Foreign steel is much less available despite prices far

above domestic levels.

Exports of steel have increased somewhat, but this

is not a large factor in the supply situation, particularly in the Midwest.
Although demand for virtually all types of producer equipment
is intense, with delivery times streching out still further, the picture
is particularly tight for farm equipment, heavy construction equipment,
heavy trucks, freight cars, machine tools and traveling cranes needed for
new factories and utility generating stations.
Farm loan demand remains exceptionally strong, although demand for
feeder cattle loans has slackened.

Rural banks are shouldering a larger

share of the farm loan demand because trade credit has become less available
in a period of tight money and short supplies of fertilizer and other products
sold to farms.

Farmland values rose sharply again in the first quarter.

District bankers reports indicate farmland prices averaged 34 percent above
year-ago on April 1.

Corn Belt farmers had completed 27 percent of their

intended corn planting by May 5, up from only 6 percent a year earlier and
the 5-year average of 18 percent.

Because of curtailed feeding operations

for both hogs and cattle, most analysts expect higher prices for red meat
later in 1974.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The pace of economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District
remains moderately upward.

Manufacturing activity generally continues

strong, especially for firms connected with the capital goods industry.
On the negative, construction activity, particularly single-family
dwellings, has deteriorated.
report

a slowing in activity.

Some firms supplying this industry also
On the agricultural side, a large increase

in crop output is still in prospect, but cattle, hog, and poultry feeding
operations are unprofitable.
Retail sales have generally continued upward in recent weeks.
Some retailers reported increases of 10 percent or more from a year ago.
This growth, however, is largely nullified when price increases are taken
into account.

Retailers report that clothing and other "soft lines" have

experienced large sales increases, while some slowdown has occurred in
"big ticket" items, such as air conditioners, refrigerators, and other
home furnishings.
The pace of manufacturing activity in the District is almost
unchanged from the high rate of last month.

With the abatement of the

energy crisis, manufacturing is outpacing the level of late last year and
early this year.

Firms in the capital goods industry report production

at a record pace and some reported continued increases in order backlogs.
Fewer complaints about raw material shortages were voiced than in recent
months, however, raw materials prices have increased substantially since
the lifting of price controls and apparently the market is clearing at
the higher prices.

Home construction is the weakest sector of the District economy
at this time.

In addition to rising interest rates and higher prices,

usury laws in some of the District states have hampered the industry.
Apparently hardest hit is Missouri where usury laws restrict interest rates
to 8 percent on loans to individuals.

This law has led mortgage lenders

to seek higher yielding investments such as Federal funds and outstate
mortgages and reports from St. Louis indicate that mortgage funds are
virtually impossible to obtain.

In addition, a labor strike is currently

hampering construction in the St. Louis area.
Growth of savings accounts has slowed in recent weeks at both
commercial banks and savings and loan associations, apparently reflecting
higher yielding opportunities for other forms of investments.

Low

yielding savings deposits have remained virtually unchanged with some
slight growth in the higher yielding small denomination certificates of
deposit.
The livestock feeding industry, in the face of high feed costs
and deteriorating livestock prices, is reported to be unprofitable.

If

so, this would lead to a reduction in output of fed animals until some

improvement in profit from feeding is anticipated.
are more optimistic.

Crop farmers, however,

Weather conditions in the Eighth District have been

more favorable to crop planting compared with the nearly disastrous planting

season last year.

Reports indicate that farmers are planting larger acreages

than a year ago, as had been forecast.

In general, farmers are able to

obtain fertilizer at the substantially higher prices, but reductions are

being made in the amount applied per acre.

This practice will lead to

somewhat reduced yields, but given normal weather conditions and the larger
number of acres planted, total crop output will probably be up.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

In early May the directors were asked about the extent of business
inventory accumulation and the outlook for inflation and unemployment.
They indicated that businessmen in the Ninth District have been accumulating
inventories for at least two different reasons:

apparently some businessmen

hope to avoid shortages and future price increases by building inventories
and others, facing production bottlenecks due to shortages in certain
industries, have been caught involuntarily with extra stocks.

Acknowledging

considerable economic uncertainty, Bank directors nevertheless did not
expect either inflation or District unemployment to grow more serious in
the months ahead.

A few directors even expected inflationary pressures to

lessen in the second half.

Bankers responding to our second quarter survey

of agricultural credit conditions, however, were less optimistic about the
outlook for farm income and anticipate some increase in loan demand.
Several directors reported inventory building to avoid shortages
and future price increases.

One director explained that retailers, in

some instances, are paying more to replace an item than they sold it for
and that this is encouraging inventory accumulation to avoid price increases.
A Twin Cities' banker indicated, however, that high interest rates are
"beginning to get to" businessmen, dampening their desire to add to
inventories.

One director said that the administration could prevent

unwanted inventory accumulation with a policy statement that wage and
price controls will not be reimposed.
Another kind of inventory accumulation has taken place involuntarily
as shortages of key materials and components result in production bottlenecks.
Directors from western South Dakota and Montana indicated that although

some inventory accumulation may have occurred in their areas, businessmen
are primarily concerned about obtaining sufficient merchandise to satisfy
customer demands.
Generally, the directors looked for smaller price increases in
the second half of 1974.

A director associated with agriculture pointed

to the decline in livestock and grain prices--a decline which should not
be reversed in the near future--as a sign that food price increases will
moderate.

This opinion was reinforced by a director connected with the

food processing industry who expected an improved supply situation and
somewhat reduced production costs in the second half of this year.

Also,

several directors looked for fuel prices to level off later this year.
Despite these developments which should lessen inflation, directors'
comments indicated that many pressures for increased prices may remain.
Increased labor costs during the second half of 1974, one director stated,
would place upward pressure on prices.

Another director looked for some

relief from inflationary pressures during the third and fourth quarters but
expected prices to be up substantially in the second quarter with the
lifting of wage price controls.

He indicated that some of his firm's

material costs recently rose as much as 30 percent.

A Twin Cities' area

banker foresees some increase in the price of bank services with the lifting
of wage price controls.

One director reported that residents in his area

appear more pessimistic about inflation than they were a month ago, and
another director indicated that he could discern no trend in his area

toward less inflation.
Reflecting their views that the District's economy should remain
quite strong in 1974, bank directors looked for an increase in District

employment this spring and for little or no increase in unemployment.

A Twin Cities' banker stated, for example, that although he expects the
national unemployment rate to approach 6 percent later this year, the
District's unemployment rate should remain below this level due to
continued strength in both the District's agricultural and manufacturing
Directors did not look for any significant skilled labor

sectors.
shortages.

A western South Dakota director, however, indicated that

uncertainty over the outlook for his area's tourist business could
restrict summer hiring.
Concern over the cattle industry has made many respondents to
our April survey of agricultural credit conditions less optimistic about
the future of the farm sector than they were in January.

While 70 percent

of the bankers surveyed reported first quarter farm earnings would exceed
1973 levels, Districtwide, 24 percent of the bankers expected short-term
loan demand to be greater than normal in the second quarter, up from 6 per­
cent in the January survey.

Although the high cost of farm inputs was

expected to bolster loan demand throughout the District, much of this
increase should come from the slumping livestock industry.

Farmers in

the grain-producing areas were apparently still flush with cash from last
year's crops, and loan demand in these areas was light.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

High interest rates are serving as a serious deterrent to home
buyers while disintermediation is adversely affecting the supply of mortgage
funds.

No pickup in homebuilding in the second half of this year is expected

either by District homebuilders or thrift institution executives, should
current conditions continue.

The agricultural outlook still includes big

crop yields, based on May 1 conditions, but farm income prospects are wilting.
The rate of increase of business loan demand appears to be slowing down,
although loanable funds have become increasingly tight.

Bank credit is

being rationed, while banks aggressively compete for loanable funds.
From discussions with several District thrift institutions, concern
over disintermediation was readily apparent.

Net inflows have shrunk

appreciably or have given way to net outflows of deposits.

One savings and

loan executive said that April was "miserable," and the "Treasury issues are
killing them."

Another described deposit inflows as "slim and bad."

He

wants the Board to know that the law of supply and demand still works--that
people are withdrawing large CD's before maturity because they can make up
the penalty and then some.

A third "...sure would like to know what the

Fed is planning to do to him next."

A respondent who had recently attended

a mortgage bankers convention said "everyone there seemed scared and uncertain."
With a few exceptions, homebuilders generally sound just as gloomy
as S&L executives about the outlook.

Although most expected the year to be

slower, pessimism about the months ahead is increasing.

While new home sales

in the Kansas City metropolitan area held up surprisingly well through midApril, they have dropped off drastically since, especially in Missouri because
of its 8 percent ceiling on mortgages.

Two major Kansas City builders

expressed resentment at the apparent willingness of the Federal Reserve System
to sacrifice the housing industry this year in an effort to stop inflation.
In Colorado, building activity continues to be determined largely by natural
gas allocations.

Thus, Denver experienced a record number of mortgage

commitments in April, a bulge created by the gas company's requirement that,
in order to get gas service, new units must be completed by July.
decline in new starts is expected once that deadline is passed.

A sharp
In Tulsa,

a builder complained about how high interest rates were hurting housing.
"You know," he said, "we had some carpenters looking for jobs recently.
Now, that's a change."

One hundred miles away, in Oklahoma City, however,

the construction of single family homes is off only slightly from last year,
and the builder contacted remains optimistic about the months ahead.

However,

such favorable views were decidedly fewer in this Redbook survey than in the
one taken three months ago.
Agricultural conditions in the District continue mixed.

Favorable

weather has enabled farmers to make good headway with the planting of spring
crops.

Some difficulty in acquiring fertilizer and chemical pesticides is

being reported, but the problem does not appear to be too serious in this
geographic area.

Winter wheat conditions have deteriorated substantially

in

much of the District since May 1 when favorable prospects were indicated in
the crop report.

Dry weather and an outbreak of streak mosaic are hindering

the development of the crop.

With immediate improvement in the weather, the

1974 wheat crop still could be larger than a year ago.

The sharp decline in

wheat prices over the last 2 months has removed much of the bloom surrounding
income prospects for District farmers, but unless weather conditions improve,
the price situation may reverse.

Moreover, the livestock industry, which

continues in a depressed state, offers little promise of bolstering District

farm income unless slaughter prices improve or costs come down.
Although business borrowing at large District banks increased sharply
in the past 4 weeks, reports from a survey of some of the larger banks indicate
that recent increases in the prime rate are beginning to have an effect on
business loan demand.

Several banks reported that, while the volume of

business borrowing remains exceptionally large, loan requests do appear to
be leveling off or, in a few cases, even declining.

Nevertheless, due to

the current high level of business loan demand, some banks have begun to
ration credit either by rejecting new loan requests or by limiting the size
of loans to normal or past amounts.

Moreover, in several instances, banks

have become more selective with regard to the purposes of loan requests and
have rejected speculative loans for land development and "excessive"
inventory accumulation.

To accommodate the business loan demand, District

banks are competing aggressively for CD's and, as a result, are experiencing
sharp inflows of deposits.

Most banks are also relying upon purchases of

Federal funds to supplement loanable funds, but of the banks in the survey,
none as of yet have borrowed Euro-dollars.

With only two exceptions, the

survey banks have not experienced any slowing in the growth of savings
deposits or consumer certificates of deposit in recent weeks.

One of the

exceptions, however, did report a drop of 5 percent in savings deposits
and consumer CD's in the last month.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

In discussing current economic and credit conditions at the
May 9, 1974, meeting of our Board, the directors expressed opinions on
inventory positions in their own industries, expected business loan
demand, status of shortages of supplies and materials, and overall price
trends.
Directors, in the retail field, believe inventories to be increasing.
largely in the big-ticket items such as furniture and appliances, but think
a sizable portion of the increase can be accounted for by price changes
as opposed to large increases in numbers of units.

The retail business

generally has remained fairly strong although there has been some leveling
in sales.

It was pointed out that goods to be offered for sale in the

next 90 days will be at higher prices, and it remains to be seen what
consumers' reactions to such prices will be.

In looking at the south­

western part of the United States, generally the opinion expressed was
that increase in sales are about even with the increase in inflation.
The cost of maintaining inventories has increased substantially with
higher interest rates, and there is somewhat of a squeeze on profits.
Most retailers appear to be holding their inventories a little lower than
usual in order to avoid committing too far in advance.
On production, continued shortages of supplies and materials in
certain areas are causing disruptions.
related fields.

Business is very active in energy­

While there have been increases in the quantities of

units produced, the large dollar figures are accounted for in considerable
measure by inflation.

New price increases will be a real factor in how

well business fares over the coming months.

All directors anticipate

further price increases and referred to the fact that prices of a number
of items, such as heavy equipment, manufactured goods, and steel products,
are set at the time of delivery, rather than at the time of ordering.
Concern also was expressed with the ability to finance large projects in
the energy field.
The bank directors reported that business loan demand at commercial
banks is continuing quite heavy in this part of the country, particularly
with large national companies calling upon previous commitments.

It is

expected that such business loan demand will continue quite strong.

There

is evidence of disintermediation as deposits are trending downward and money
is going directly into high yield investments.
There were differences of opinion as to whether interest rates
have topped out and whether there will be a sharp decline in interest
rates this year.

Most of the directors do not expect significant declines

in interest rates in the near future.

It was recognized that if interest

rates are not effective in dampening loan demand, the alternative will
be greater restriction on the availability of credit.

The principal

problem here, of course, is to avoid a credit crunch.
Homebuilding in Texas is being hampered by tightening mortgage
markets.

A survey of leading savings and loan associations in the state

revealed that most suffered sizable deposit losses in April.

For example,

the two largest savings associations in Houston lost in excess of $1 million
each during the month.

Many large accounts, those in excess of $100,000,

were withdrawn and were reported to have been mostlyreinvested in Treasury
bills.

But lenders feel that the current round of disintermediation has

been less severe than the loss of deposits following the implementation of
wild card CD's last summer.
Nevertheless, recent deposit losses are proving difficult to
offset from other sources.

The secondary mortgage market is currently

described by those surveyed as a "buyers market."

In addition, the

Federal Home Loan Bank of Little Rock, which has jurisdiction in the
Southwest, is maintaining a restrictive policy stance.

The variable

rate on advances was raised on April 30 from 9-1/2 percent to 10 percent,
which is equal to the usury ceiling in Texas on primary mortgage loans.
Also, by regulation, advances cannot be made to cover the loss of CD's
in excess of $100,000.

Therefore, savings institutions in the state

that are losing these large deposits are now looking elsewhere for funds.
Savings and loan associations across the state are responding
to losses of deposits by raising rates and cutting back sharply on loans
and commitments.

During the last two weeks of April many raised their

prime mortgage rates on conventional loans to 9 percent from 8-1/2 percent.
Most of the lenders interviewed felt mortgage rates will go higher,
probably reaching 9-1/4 percent by mid-May.
Mortgage lenders report home buyers are much less sensitive to the
recent rise in mortgage rates than they were when rates moved up at the end
of last summer.

Buyers generally expect housing prices will continue to

climb rapidly, and waiting until mortgage rates decline is no longer viewed
as a means of reducing the total cost of a house.

However, the president

of a large savings and loan association in Texas points out that borrower
resistance to rising mortgage rates stiffens as rates approach whole numbers,
and he predicts many borrowers will shy away, at least temporarily, from the
9 percent rate.

The most noticeable impact of tightening mortgage markets

35

is that lending institutions are making more conservative estimates of the
value of homes and are cutting back on the size of individual mortgage
commitments.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Economic activity in the Twelfth District shows continued strength.
Inflation remains the main policy concern of our directors, but rising interest
rates are expected by some directors to cause additional problems.

Business

investment expenditures remain strong, reinforced by efforts to build up
inventories.

Consumer spending is high, and with the exception of

autos, sales of durables are good.
ticularly for business loans.

Banks face strong loan demand, par­

The majority of our directors see little

sign of any slowing in economic activity after the pause caused by energy
shortages in the first quarter.

Business spending to expand capacity is a

major source of strength, but expansion efforts are being hindered by
material shortages and slow deliveries.

Shortages are reported by most

of our non-banking directors and few expect any major improvement in the
supply situation during the next six months.

Steel and other metals,

chemicals and plastics are the materials which are most difficult to obtain.
Consumer spending is good throughout the District for nondurables and durables,
with the exception of autos.
been recovering.

Although auto sales are still weak, they have

Sales of full-sized cars are increasing, in part because
Some consumer

of the effects of manufacturers' sales incentives programs.
reaction against high prices is reported.

In California, milk consumption

has fallen by 10 percent after a 13 percent price

increase.

Consumer

demand for credit is described as strong at most banks, but it is accompanied
by rising delinquencies.

One large Los Angeles bank reported its delinquencies

were at an eleven-year high.
Expenditures on tourism are lower than last year.

Concern exists

in such states as Oregon as to the impact of travel of possible gasoline

shortages this summer.

Spokane, because of the opening of its World's

Fair, expects to attract large numbers of tourists with favorable effects
on the local economy.
residential housing.

The weakest sector in this District remains
After a low point in the first quarter, housing

starts have increased but this recovery is threatened, in the view of
some directors, by high interest rates.

Commercial construction, while

much stronger than the residential sector, is hampered by materials shortages
in steel, construction equipment, and builders' hardware.
industry is experiencing mixed trends.

The timber

Pulp and paper mills are working

at full capacity, but there has been a weakening in lumber and plywood.
In Oregon, the closing of several plywood plants has been reported.

The

president of one lumber company feels that high interest rates which are
causing problems for this industry will also precipitate a turndown of the
general economy within the next three to four months.
Agricultural prospects are generally reported as excellent, and
farmers are attempting to expand acreage in production.

In Idaho farmers

are uncertain as to which crops offer the best prospects, but surveys
indicate they are shifting to potatoes and grain and away from such crops
as beets.
being used.

Shortages of fertilizers persist, but acceptable substitutes are
Agricultural equipment is in strong demand and buyers face

delays for weeks before receiving delivery.

loan demand, particularly by business.

Banks are experiencing a strong

The business loan demand is being

felt by both large- and medium-sized banks.

Much of the demand is to

finance inventory accumulation in anticipation of higher prices or to avoid
future shortages.

Additional demand is for capacity expansion.

More banks

are facing liquidity pressures and have become more selective in lending or
have imposed loan ceilings.
for another reason.

In Idaho, business loans are being curtailed

The state usury laws set a 10 percent ceiling on loans

38

to proprietorships and partnerships, and this is below the rate paid on
Federal funds.

Another factor in the heavy business borrowing, according

to one bank, is speculation that long-term rates will fall, and therefore
businesses are willing to borrow at high short-term rates in order to
refinance at lower rates later in the year.

The existing high rates are

viewed by some bankers as hurting small businessmen and residential
housing, but the consensus is that rates will begin to decline.

