CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

April 10,

1974

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .....

........

.......

First District - Boston . . . .
Second District - New York

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

4

Third District - Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Fourth District - Cleveland .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Fifth District - Richmond . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sixth District - Atlanta

. . .

. .

12

. . . S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

Seventh District - Chicago

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Eighth District - St. Louis . .

S .

. . . . . . . .

. . .

. . . . . . . .

18
21

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Tenth District - Kansas City

.

27

Eleventh District - Dallas

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

. .

Twelfth District - San Francisco

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

SUMMARY*

The general impression conveyed by this month's Red Book is that
the worst of the economic slowdown appears to be over, and that the economic
outlook has improved.

Directors throughout the System, along with other

businessmen and bankers, are generally more optimistic (or less pessimistic)
than a month or two ago.

The improvement in attitudes is widely attributed

to the lifting of the oil embargo.

Moreover, indications are that business

in the energy-affected sectors was not as bad as expected, or at least the
declines have bottomed out in areas such as auto sales, tourism, and housing.
Retail sales are showing signs of a pickup, while capital spending remains
very strong.

Severe shortages of materials and long delivery times continue

to hamper operations in many industries.

Residential construction is

characterized as having stopped declining, but no solid upswing is yet in
progress.

Agricultural prospects are viewed as good in most areas, although

shortages of certain production inputs are a problem.

In addition, producers

of meat animals and poultry are incurring severe losses as a result of recent
price declines.

Business loan demand has surged in recent weeks.

In the consumer sector, there are signs that the most depressed areas,
such as new cars, large used cars, and spending for tourism and recreation,
are beginning to improve.
that the decline has ended.

Districts commenting on the auto market indicate
Auto dealers are becoming more optimistic as

sales of luxury-type and large-sized new and used cars show some pickup.
Tourism and recreational spending, which had been dampened by the gasoline
situation (and poor weather in some ski areas), is beginning to recover.

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Nonautomotive retail trade is generally described as having been soft during
most of the first quarter.

Pre-Easter sales, however, appear to be better

than expected by retailers in some Districts.

Minneapolis attributes good

first quarter sales partly to the high level of farm income.

On the other

hand, Richmond says that consumers are becoming more cautious about
discretionary spending, while Cleveland suggests that it is too early to
conclude whether a significant pickup in general merchandise trade is
underway.
Business fixed investment continues to be an important source of
strength.

Atlanta notes that the volume of plant announcements is once

again on the upswing and emphasizes substantial spending for pollution
control.

Chicago sees no letup in demand for all types of capital goods,

and adds that the farm equipment industry will be hard pressed to increase
shipments over last year because output is at capacity and finished goods
inventories are down sharply.

Cleveland also reports across-the-board

strength in capital goods, particularly machine tools.

St. Louis, San

Francisco, and Philadelphia all see signs of further strength in capital
spending.
Shortages and long delivery time continue to be serious economic problems,
although of less importance than inflation.

Almost every District's report

includes some comment on the difficulties in obtaining materials and parts
and, in some cases, skilled labor and transportation.

Shortages are affecting

not only manufacturing, but also mining, construction, and agriculture.

There

are scattered indications that selective decontrols have helped alleviate
tight supply conditions in certain instances.
situation has grown worse.

Chicago,

Cleveland,

But in some cases the
and Dallas,

for example,

all

emphasize increasingly tight conditions in the steel industry, partly because
of rapidly dwindling coal supplies.

Residential construction seems to have bottomed out, but no District
reports a solid recovery underway.

In fact, there is concern (variously

expressed by Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, St. Louis, and San Francisco) that
rising interest rates and potential disintermediation may adversely affect
the recovery of homebuilding.

St. Louis reports that S&Ls already have begun

to lose deposits in significant amounts.
In the agricultural sector, prospects for crops are generally good.
Dallas, however, notes that the winter wheat crop in Texas has been affected
by drought and is expected to be half of last year's harvest.
agricultural inputs are disrupting production in the Southwest.

Shortages of
Chicago and

San Francisco also mention problems regarding shortages of inputs such as
fertilizer and machinery.

Prospects do not appear to be particularly good

for cattle, hogs, and poultry.

Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and

St. Louis each express concern over the cost-price squeeze currently affecting
many producers.

Sharp losses due to recent price declines in cattle, hogs,

and poultry are reducing the incentive of producers to expand their output.
In the banking sector, business loan demand has risen sharply in recent
weeks.

Kansas City and New York attribute some of the strength to borrowing

in anticipation of higher prices.

New York adds that the recent rise in

money market rates has caused a shift from the commercial paper market to
bank credit.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Our directors forecast for 1974 is getting less gloomy as business
continues to be very good.
Current business orders are very strong in the capital goods areas
and very weak in leisure, auto, and apparel industries, according to our
directors.

Only one director explained his very good sales in March as

largely due to strike hedge buying and to anticipatory buying before an

announced price increase for April.

In general, business is considered to

be quite good, and the continuation of this situation has shaken our directors
feelings that 1974 would inevitably be a year of stagflation, with a rapid
rise in unemployment.

Their current feelings about the outlook are "confused"

because they feel that the economic picture is "muddled."
Our bank directors ascribe the recent rise in the prime rate to the
rising Federal funds rate and to a sudden surge in business loan demand.

The

major banks are so heavily dependent on Federal funds, according to a director
from a large Boston bank, that a rise in the Federal funds rate assumes major
importance in determining the cost of bank funds.

This director also reports

that business loan demand is booming across the board.

Real estate investment

trusts in the past 3 to 4 weeks have been pulling down their bank lines
because they have not been treated well in the commercial paper market.
Major corporations have been coming in for their full lines in the last few
weeks, and foreign banks have also been heavy borrowers.
Our academic correspondents, Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, Shapiro
and Tobin, were sharply divided in their policy recommendations this month.

Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin were all prepared to accept significantly

-2­
higher rates of monetary growth in order to curb the rise in short-term
interest rates, while Dr. Shapiro favored continued moderate money growth
regardless of the accompanying interest rate pattern.

In Shapiro's view, the current restriction is a desirable measure to
make sure excess pressures on capacity will not build up later in the year.
Continuation of this policy would lead him to reduce his estimate of housing
starts at year-end by about 200,000 units.

However, except for the weakness

in consumption, the other components of spending remain strong.

The job for

monetary policy is to hold down inflationary pressures by insuring that the
recovery in consumption will be a gradual one.

Dr. Shapiro expects output

declines over the first half of the year to be offset by increases in the
second half.

The unemployment rate is predicted to rise to 6 percent by year­

end and average to about 5.8 percent in 1975 with real growth of 4.2 percent.
He feels a Federal funds rate of about 10 percent would cause a reversal of
short-term capital outflows and of the recent tendency for loans which would
have been acquired in the Euro-dollar market to come home.
Samuelson feels the tightening of short-term interest rates have been
over-done.

He notes that the public and business community have come around

to the experts' view that we are in a mini-recession which will be near its
bottom in the second quarter, but have not accepted the unanimous view that
the rate of inflation will be tapering down in the second half.

However,

"unless money grows at about 8 percent between now and year end, the fourth
quarter recovery will not occur as disintermediation will abort the housing
recovery," Eckstein said.
Both Samuelson and Eckstein argued that a monetarist approach to policy
need not be associated with a 5.5 to 6 percent money growth target in the
present context.

Noting that monetarist James Meiggs of the Argus Corporation

- 3 ­
favors a higher growth rate at the present time, they both argued a 5.5 to 6
percent money growth would be appropriate now only if we want a genuine
recession, only if the Fed intends "to beat inflation by itself."

The current

inflation has no particular relationship to excess demand spending and can
be brought down only gradually by aggregative policy.

Not to accommodate

any of this special inflation is an extremely tight policy which will generate
a recession of some severity and exceptional duration.

"Even if the Fed

wished to do this, the political process would not go along with it,"
according to Eckstein.
Tobin argued that lower interest rates would be necessary to achieve
even the administration's hopes for a rather modest recovery this year.
rising rates, this prospect is in jeopardy.

With

The Fed cannot "solve" the

problem of inflation without prolonged stagnation and unemployment.

The

first casualty of rising rates is expected to be housing, where the turnaround
was predicted or reintermediation as opposed to the increasing disintermediation
associated with higher rates.

Tobin stressed the role of the stock market

in setting the cost of capital for business fixed investment.

While tighter

money and higher capital costs now might not preclude this year's investment
boom, its consequences would surely be felt in the form of weakened capital
spending in 1975.

Tobin advocated a Federal funds target of 8 percent.

-4

-

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District directors, retailers, and New York City bankers who
were contacted recently painted a generally more optimistic picture of the
current economic outlook as compared to last month.

A number of respondents

characterized business conditions as stronger than expected to "very strong"
and "booming".

The respondents in

general felt the end of the Arab oil

embargo would provide some, if only moderate, near-term boost to economic
activity.

The retailers and other respondents on balance reported more strength

in consumer spending than had been expected earlier.

The sharp rise in recent

weeks in business loans was traced primarily to inventory building by business
firms as a hedge against expected price increases and scarcities, as well as
to a shift from the commercial paper market.
The respondents on balance felt the lifting of the oil embargo would
provide some near-term stimulus to economic activity.

In particular, the

end of the embargo was expected to bring relief to those sectors that have
been most adversely affected by the oil shortage and at least removed the
threat of the more serious consequences that might have occurred if the
embargo had been maintained for a longer period.

A number of respondents,

however, noted that the severe shortages of productive capacity and of
numerous materials remained a serious cause for concern.
Several respondents felt that the lifting of the embargo would have
some positive influence on consumer attitudes.

And indeed, as noted above, a

fairly strong retail sales picture emerged from the observations of the
retailers and other respondents.

Thus, the Buffalo branch directors reported

retail sales in their areas to be at least at, and perhaps somewhat above,

-5
earlier forecasts.

­

The president of a Buffalo department store reported

sales at his store had been running somewhat above last year, and a senior
official of a large multinational firm based in Rochester mentioned a strong
demand for firm's products,

as did another upstate manufacturer.

Among the retailers who were contacted,

the chairman of a New York

City area middle-price department store chain stated that, primarily as a
result of promotional efforts, sales at his stores in the recent past had
exceeded "by a considerable amount" the levels forecast earlier in the year.
Moreover, on the basis of conversations with officials of other retail firms,
he believed that similar department stores in the New York metropolitan area
were having comparable experiences.

A senior official of a high-quality New

York City department store with branches in the suburbs did characterize the
current retail sales picture as "soft," but expected that for 1974 as a whole
business at his firm would be somewhat higher than in 1973, in physical
volume as well as in dollar terms.

An official of a nationwide department

store chain reported that his firm's sales had increased somewhat more than
expected and noted that, while the rate of increase has been below that of
the comparable period last year, his firm had enjoyed an "extremely strong"
first quarter in 1973.
Regarding the current large demands for short-term bank credit by
business firms, the directors and the New York City bankers who were contacted
generally attributed the sharp rise in such credit primarily to inventory
building.

This accumulation in turn was variously attributed to fears of

shortages, to expectations of price increases, and to the higher cost of
carrying inventories as a result of the previous increases in prices.

Some

respondents also felt the rise to be related to some extent to tax-borrowing.

-6-

Another major factor cited by the New York City bankers has been a shift
from the commercial paper market to commercial bank credit, induced by the
rise in money market rates.

The effect of this shift, according to one bank

economist, may have been largely concentrated in the New York credit market.

- 7-

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic prospects on the whole have improved during the past month.
Production activity is about the same as last month, but respondents foresee
increased activity by fall.

While employment opportunities are about

even with last month, firms expect some increases in the level of
employment in the next six months.

Inventory spending remains unchanged

from last month, although executives see boosts in capital expenditures
plans in the months ahead.
in the Third District.

Construction activity, however, has weakened

Easter sales in retail department stores are strong,

but soaring prices continue to plague the regional economy.

While loan

demand and deposit flows leveled off during most of the first quarter, recent
weeks show increases in the levels of loans and deposits.

Manufacturers

in the Third District, responding to this month's business outlook survey,
report a divergence between current business activity and their expectations
six months in the future.

Currently, over two-thirds of the area

manufacturers are experiencing no change in their new orders, shipments, and
unfilled orders.

In contrast, the six-month outlook of the area executives

is more optimistic than it has been since last June.

Well over a third of

the respondents expect new orders, shipments, and unfilled orders to start
picking up during the next two quarters.

Employment in the Third District

remains about where it was last month with almost 90 percent of the firms
reporting no changes this month in their number of employees and the length
of their average workweek.

However, by next fall, almost one-fourth of the

firms expect to be increasing the average length of the workweek.

Virtually

no firm expects a decrease in either employment indicator within the next
six months.

-8Business investment in inventories remains unchanged this month,
and over half of the firms surveyed expect this trend to continue six
months out.

However, manufacturers' plans for boosting expenditures for

plant and equipment have increased substantially from several months ago.
Almost one-half of the respondents expect to increase spending in this area
by October.
Construction activity in the Third District has declined somewhat.
Residential housing contracts are off slightly, and nonresidential projects
are down considerably from previous levels.
Philadelphia department stores are far more optimistic this month than

last.

February and early March brought soft sales for retail stores.

But

the easing of the energy shortage and early Easter have brought shoppers
back into area department stores.

Accessories, children's clothes, and

millinery are all selling well.
Prices continue to travel upward on a broad front.

Nearly 80 percent

of the Third District's respondents report paying higher prices for raw
materials in April than they did in March, and nearly 60 percent report
receiving higher prices in April--up from last month.

But area manufacturers

see no lessening in inflationary pressures during the next six months.

Over

three-fourths expect to be paying and receiving higher prices by October.
Loan demand has been down in Third District banks most of the first
quarter.

However, bankers surveyed report increases in loan demand in late

March and early April.

An increase in business loans appears to be responsible.

Deposits seem to be following the same trend as loans have.

Deposits were

low during most of the first quarter with an increase reported during the
last few weeks.
time deposits.

Several banks attribute the increase to upward shifts in their
While most banks report the demand for CD's remaining flat,

one bank turned in a significant increase in their volume of CD's.

-9

-

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The economic situation in the District is still characterized by
a mixture of soft spots coupled with sectors of strength.

In the retail

area, nonautomotive consumer spending has been soft and signs of a pickup
are inconclusive.

Steel and capital goods industries continue to operate

at peak capacity, but weakening tendencies in automotive and other consumer
goods persist.

Widespread shortages and long delivery times continue

to plague manufacturers, although the lifting of economic controls in
certain industries has helped in some instances.

The severely depressed

housing sector shows a few signs of improvement.

S&Ls are becoming

increasingly concerned about the possibility of deposit losses.
The president of a major department store in Cleveland reported a
pickup in consumer spending since mid-March, following sluggish sales in
January and February.

He noted across-the-board improvement and states

that customers seem to be taking higher prices for apparel in stride.
He expressed some concern about a trend toward accounts receivable
delinquencies.

This executive believes the worst of the retail trade

slowdown is over, and he is more optimistic over the near-term sales
outlook than he was earlier in the year.

On the other hand, an economist

with a major retail chain headquartered in the District sees no sign of a
pickup in his firm's business.

The real volume of their sales in the

first quarter was up only 1 percent from a year ago.

Further softening

in sales of general merchandise, apparel, and furniture (GAF) may be in
store as the rate of increase in these retail prices begins to accelerate.
The firm's buyers are seeing increasing prices on GAF-line items as a
result of higher prices for natural and synthetic fibers at the wholesale
level.

- 10 -

Capital goods markets remain strong, but automotive and related
industries continued to show signs of weakening through March.

There are

no indications of a let up in new orders for steel, printing and business
equipment machinery, machine tools, and other metalworking machinery.
In recent months, about two-thirds of the purchasing agents in
the Cleveland area have been reporting lead times of one year or more for
capital equipment.

(A year ago, only about one-fifth reported such

lead times.)
Representatives from three major steel firms emphasize the tight
supply situation for steel; demand continues to exceed productive capacity,
and no let-up in demand is in prospect.
by coal shortages.

All three steel firms are hampered

They have been trying, unsuccessfully so far, to build

coal inventories to carry them through coal miners' two-week vacation
this summer.

Steel mill inventories cannot be reduced much further, which

may cause steel users to start drawing upon their stocks to maintain
output.

One steel firm reports that auto companies still have not fully

cut back their steel orders in line with current production and inventories.
Complaints of materials shortages and long delivery times continue
to be widespread.

Some of our industrialist directors, in fact, believe

that the most serious economic problem, after inflation, is long delivery
time.

One director said his firm's lead time in obtaining castings and

forging and cutting tools runs one year or more.

Another director, in the

machine tool business, notes that his firm will not be able to make delivery
on any big order until early 1976.

He mentioned that machine tool buyers

are anxious to get their orders on the books, even without firm price
commitments.

This director also complained about the difficulty in

obtaining castings (64 weeks lead time).

A financial officer for a

- 11 ­

"stripper well" operation in Ohio reports serious problems in obtaining
mechanical parts, which is holding down their output of natural gas.

An

official with a petrochemical firm reports that selected decontrol of
products in that industry has tended to alleviate tight supplies for some
items, although there are still severe shortages of some products, such as
benzene.

At least the incentive to export certain products has been lessened

as domestic prices were decontrolled.

One director also noted that it has

been easier to obtain plastics recently.
In the District's housing sector, residential construction contracts
have edged up moderately in the past few months, following a precipitous
decline in 1973.

Sources close to the industry are hesitant to conclude

that a solid turnaround has occurred, in view of the high level of interest
rates, the relatively mild winter, and seasonal adjustment problems.

Banks

and S&Ls seem to be cautious in making loan commitments because of uncertain
prospects for deposit flows.

One of the District's largest banks has raised

the minimum down payment on home loans from one-fifth to one-third and has
shortened the maximum maturity from 25 to 20 years.

An economist with a

Federal Home Loan Bank said S&Ls experienced some deposit losses as a result
of the recent 8 percent Treasury note offering.

He reports that S&Ls are

very concerned over possible disintermediation because of present money
market rates.

The S&Ls have made substantial withdrawals from their

overnight accounts with the FHLB, and they are placing the funds in
short-term money instruments.

- 12 -

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Results of our most recent survey of businessmen indicate that
business activity in the District remains strong.
in the manufacturing sector.

Little change was reported

However, business sentiments in this sector

improved considerably in the past month.

Employment in the manufacturing

sector registered a further slight decline.

Price increases continue to be

widespread in both manufacturing and retailing.

Retail sales increased in

recent weeks, although consumers are reported to be more discriminating in
their purchases.

Manufacturing activity remains strong in the Fifth District.

Shipments

and backlogs increased slightly during March, while new orders were essentially
unchanged.

Textiles, chemicals, primary metals, and machinery and equipment

industries are among those reporting increased activity.

Many manufacturers,

particularly those in textiles, are concerned that some consumer resistance to

sharply higher fall prices may be encountered, while material shortages remain
a problem, some easing in the shortage of electronic components was reported.
Shortages of synthetic fibers continue to be a problem in the textile
industry.

The level of employment in the District has apparently declined somewhat
in recent weeks.

The diffusion of survey responses suggests that in

manufacturing both the number of employees and the hours worked per week
declined.

Retailers reported no change in the number of employees.

of price increases are pervasive.

Reports

More than 90 percent of the manufacturers

reported higher prices paid and 55 percent reported higher prices received.

- 13 -

All respondents in retail trade reported an increase in prices paid and
three-fourths reported an increase in prices received.
Survey results suggest that retail sales remain strong in the District.
Nearly two-thirds of the respondents indicated increased volume during
the past month.

Reports are common, however, that higher prices for food

and fuel are causing consumers to be more discriminating in purchasing
discretionary goods.

Reports of adverse effects of the gasoline shortage

on tourism continue to be received.

Colonial Williamsburg, one of the largest

tourist attractions in Virginia, reported that attendance for February was

50 percent below year-ago levels.

Lodging and restaurant business in the

Myrtle Beach, South Carolina area are said to be off 30 percent compared to
a year ago.
Large commercial banks in the District indicate that demand for
business, consumer, and real estate loans remains strong.

Loans in all three

categories rose substantially during the month of March and are apparently
continuing strong so far in April.
Farm income continues to show significant improvement over year­
earlier levels.

The District's 35 percent increase in January, however, was

below the 48 percent gain nationally.
District farmers' planting plans for this year have changed little
since January.

Overall, the planned acreage increase as of March 1 adds up

to about 6 percent over 1973.

Corn accounts for better than half of the

planned expansion, while wheat, with acreage stepped up sharply, comprises
around one-third. Most of the remaining intended acreage increase will go
into tobacco and soybeans.
The diffusion of responses suggests a substantial improvement in
business psychology since the last survey, with much of this improvement

- 14 ­

apparently due to the lifting of the oil embargo.

Among manufacturing

respondents, nearly three-fourths expect national business activity to
remain the same or improve, whereas only 46 percent were this optimistic
last month.

Nearly one-half of the manufacturers expect the level of

production in their own firms to increase.
optimistic a month ago.

Only 27 percent were this

Responses from retailers suggest that they also

expect business conditions to improve both nationally and locally.

- 15 -

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The District economy appears to be improving despite some reports
of job layoffs.

Both new and used auto sales have apparently bottomed out,

and announcements of new and expanded plants and commercial projects are
strong.

But several job layoffs and strikes continue to depress certain

economic areas.
Surveys of Louisiana auto dealers indicate a more optimistic attitude
than in previous months.

The lifting of the oil embargo seems to add

encouragement to their outlook.
to move in these areas.
new and used big cars.

Used car sales are apparently also starting

Florida directors report a pickup in sales of both
However, retail sales in general remain soft.

Most

local retailers in the New Orleans area are complaining about sluggish
business.

Sales tax receipts, particularly gas tax revenues, are down in

the early months of 1974 from year-ago levels.

However, one bank director

from Louisiana notes that business seems to have picked up over the past
several weeks.
Florida.

Tourist activity also seems to be reviving, particularly in

Officials of Disney World, Cypress Gardens, and Circus World report

their business is up over the past few weeks.

Yet, tourist travel in

Tennessee's Great Smoky Mountains National Park remains depressed.
Job layoffs continue to plague the region's economy.

Most notable

were an extension of previously announced layoffs of Atlanta area auto
assembly plants and the temporary deferral of 1,300 workers at a Ford glass
plant in the Nashville area.

Because of the auto industry slump, an Alabama

textile manufacturer will shut down next month.

plant is idling 1,200 workers through April.

A Louisiana army ammunition

In central Mississippi,

- 16 ­

1,500 workers will be temporarily unemployed, resulting from the slaughter
of several million chickens contaminated by pesticide tainted feed.

This

is a severe blow to that local economy and particularly to poultry producers
who will suffer several million dollars in losses.

Several large strikes

in Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee have also temporarily idled several
thousand workers.

On the brighter side, regionally based airlines are

beginning to hire back previously furloughed employees.
The volume of plant announcements appears to once again be on the
upswing.

A $25 million electric steel mill, which will use recycled autos

and other steel scrap, is planned for Jacksonville.

Ashland Oil has

announced plans to build a town of approximately 45,000 people, a refinery,
and an offshore oil port near Florida's Atlantic Coast.
generate 1,000 jobs.

The refinery should

Related businesses are expected to create between

8,000 and 10,000 jobs, in Jackson, Mississippi, the expansion of two plants
will add 200 new jobs.

Alabama appears to be in the race along with

Mississippi and Louisiana as the location of a $600 million refinery on the
coast after the refinery was voted out of New Hampshire.
plants may soon be announced in this area.

Several chemical

While new and expanded plants

were being announced, some other plans to build plants have apparently been
shelved.

The Florida Department of Commerce reported that 14 companies

suspended plans to build plants there because of the energy crunch.
Oil and gas exploration is intensifying in the southeast.

Florida

Power and Light Company and Amoco Production Company have announced a $10.5
million joint oil exploration venture in 26 south Florida counties.

At the

same time, Florida Gas Company has made a gas discovery in south central
Mississippi.

- 17 -

Spending for pollution control is becoming an important ingredient
of the region's capital spending plans.

According to the Alabama Water

Improvement Commission, in 1973, 27 industries constructed water
pollution control facilities in Alabama valued at $19.5 million.

In 1974,

announced plans are for 40 different industries in the State putting nearly
$28 million in new pollution control facilities into operation.

In

Tennessee, $10 million in bonds to finance additions to the environmental
protection facilities of a large paper manufacturer have been approved.

A

Meridian, Mississippi, manufacturer has announced that it is investing
$600,000 in new equipment and facilities for pollution abatement and
increased efficiency.
Numerous commercial projects were announced.

A team of Houston, Texas,

and Sidney, Australia, developers will start construction this May on a
114-acre planned residential and commercial city near Atlanta costing $50
million.

Another $75 million multipurpose commercial project has also been

announced for Atlanta's south side.

Several smaller commercial projects

were announced in the Baton Rouge, Louisiana, area.
Atlanta bankers have indicated a strong interest in the new issue
of $1.5 billion of U. S. Treasury notes paying 8 percent.

They expressed

fears of losing funds from checking and savings accounts as small investors
draw down these accounts to purchase these Treasury bills.

One other bit of

news, the refinancing of New Orleans' Superdome in the approximate amount of
$138,930,000 came to market and found no bidders.

The primary reasons noted

were (1) the 6-percent legal limitation on interest rates for public entities
in the State and (2) the high inventory of municipal bonds on the shelves of
banks and investment houses in a very depressed bond market.

- 18 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The capital goods producers in the Seventh District see absolutely
no letup in demand.

Industries worst hit by slower sales and the oil

shortage--large cars, plastics, and recreation-related activities--appear to
have bottomed out with some improvement noted.

The feared "secondary"

impacts of the energy crisis have not been clearly significant.

General

shortages of skilled labor, materials, and components continue.

Prices of

components and finished goods are moving up even more rapidly as controls
are relaxed.

Forecasts for the general economy by regional experts were

being revised upward recently, but the renewed upsurge in interest rates has
raised new doubts, particularly for on-site housing.

Prospects for large

farm crops are good, but there is concern over shortages of machinery,
transportation, and fertilizer.
Large firms will be raising prices in the next few months as
circumstances permit, but even industries that have been "freed" of controls
realize that caution is necessary.

Chicago daily newspapers were raised from

10 to 15 cents on April 1, apparently without repercussions, which may
reflect the public's acceptance of inflation as a continuing trend.
Declines in demand for such products as autos, some appliances, and
TV sets have not eased supplies, except for components used in consumer
electronics.

Shortages mentioned most frequently include steel, nonferrous

metals, petroleum-based products, and paper.
they are badly unbalanced.

Inventories are rising, but

"You take what you can get and wait for the rest."

Purchasers complain of vendors disregarding terms of contracts and that
"business ethics are on the block to the highest bidders."

Strikes, e.g.,

- 19 ­

in transportation, coal mines, truck wheels, and outboard motor components,
have contributed to problems.

Firm shipping dates and firm prices are

becoming the exception rather than the rule.
Freight car availability is the "worst in all railroad history."
Frieght car builders are booked through the first quarter of 1975, but
production has been hampered by a strike at the major factory producing
wheels.

Shippers in Michigan are worried about proposed abandonment of

railroad trackage, which is now heavily used.

Pressure on capacity of

truckers has been increased by reduced speeds and by problems of independent
truckers (who handle over one-third of highway freight) in getting adequate
fuel at prices they can afford.
Gasoline has become generally available in the past several weeks in
the Chicago area, which had much the worst problem in the District.
smaller cities were never seriously inconvenienced.

Many

Local experts believe the

world price for crude oil will "settle" at about $10 per barrel, which might
be compatible with a U. S. retail gasoline price of 63-65 cents.
Some users of steel have been told that their allocations will be
reduced in the next few months because of the coal strike of early March
and other problems holding back steel output--availability of scrap, ore
pellets, and fuel.

A shipbuilder has been unable to bid on contracts because

he cannot get commitments on steel.
Because lead times continue to lengthen on new capital goods, some
firms that normally buy only new equipment are purchasing used equipment.
Demand for capital goods is very strong "for all products, and in all foreign
countries, including the U. K."

Down payments are now required on some

products, on which such payments were not required before, with no effect on
demand.

A large construction equipment producer, who recently shifted

- 20 ­

pricing to time of delivery instead of time of order, would be "happy if
our order backlog were half as large."

There is "no way" the farm

equipment industry can increase sales over last year because output is at
capacity and finished goods inventories are down sharply.
Shortages of skilled labor, including machinists, welders, mining
technicians, and electronics engineers, etc.,
ever."

are said to be "the worst

In contrast, the market for teachers is weak and will weaken further

as school enrollments continue to decline.

A Chicago teacher is being

aided by the ACLU in a suit against compulsory retirement at 65, the
outcome of which may have a widespread impact on employment practices.
Michigan observers believe many laid-off auto workers will never be
rehired.

In the past, the industry has used such layoff periods to revamp

operations so fewer workers are employed.

- 21 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

In summary, economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District
has apparently turned up following a minor slowdown near the end of last
year.

Retail sales continue to increase, and construction activity has

turned up on a seasonally adjusted basis.

Manufacturing activity generally

has remained at capacity levels, with the exception of those industries
affected by the petroleum shortage, and most businessmen believe that the
decline in output in these industries has bottomed out.
risen sharply in

recent weeks.

Loan demand has

On the agricultural scene,

large crops are

in prospect, but some producers are taking losses on meat animals.

Inflation

remains a major concern of businessmen, and little optimism was expressed
that the problem will be satisfactorily handled.
Retail sales generally continue their uptrend of the past year.
Representatives of department stores reported further sales gains in recent
weeks on a seasonally adjusted basis.

The decline in automobile sales

apparently has bottomed out after a sharp decline late last year.

Dealers

expressed greater optimism as a result of the improved gasoline supply
situation.
Businessmen report that both residential and commercial construction
is picking up throughout the District.

Materials shortages are still a

problem in the industry, but fewer complaints of shortages were heard this
month than a month ago.
Manufacturing activity continues at a high rate, and backlogs of orders
are still reported for many industries.
to be as critical as in recent months.

Such backlogs, however, do not appear
Profit margins in manufacturing have

- 22 ­

improved with the lifting of price controls, and larger supplies of most
products are being made available.

As a result of the greater incentive for

producers, plant expansion is on the upswing in those industries where
shortages were a problem.

Furthermore, with the higher prices, consumers

demand a smaller quantity of products than at the lower controlled prices.
Loan demand has increased sharply in recent weeks, and interest rates
have risen.

Commercial loans have increased for all purposes, and rising

construction has boosted the volume of real estate loans.

The prime rate

on commercial loans is somewhat higher than a month ago, and the points
charged on real estate loans are also up.
The recent rise in market interest rates coupled with the restrictions
on rates paid on savings is again causing disintermediation among the
savings and loan associations.

Savings and loan officials reported that the

7-1/2 percent maximum rate payable by their firms is not competitive with the
8 to 8-1/4 percent rates on Government and Government Agency securities with
similar maturities.
weeks.

They have reported sizable outflows of savings in recent

Usury laws are also a problem in most of the Eighth District states as

market rates have risen above the maximum permissible rates on loans.
Farmers in the Eighth District are planning sizable increases in crop
plantings for 1974.

Cotton planting is expected to be up 20 percent in

eastern Arkansas and 33 percent in west Tennessee.
plantings are also expected to increase.

Corn, soybean, and hay

The earlier-than-expected decline

in fat cattle and hog prices, however, has reduced the incentive for expansion
of livestock feeding at current feed/livestock price ratios.
Businessmen continue to view inflation as the nation's most serious
economic problem.

An Arkansas businessman asserted, "worldwide inflation is

a serious threat to our society and the current situation is frightening."

- 23 -

A representative from Louisville said, "There is an inflation psychology
that is the worst in history, and people are resigned to it."

A leading

corporate representative in St. Louis stated, "Continued high inflation is
the major problem with business and consumers."

- 24 -

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Directors' reports indicate that District farmers generally look
for a good year in 1974, even though the livestock feeding industry is
experiencing difficulties and the outlook for grain prices is uncertain.
Gains in District retail sales probably exceeded national increases in the
first quarter, and District retailers expect business to remain good in the

second quarter.

With the lifting of the Arab oil embargo and the prospect

of increased gasoline supplies, the outlook for this summer's tourist
business has improved.

Many directors report that both residential and

nonresidential construction are expected to be quite strong in their areas

this year.
Despite problems in the cattle feeding industry and concern about
grain prices, most District farmers still hope for a good year.

Many

District cattle feeders are losing money, however, as high feed costs combine
with declining prices for fat cattle.

A Minnesota director indicates that

these developments will force marginal cattle feeders out of business.

A

Montana director does not expect the situation to improve in the near future
since cattle marketings in March fell considerably short of expectations and

sizable inventories remain to be marketed. Not only are fat cattle prices
down, but prices for feeder cattle have also declined recently, and a western
South Dakota director indicates some uneasiness among ranchers in his area
about the outlook for feeder cattle prices this year.

A southern Minnesota

director also points out that poultry producers are also facing a cost-price
squeeze, and his area's two largest turkey producers are losing money on

their current flocks due to high feed costs.

Furthermore, dairy farmers

- 25 ­

fear reduced demand because of consumer resistence to higher milk prices.
The outlook for crops is not so discouraging.

The general impression

conveyed by the directors is that some decline in grain prices is expected
this year because of a softening in export markets and increased domestic
supplies.
Although District farm incomes in 1974 may not match the record set
in 1973, several directors indicate that farm income gains this year will
probably compare quite favorably to those of recent years.

Even if farm

prices decline this year, one director feels that increased production will
prevent a loss of gross income.

In addition, many farmers carried crops

over from 1973, postponing income until early 1974 for tax purposes.

This

too should enhance farm income in 1974.
Due primarily to 1973's high farm income, directors report that
District retailers enjoyed a good first quarter and are quite optimistic
about the second quarter.

A Minneapolis-St. Paul area banker, for example,

estimates that relative gains in District retail sales in the first quarter
were probably double the comparable national increase and expects this
region to exceed national increases in the second quarter.

Another director,

however, indicates that District retail sales may have been off somewhat in
the first quarter, but he looks for improvement in the second quarter.

A

different view comes from a southern Minnesota director who believes that
concern about future income may discourage farm spending and therefore his
area's retail sales in the second quarter.

Although District automobile sales

have been down from a year ago, sales in the Midwest have been much better
than in the nation.

Furthermore, District car dealers in early March

reported a pickup in full-sized car sales.

Pickup trucks and particularly

medium-sized grain trucks have been selling at a rapid rate.

- 26 -

Reduced snowfall and fears of gasoline shortages dampened the
District's winter recreational business, but the prospects for the summer
tourist season have brightened recently.

Several directors from areas where

the tourist industry is important indicate that the outlook for tourism has
improved with the prospect of increased gasoline supplies later this
spring.
Although building permit data do not yet point toward a resurgence

in District homebuilding, many directors look for a good year for both
residential and nonresidential construction in their areas.

Housing

construction is down in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area, but two
directors located on the periphery of the Twin Cities report considerable
residential construction in their areas.

Other directors throughout the

District also expect considerable residential and nonresidential construction.
However, a Minneapolis-St. Paul area banker feels that Minnesota's 8 percent
usury law will depress homebuilding in Minnesota this year, and he does not
expect commercial construction to be strong in the Twin Cities metropolitan
area.

With regard to highway and heavy construction, a director associated

with that industry says that lettings for new projects so far this year are
down and that many blacktop contractors are looking for work.

- 27 -

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Manufacturing firms in the Tenth District continue to be plagued
with supply shortages and rising prices of materials.

Yet most of those

surveyed report their own business to be good and their view of the
economy to be fairly optimistic.
may be past.

The worst of the decline in auto sales

Declining farm prices will slow the growth of farm income,

but may result in more stable food prices at retail.

Business loan

demand at District commercial banks is strong for nearly all types of
customers.
Rising prices, inadequate supplies, and lengthening lead times for
delivery continue to face manufacturing firms in the Tenth District, with
variations on these themes appearing from industry to industry.

In some

instances, shutdowns have been averted by slight modifications in product
that permit substitutions among inputs, or by finding alternative sources
of input supply.

Further price increases are expected by nearly all

respondents, and several have already been put on notice of future increases.
The majority of purchasing agents queried seem to expect more ample supplies
and improved availability of materials in the short run and expressed a
willingness to pay the higher prices if supplies could thereby be assured.
Some materials, such as steel, rubber, and plastics, come in for
special mention in discussions of short supplies.
reports either feast or famine:

A maker of rubber goods

after going months without a delivery,

he may receive a six-month supply thus creating unwanted inventory.
Delivery times for plastics are reported to be very long (and lengthening),
and prices are rising sharply.

One plastic goods fabricator put it this

- 28 ­

way:

"A year ago suppliers were giving us green stamps to buy their

polyethylene; now, we have to beg them for it, and take something less in
the way of specifications than we want.
don't get what you want."

When you buy what you can get, you

Steel castings and rebars continue to get

special mention among steel goods in tight supply, along with some
fabricated steel items.

A manufacturer of small appliances summed up his

supply situation in this way:

"...it's give and take; it's search and find-­

or search some more; it's accept higher-priced items than you need, or get
nothing at all; it's pay higher prices, period."

There were few respondents

echoing this relatively optimistic view from a metals firm:

"I see signs

of people coming up with items that have been hard to get, and I think
this is the beginning of new supplies responding to demands."
In spite of these problems, nearly all respondents felt that their
own businesses were doing pretty well, and several believed that only
inadequate supplies of materials were preventing them from expanding
output further.

Views on the condition of the economy ranged from "...I

think the economy is a good bit weaker than we read about...", to "...I
think that the economy is a lot stronger than some people are saying."
In general, the responses tended to support the latter view somewhat more
than the former.
Responses from automobile dealers in major cities of the Tenth
District suggest that the new auto sales situation is no longer worsening.
As elsewhere, smaller cars continue to sell better than full-sized cars,
but several dealers believe they are seeing a turnaround in large-car sales.
Sales of small imported automobiles appears to be rather weak.

Farm

prices fell four percent during the month ended March 15, led by an 8
percent decline in the price of meat animals and a 10 percent drop in
the price of wheat.

Further declines since mid-March have brought hog

- 29 ­

prices to their lowest level in 14 months.

Expectations of large

marketings during the next few weeks have limited buying and may portend
even lower prices for hogs.

Fed cattle prices have also declined since

mid-March, and a number of heavy cattle continue to hang over the market.
Wheat prices have dropped precipitously since late February due to strong
progress of the winter wheat crop and increased competition to sell wheat
in foreign markets.

Farmers are also putting pressure on the market by

selling wheat to make room for the record 2.1 billion bushels expected
to be harvested this year.

These factors will have a negative influence

on farm income, but will be welcomed by consumers if these lower prices
are passed along to the supermarket.
A survey of District bankers revealed that business loan demand in
the first quarter of 1974 generally far exceeded what was expected.

Most

interviewees attributed the heavy loan demand to the underlying economic
strength of the local and regional economies.

In addition, higher prices

were frequently cited as a prime source of the increase in business
borrowing.

In many instances, bankers also felt some borrowing appeared to

be in anticipation of higher prices and, perhaps, higher interest rates in
the future.

Related to this, one banker in Denver reported that suppliers

were now demanding immediate payment for goods,

thereby forcing many of the

bank's customers to increase their borrowings.

In reflection of economic

strength, increased borrowing was reported to be fairly uniformly
distributed across bank customers and not confined to any single industry.
Increased borrowing to finance inventories was noted by several bankers,
but this was generally felt to reflect higher prices rather than declining
sales.

- 30 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Texas steel producers are faced with rising demand which has
outstripped supplies of many steel products.

Because of the strong demand,

some steel producers report they are allocating supplies to customers on
a nonprice basis, and they expect to continue to limit shipments throughout
1974.

A shortage of drilling pipe has already hampered efforts to increase

oil production, especially by wildcatters.

Shortages of structural and

reinforcing steel are also causing disruptions in construction activity.
In addition, an executive of one steel company claims their entire output
could be sold to customers in Japan at substantially higher prices.
However, exporting all the firm's production would force its domestic
customers to severely curtail operations.
The relative scarcity of steel in Texas has not been due to

inadequate supplies of energy.

However, the ability to keep pace with

expanding demand is being hindered by a shortage of high quality scrap
metal and the requirement that increased capital expenditures comply with
Environmental Protection Agency guidelines on pollution control.

Record

exports of scrap last year have forced the State's steelmakers to rely
on poor quality scrap, which in the case of one plant resulted in production
being cut from six days to five days a week.

Also, a steel industry

spokesman pointed out that exporting scrap was equivalent to exporting
energy since it takes four times as much energy to produce steel from ore
as it does from scrap.

Even with the scrap shortage, the manager of one

plant maintains an additional gas oven would have been installed this year
if the cost of complying with the EPA guidelines had not been so high.

- 31 -

Another steel producer said plant improvements, planned to be operational
in late 1973, were delayed until this year in order to implement a pollution
control program.
Texas building contractors agree that the shortage of reinforcing
steel has delayed both the beginning of new jobs and the completion of
many projects already under way.

But as of now,

the shortage has not

caused a significant number of construction plans to be abandoned.

To

acquire a sufficient supply of construction steel, the largest commercial
builder in the State has relied on higher priced foreign supplies.

In

addition to paying approximately 40 percent more for steel bars purchased
abroad, foreign producers often insist on large orders, which resulted in
an additional inventory cost to this builder.
The cattle feeding industry in the Southwest is under a severe
cost-price squeeze.

Because of the drop in price for fed cattle and the

relatively high cost of grain, many cattle feeders have experienced major
losses in earnings in recent months.

Net losses have ranged from $100 to

$150 per head recently, with one feeder reporting to have lost $1 million
since the break in prices for slaughter cattle last fall.

The president

of the Texas Cattle Feeders Association estimates these losses will result
in 10-15 percent fewer cattle placed on feed in the State this year as
compared to 1973.
fertilizer.

However, one windfall to feeders has been the shortage of

Brisk demand for manure has boosted prices to $2 per ton, four

times the price a year ago.
Drought in West Texas has diminished prospects for the dryland
winter wheat crop in Texas.

This year's crop is expected to be about half

of the nearly 100 million bushels of wheat harvested in 1973.

According

to a Lubbock banker, a considerable amount of wheat acreage in the southern

- 32 ­

high plains has already been plowed under in hopes that enough rainfall
will occur to plant grain sorghum later this spring.
The lack of rain plus shortages of chemical fertilizer, herbicides,
pesticides, and baling wire is disrupting agricultural production in the
Southwest.

In addition, many farmers and farm lenders are concerned

about a possible drop in agricultural prices.

With the recent decline in

spot and future prices of farm commodities and with substantial investments
in the 1974 crop, farmers are alarmed that a big world harvest could
cause a sharp setback in farm incomes this year.

- 33 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

A distinct shift has occured in the sentiments of our directors
compared to recent months.

Although there remains some uncertainty,

more directors feel that business conditions will be stronger in the
coming quarter than they had thought they would be.

Continued weakness

exists in residential construction and automobile sales, but business
spending is very strong and consumer spending is holding up.
Most directors had expected a slowdown in economic activity in the
first half of the year.

The energy crisis was a major cause of concern;

but now that the worst of the gasoline shortage appears to be over and
business remains good overall, there is much more optimism.

Several

directors stated that 1974 will be much better than previously expected
despite some shortages and dislocations.

One director, after a recent

trip around the country, reported most of his contacts have better business
than they had anticipated.

Other directors were "very optimistic;" they

noted "strong growth" patterns and reported "there has been a significant
improvement" in the last month.
The energy problem is turning out to be less severe than expected.
The Pacific Northwest and Utah have surplus electric power, and gasoline
is in greater supply although at higher prices.

The greater availability

of gasoline has been one element in the improved attitudes of consumers
and businessmen.

Automobile sales remain slow, but according to the

reports by several directors, signs of a recovery are present.

Sales of

standard and luxury cars are reported to be improving, and used car prices
have risen.

In addition, the conversion of production to smaller-sized

- 34 ­

cars is having benefits for suppliers of automobile parts whose orders are
heavier.

A manufacturer of large power boats reports that sales are brisk.

shortages had caused a noticeable decline in sales of smaller boats, but
the market has rebounded.
Consumer retail spending is holding up, buoyed by heavy Federal
income tax refunds and, in California, a one-time refund of taxes.
borrowing has not declined significantly.
at a strong pace.

Consumer

Industrial activity also continues

Wood products, electronics, and industrial machinery

manufacturers are at near-capacity levels of production.
much higher than expected.

Lumber demand is

Shortages of metals and petrochemicals, however,

are causing some problems for manufacturers.

In both cases, the shortages

reflect worldwide demand, and the situation is likely to persist for some
time.
Capital spending by business has helped keep up activity in the
construction industry.

In most areas of the district, the decline in

residential housing has been partially offset by heavy commercial activity.
The building trades are not experiencing significant unemployment as a
result of this shift in demand.

Residential housing has stopped declining,

but no major recovery is expected this year.

In California, for example,

the number of starts in early 1974 was running on a seasonally adjusted
rate at about half of the 1973 levels.

The sharpest declines both in

California and in other District states has been in apartments.

Some

recovery in residential activity is expected later in the year, but it will
still be below 1973 levels.

There are some localities where residential

construction is increasing.

In the Seattle area where construction has

had low rates for several years, excess stocks have been worked off, and

Fuel

- 35 ­

demand for new housing is stronger.

Some weakness is reported in office

and professional building construction.

Builders are concerned that the

recent jump in mortgage rates and higher costs will cut down housing
demand.

Costs are expected to jump with the end of price controls and with

new wage contracts.
The agricultural situation remains unchanged--excellent crops and
high prices.

Farmers are having some problems from shortages of equipment

and fertilizer.

While prices may be good, costs will be rising also, but

generally farmers are optimistic about this year's income.
In banking, loan demand by both business and consumers is strong.

A

few banks have also experienced increased real estate loan demand, and
savings institutions appear to have more funds available.

Several banks

think that the recent increases in interest rates will soon be reversed,
although others are worried that longer-term rates such as mortgage rates
will rise steadily to the point where demand for housing is reduced.
Views are mixed about future interest rates.

Some bankers think that rates

will fall slowly over the rest of the year, but others think that an
upturn in rates will come in the second half.

