CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 5, 1974

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . .
First District - Boston . . . .
Second District - New York

. .

Third District - Philadelphia
Fourth District - Cleveland .
Fifth District - Richmond . . .
Sixth District - Atlanta

.

Seventh District - Chicago

. .

Eighth District - St. Louis .
Ninth District - Minneapolis
Tenth District - Kansas City
Eleventh District - Dallas

.

.

Twelfth District - San Francisco

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. . .

.

31

. . . . . . . . . . .

34

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

SUMMARY*

The general thrust of this month's commentaries is that expecta­
tions concerning the near-term outlook for business have deteriorated
considerably.

Prospects for dampening inflation are viewed with

various degrees of skepticism and pessimism; some businessmen fear wage­
price controls.

District reports emphasize supply-demand imbalances in

labor, product, and financial markets.

The supply situation is improving

in some product lines, while conditions remain abnormally tight or have
grown worse in others.

Qualitative statements suggest that aggregate

economic activity is registering little if any real improvement in the
current quarter.

Consumer spending remains sluggish, except for a recent

spurt in auto sales.
excessive.

Inventories held by retailers generally are considered

Housing is depressed throughout the nation, with indications

of a further weakening in store.

The capital spending picture may require

reevaluation, as industrial firms and utilities announce cutbacks or post­
ponements in their plans for expenditures.

Agricultural prospects for

crops and feedgrains have improved somewhat since early August, but the
situation in the livestock industry is dismal.

Savings outflows from

thrift institutions continued in August, and banks in some Districts are
also experiencing losses in deposits.

Business loan demand remains strong,

but is being curbed as bankers are becoming more selective in allocating
credit.

There is widespread concern among businessmen, bankers, and

economists over the current and prospective effects of tight money.

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland

Consumer spending is described as sluggish or weakening in almost
every District.
are depressed.

Sales of appliances and home furnishings, in particular,
Philadelphia reports widespread consumer resistance to

higher prices on the new fall line of soft goods.

Chicago says spending

on discretionary goods is slow, and that recovery in recreational vehicles
has ended.

A number of Districts mention problems of excessive inventories

at the retail level.

New car sales seems to be an exception in the

generally lackluster consumer sector.

Dallas, Cleveland, Kansas City,

St. Louis, and San Francisco all report recent strength in sales of 1974
models stemming from the publicity given to price increases on the 1975
models.

Expectations are that new model year cars will suffer from

buyer resistance to higher prices.
In the capital goods sector, some weakening tendencies are developing
in an otherwise strong market.

San Francisco says high interest rates

are thought to be depressing capital spending.
of weakness ahead.

Philadelphia sees signs

Minneapolis reports some cutbacks in planned expen­

ditures on machinery and equipment in farming areas where crop prospects
are uncertain and cattle prices are depressed.

Atlanta says the volume of

commercial and industrial building is declining.

A number of Districts

(Boston, Richmond, Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis) commented on
reductions in capital spending by utilities or emphasized their current
financial problems.
Residential construction appears to be depressed in every District,
and prospects for recovery before 1975 are bleak.

Thrift institutions

continued to lose deposits in August, according to St. Louis, Dallas,

San Francisco, New York, Richmond, and Cleveland.

High interest

rates have caused postponements and cutbacks in major condominium
projects in Atlanta.
In the agricultural sector, early summer drought has severely
damaged crops in many parts of the nation.
improved the situation, however.

Recent rainfall has

Chicago mentions that now the major

concern for the corn crop is cool weather and an early frost.

The

livestock feeding industry is experiencing its own recession, according
to Kansas City, Dallas, San Francisco, Minneapolis, Chicago, and
Atlanta.
Banks continue to face strong business loan demands in San
Francisco, Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas City.

Those Districts

all report that bankers are becoming increasingly selective in granting
loan requests, particularly from new borrowers.

Kansas City, however,

notes that loans to new customers in energy-related fields are being
accommodated.

Dallas mentions a problem of loan delinquencies in real

estate and heavy construction.

-1

-

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Our directors' reports continue to vary.

Some report that

"business is good, but not great" while noting that "despite the
economists' forecasts of gloom--everyone's smiling."
are becoming anxious about the health of the economy.

Other directors
All express

a concern about interest rates and problems with balancing patterns
of demands and supplies, and they see price increases as symptoms of
shortages in finance, raw materials, and factors of production.
An important theme is balance.

Softening of demand is noted in

many lines, while orders have backlogged for as much as two or three
years in others.

Notably, carbon black, auto parts, lumber, certain

recreational vehicles, large motor boats, housing ("the bottom fell
out of the bottom"), and retailing are experiencing various degrees
of decline in demand.

On the other hand, various metals and alloys,

some steel intermediate goods, skilled labor, sail boats, and private
aircraft are in short supply.

Our directors also report that the

tourist trade recovered significantly in August, despite a poor start
at the beginning of the season: "tourists seem to be travelling less
and when they get here they spend more money."
Employment prospects for the young are assessed as bleak; and
a director from Connecticut, noting the rising number of layoffs,
furloughs, and small business failures, anticipates worsening conditions.
A Massachusetts director involved in job placement indicates that the
unemployment rates are largely symptomatic not of a dearth of opportunities,

-2

­

but a pattern of skills which does not match that sought by employers.
A scramble for the qualified seems to be occurring.
Most directors comment that price increases are reflecting higher
costs of business.

Increases in finance, raw material, and labor

charges prod many firms to pass on the expense, and the assessment is
that demand is solid enough to support this tactic.

Retailers and

auto dealers, facing high finance expenses on Christmas inventory and
floor plans, are raising prices
sales:

(cutting discounts) in spite of weak

"those who are shopping have the money" and "decreasing prices

would not raise revenue anyway."

Basically, business is attempting to

"get what it can for what it can sell."
High interest rates are cited for increases in
ures in Connecticut,

small business fail­

and directors from all regions comment on the bur­

den, especially to small firms.

A New England utility seeking $75

million for five years managed to draw only $60 million by offering a
record 12.5 percent.

A director indicates that there is a real concern

for utilities obtaining a reasonable rate of return on capital.

In

general, those close to financial markets express gloom.
All of the academic correspondents contacted this month, Dr. Shapiro,
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin, agree the effects of restric­
tive monetary policy are being felt in the economy.
if

Samuelson says that

the 1975 model autos fare poorly and housing remains depressed,

weakness will spread.

the

Eckstein feels that continuation of present

policies will produce a recession of exceptional depth and duration.

He

recommends Chapter 7 of Friedman's Monetary History of the United States
on the role of the Federal Reserve policy in the Great Depression.

Tobin

recalled his earlier statement of how continued restraint would weaken

- 3 ­

the securities market and ultimately business fixed investment.

Shapiro

notes that there has been scaling back in capital spending and cancellation
in financing, and that "the financial community is terrified."

Maintaining

the present policy would mean no reduction in short-term rates by year­
end and higher long-term rates.
If policy remains on its present course, according to Shapiro, the
pass-throughs of unit labor costs are going to terminate.

Eckstein believes

that the present strategy will produce a recession of considerable severity
but will not suffice to bring inflation to an acceptable level.
Eckstein, Tobin, and Samuelson feel the emphasis put on Federal budget
restraint is misguided.

Tobin argues it is part of a misdiagnosis of the present

sources of inflation, "a knee-jerk reaction."

Eckstein says real Federal

expenditures have declined since the 1972 election, and the present crusade
is an attempt to atone for previous sins.

Samuelson argues the psychological

effects of tough talk on the budget are exaggerated.

The three agree that

marginal expenditure adjustments would have minimal effects on inflation
abatement.

None of them feel that current demand is excessive.

Eckstein and Tobin want the Federal funds rate lowered quickly.

"Any­

thing above 8 percent is disintermediation territory," said Eckstein.
Shapiro recommends continuation of a 6 percent rate of money growth.
Samuelson would be frightened with another six months of 6 percent money
growth.

Five to six percent money is tight enough to abort a recovery in

construction, and to cause bankruptcies and severe disintermediation.
Samuelson urges a cost/benefit analysis of continued tight policy;
what is gained, by what mechanism, and what is paid for it?

He feels

-4­

present policy is politically in a more and more exposed position.
The political dynamics of six quarters of positive but near zero
growth are the same as an "official" recession.
lash to such a policy in West Germany.

He notes the back­

- 5-

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District directors and other business leaders who were
contacted recently,

in

general,

felt that the recent change in the

Administration would have a favorable, if only mild, effect on the
business outlook.

The respondents, however, were less than sanguine

regarding the probable effectiveness
Price Stability in curbing inflation.

of the Council on Wage and
There were reports of easing

shortages in a number of lines, alongside continued tight supply
conditions in other lines.

Excessive inventories were reported

to be becoming a problem for some firms,
field.

especially in

the retail

The residential construction picture in the District remains

bleak.
The respondents in general looked for little immediate change in
the fundamental economic outlook as a result of the recent change in
Administrations.
For example,

The reaction, however,

on the whole was favorable.

a senior official of a large upstate bank felt that the

Government would now be able to give fuller attention to economic
problems.

Similarly, the president of a large nationwide department

store chain noted that the new President had already indicated that
economic problems would receive his prompt attention and that the
present cooperative atmosphere between the Administration and the
Congress could lead to substantial progress as far as the business
outlook is concerned.

In his view, the President's decision to call

the economic "summit conference" was a positive first

step.

Most respondents expressing a view on the subject, however, felt
that the new Council on Wage and Price Stability would be relatively

-6­

ineffective in holding down inflation.

The respondents in general were

opposed to the reimposition of wage and price controls.

In this context,

the president of a multinational firm expressed the belief that firm
guidelines for wages and prices tend to become "floors" and interfere
with the proper operation of the economy.
Views were mixed regarding the impact on current pricing policies
of fears of a return to jawboning or price controls, but the majority
of the respondents expressed the view that such fears were not a major
factor in firms' pricing decisions.

Most of the Buffalo branch directors

thus felt that competition prevented such practices.

Similarly, the

president of a large retail chain reported that his firm's pricing
decisions were only based on traditional considerations such as costs
and the competitive environment, and the president of a non-ferrous
metal concern stated that pricing behavior in the metals industry reflected
supply and demand conditions and not fears of a return to jawboning or
price controls.

The senior official of a large upstate manufacturing

firm, however, thought that fears of price controls had influenced
businessmen who wanted to "get ahead of the game" before controls were
reinstated, and a similar view was expressed by a New Jersey banker.
Regarding shortages of materials, there were a number of reports of
easing in certain lines, but of a continuing tight supply picture in
others.

The retailer mentioned above thus reported signs of an easing

in several areas of his firm's business, notably textiles.

Most of the

Buffalo branch directors reported some easing of shortages, as did a
number of other respondents.

A senior official of a multinational

petroleum concern reported that petroleum was no longer in short supply,
but that a possible coal strike this fall could increase oil demand.

-7-

He also reported a shortage of drilling equipment.

Other respondents

mentioned continued shortages of chemicals, steel, alcohol, paper
boxes, and certain replacement parts.
Regarding the inventory picture, the respondents on balance felt
that the buildup of inventories has begun to become a problem in some
lines.

Among others, the president of the large department store chain

mentioned above reported that inventories were building up at the retail
level as well as at the wholesale level and, in some instances such as
big-ticket appliances, at the manufacturing level.

An upstate retailer

also stated that high inventories have become a problem in the retail
line.

The president of a non-ferrous metal firm noted that while stocks

of metals are still very low, inventories of some metal products are
building up.

Another observer indicated that stockpiling of raw materials

and work-in-process items had been attractive when expected cost increases
were much greater than carrying costs, but that the situation was now
reversing.
Residential construction in the District, particularly in the New
York City metropolitian area, remains very weak.

Thrift institutions

have suffered a massive outflow of funds and in many cases are granting
no new mortgage commitments or are requiring large downpayments and
other stiff terms.

One large New York City savings bank, for example,

is granting mortgage loans only to depositors of two years' standing,
requiring that at least $5,000 be maintained in the account from the
time the application is received to the closing of the loan, and
stipulating that the rate be renegotiated every five years.

-8

-

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Business conditions in the Third Federal Reserve District are
showing conflicting signals, picking up a bit in the manufacturing
sector and weakening in the retail sector.

During the last few weeks

new orders and shipments at local manufactureers have shown some
strength, and the outlook for early 1975 is also positive. At present,
there is no forecast of any significent downturn in manufacturing
employment.

However, area retailers report that inflated prices are

taking a heavy toll in the sales of nearly all lines of merchandise.
No relief from inflation is expected by any of the merchants or manu­
facturers surveyed.

The banking community reports that its business

is relatively stable compared to the uncertain conditions of the spring
and early summer.

Loan demand remains strong, and access to the national

money markets is adequate to meet current needs.
According to executives surveyed for the business outlook survey
of manufactures in the Third Federal Reserve District, economic activity
showed a slight improvement in August.

New orders, shipments, and un­

filled orders were all above their levels of the previous month.

In­

ventory stocks were lower, but employment was steady.
In addition, more than half of the businessmen polled anticipate
some improvement in general business conditions by early 1975.
though inventories may decline, new orders are expected to rise.

Even
How­

ever, this bullishness noes not extend into the capital spending area.
The weakness that has been developing in this sector for several months
is still evident.

Only one quarter of the firms surveyed plan to increase

-9

­

their spending on capital goods in the next 6 months.

At the same time,

employment in the region's manufacturing sector may be stronger than
most economic forcasters are currently predicting.

The 6-month outlook

reported by area businessmen is for stable employment with just as
many firms planning to add new workers as to reduce

their work force.

Retailers in the Third District are feeling a significent sales pinch.
There are reports of widespread resistence to price increases on the new
fall line of soft goods.

Sales of case goods are still strong, but

higher dollar sales totals are attributed to rising prices rather than
greater volume.

Store management expressed the opinion that buyers are

no longer willing to reduce their savings to maintain their standard of
living.

Consumers have also avoided any increase in the proportion of

purchases made on credit, even though the real cost of revolving charge
account credit has declined.

Major price promotions

for the fall in an effort to boost sales volume.

are being planned

The regions banking

sector reports general stability in its operations.

Loan demand is still

high, but the bankers surveyed report that they are trying to restrict the
expansion of their loan portfolios.

They are also restructuring their

asset holdings by moving out of "impersonal" investments and low­
yielding credits such as real estate and consumer loans (public dis­
claimers to the contrary notwithstanding).

The banks suffered some

deposit losses when the Treasury and the floating rate capital note
issues reached the market, but the outflow was not severe.

also report
money in the

The bankers

that they have been able to meet their needs for the new
liabilities markets even though rumors occasionally hamper

these operations. Finally, the inflation picture continues to be grim.
Nearly two-thirds of the manufacturers surveyed experienced increases
in the prices they paid for goods during the last month, and over half

- 10 ­

of them increased some of their own prices.

The outlook for early

1975 is overwhelmingly for still higher prices.

The only ray of hope

is a very modest increase in the proportion of survey respondents who
claim that they will be able to hold the line on prices for the foreseeable
future.

These executives are still a small minority, but any growth

in their numbers is an encouraging sign.

- 11 -

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Reports from economists, directors, and other businessmen suggest
limited improvement in nonautomotive retail trade and a recent stimulus
to new car sales.

There are scattered signs of price declines among some
De­

industrial commodities and increased availability of raw materials.
mand for steel remains strong, partly because steel users are hedging
against a coal strike.

Coal business is booming, while output is being

hampered by shortages.

A number of electric utilities are shifting their

capital spending from atomic power plants to coal and oil plants.

S&Ls in

the District continue to lose deposits in August.
Retail sales of a major department store chain in the northeast Ohio
area have improved recently, following a virtually flat to declining
level of sales for several months.

The president of that chain attributes

the recent spurt to extensive sales promotions.

Their inventories, which

have been more than ample in recent months, are being brought into better
balance.

He expects that remaining excess stocks could be worked off over

the next few months if the recent pickup were sustained.

However, he felt

that the unit sales would do well to hold even, at least in the near term.
An economist with another major retail chain reported that the physical
volume of sales remains flat.

Their inventories, which were considered

excessive two months ago, have increased.

The firm expects a decline in

unit sales of one to two percent during the balance of the year.
Auto dealers in the Cleveland area are experiencing an increase in
sales of 1974 models as a result of the recently publicized price increases
on 1975 models.

Supplies of full-sized and intermediate models have been

- 12 ­

drawn down, but stocks of small cars are said to be abundant.

Dealer

sentiment is that the typical new car buyer will be reluctant to pur­
chase a 1975 model, primarily because of the price factor, but also
because of uncertainties concerning the availability of unleaded fuel.
An economist for a major tire producer reported that recent declines
in prices for natural rubber, cotton, and propane lead him to conclude
that industrial price pressures will moderate, albeit gradually.

According

to this source, capital spending plans of his firm have not been scaled
downward because of the cost or availability of borrowed capital.
Inventory plans have not been deterred by interest rates and their
inventories are now being held in check as a result of a more abundant
supply of raw materials and declines in some commodity prices.

Their

short-term debt has "soared" in part reflecting financing of inventories,
and they have relied heavily on commercial paper to satisfy working capital
needs.
Sources in the steel industry say they are having difficulty in
maintaining production due to shortages of raw materials and downtime for
maintenance.
freight cars.

Steel mills are also experiencing a critical shortage of
New orders for steel products have been highly erratic, and

almost meaningless, because order books are filled so fast each time a new
quarter is opened.

One major firm mentioned that its order intake was

dropping sharply and should be reflected in national figures.

The drop

in orders stems from an effort by the firm to return to more realistic de­
livery schedules, rather than any weakening in demand.

Steel shipments

are expected to decline about 10 percent in the second half; as a result,
there may be some involuntary liquidation of inventories by steel users.

- 13 -

The first real test of steel inventories, according to one economist,
will come after the coal settlement.

If there is a coal strike, severe

cutbacks in steel output are expected within a week.

One major steel

firm has only a few days supply of low volatile coal needed to operate
their coke ovens.
An economist with a large coal company commented "it would be prudent
to factor in a two to three-week miners' strike in any economic fore­
cast."

Expansion of capacity and output in the coal industry is being

hampered by environmental factors, long lead times on machinery, and
shortages of construction crews, drilling equipment, and railroad cars.
A director who is a supplier to a major electrical equipment company
said the firm has a nine-year backlog of turbines and generators.

The

firm does not plan to expand capacity, however, because they fear that
the orders may be cancelled.

The same director noted that many business­

men are expecting wage-price controls and therefore are retrenching on
their capital spending.

Another director with a utility expressed deep

concern that "utilities are in a liquidity crisis, which may provoke an
energy crisis."

According to this director, electric utilities are can­

celling atomic plants because of their high capital costs, and substituting
less capital intensive coal and oil plants.

The irony is that atomic

plants have fixed fuel costs, while coal and oil plants have rising fuel
costs--so the shift away from atomic plants is inflationary in the long
run.

A second director confirmed this, noting that both atomic and

fossil plants have been cancelled because of the high cost of financing
and load demand running below expectations.
were slated for completion after 1980.

A number of these facilities

In addition, because of rising

- 14 ­

construction costs, there is a rush to complete those plants currently
under construction.
A Federal Home Loan Bank official reported that, on the basis of
the preliminary sample of 35 reporting associations, savings flows in
August deteriorated further, especially in the second ten days of the
month.

He remarked, however, that the situation does not appear to be

as bad as August 1973 when wild card certificates were introduced.
Some bank economists in the Cleveland area described their net
deposits in August as exceeding the year ago volume,
off at the time of the Treasury note offering.

despite some run­

One expressed concern

that the Fed might well be overstaying restraint and that continued
restraint will result in a recession.

Another stated that although

there is danger that the Fed will be restrictive too long he did not feel
that the time had come for a change in policy.

Both of these economists

expressed concern that Merrill Lynch's offering will cause another run­
off on savings deposits and hinder their ability to issue CDs since that
firm advertises that the CDs are insured by the FDIC.

- 15 -

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Responses to our latest survey of business conditions indicate that
sluggishness and uncertainty continue to characterize the Fifth District
economy.

In manufacturing, shipments remain steady while new orders

show continued weakness and order backlogs continue to decline.

Inven­

tories of finished goods apparently rose further during August, but
growth of materials inventories appears to have leveled off.

There re­

mains, however, a general feeling that current inventory levels are excessive.
Increasing pessimism is indicated by responses concerning expectations
for business actitivy over the next six months, although most respondents
anticipate, at worst, no change in production levels within their own

firms over that period.

Among retailers surveyed, sales continue to hold

up reasonably well, although big ticket items continue to move slowly.
The latest survey of District banks suggests a persisting strong loan
demand, especially in the business sector, with banks becoming progressively
more selective in their loan policies.

In the agricultural sector, crop

conditions in many areas have improved somewhat as a result of rains
since the first of August.

Complaints of the depressing effects of tight

money and high interest rates are widespread throughout the District.
The August survey of business conditions shows little or no abate­
ment of the slowing trend which has characterized much of 1974.

At no

time this year has the survey suggested an increase in the volume of
new orders, and the latest survey marks the seventh consecutive decline
in this indicator.

Shipments showed little change during the month; but

as in previous months, production seems to have been buoyed by existing

- 16 ­

backlogs of orders rather than by new orders.

Forty-nine percent of the

manufacturers responding to our survey report further declines in backlogs.
Despite the relatively stable level of shipments, inventories of finished
goods continue to accumulate, with forty-three percent of manufacturing
respondents reporting further increases.

There are fewer reports of

increases in material inventories than in recent months, but in no
month this year has a decrease been indicated.

Over 50 percent of

respondents now feel that inventories exceed desired levels.

Manufacturing

employment has remained relatively stable during the first eight months
of the year, but the average workweek continues in a mild but persistent
decline.
Expectations of District businessmen have taken a distinctly pessimistic
turn in recent months, and fewer respondents now expect any nationwide
improvement than at any time in the past six months.

Expectations for

local business conditions also remain on the bearish side as almost
45 percent of the manufacturers surveyed expect local business
to worsen over the next six months.

Expectation

patterns

conditions

among retailers

do not differ significantly from those among manufacturers.
In the retail sector, the dollar volume of sales i

reported as

firm, although sales of big ticket items relative to total sales apparently
continue to weaken.

Retailers in our survey indicate some further in­

ventory accumulation during August, and increasing numbers view current
inventory levels as excessive.
A recent survey of Fifth District bank lending practices suggests
a further tightening of credit conditions, continuing a
has persisted for several months now.

situation which

Additionally, loan demand remains

strong, led by demand for commercial and industrial loans.

In the face of

- 17

this continued strong demand and the high marginal cost of loanable
funds, financial institutions are applying increasingly strict standards
to loan applications, and interest rates and compensating balance re­
quirements are also becoming firmer.

Established and local service area

commercial customers continue to receive favored treatment on loan re­
quests, while requests from new business customers receive more stringent
review.

Savings deposits are at the lowest levels since late May, but

CD positions have remained stable.

Savings and loan associations report

continuing losses of deposits.
The District's major public utility corporations continue to announce
cutbacks in capital plans.

The latest such announcement by a major company

involves a two-year delay in the construction of two nuclear power plants,
and a $1.5 billion decrease in the company's five-year construction plan.
The latter reduction will result in a cut of approximately 1,000 construction
jobs.

These changes in plans were attributed to rising costs and high

interest rates.
In the agricultural sector, crop conditions in many areas of the
District have improved as a result of rains since August 1. At that time,
production prospects for peanuts, soybeans, and corn were somewhat below
last year's record output, and smaller crops of hay, sorghum, grain, and
fruit were also indicated.

Strong demand and better quality tobacco have

combined to produce record breaking flue-cured tobacco prices in recent
weeks.

- 18 -

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Signs of weakness in the Region's economy are becoming more evident.
Several major construction projects in the Atlanta area have been
temporarily shelved or scaled down.

Raw material shortages remain

a problem, forcing plant shutdowns and production alterations in some
cases.

The volume of new industrial and commercial projects appears to

be declining, although several new projects were announced.

District

cattlemen are feeling the pinch of soaring feed grain prices.
Construction on a $40 million luxury high-rise condominium planned
for the Atlanta area is being delayed nine months.

Officials said that

construction start-up will be delayed until interest rates go down and
permanent loan money becomes available.

Another large Atlanta condo­

minium project has been scaled down to permit a 43 percent reduction
in the size of the project.

Mid-August was to be the groundbreaking

day for a $34 million luxury hotel and office complex in Atlanta, but
plans have been shelved for the time being because of the weakening
economy.

Construction plans on two proposed new office buildings have

also been postponed.

One construction contractor believes that an over­

abundance of office space is developing in the Atlanta area.
construction remains in the doldrums.

Residential

A representative of one large

building concern indicates that it is currently living on remodeling
business.

The downturn in residential construction has apparently

stimulated a boom in "do-it-yourself" sales.

Several businesses specializing

in "do-it-yourself" items report soaring sales.

- 19 -

Raw material shortages continue to have an impact on the Region's

economy.

Aluminum Company of America's Tennessee plant will cease

production and marketing of Alcoa Wrap products because of a metal
shortage.

Two other Tennessee manufacturing plants were shut down

because of a lack of raw materials.

Some smaller Georgia cities hit

by the natural gas drought are turning away new industries; some fore­
see the possibility of cutting off supplies to existing industries by
year-end.

The Tennessee Valley Authority's coal supply is getting

crucial, and new coal contracts are hard to obtain.

Major plants are

down to 57-day reserves, compared to the normal 90-day reserves.
Announcements of new industrial and commercial projects have
slackened off somewhat.

The Orlando-Orange County Industrial Board

reports nine new or expanded industries in the first seven months of
this year.

Two major manufacturing plants will be built in Georgia by

out-of-state corporations--aprecision ball-bearing plant and a facility
to turn out metal-building systems.

The huge $2.7 million uranium

enrichment plant proposed for Dothan, Alabama, may create the need for
another new nuclear-powered electric-generating plant in that area.
Multipurpose commercial residential projects have been announced for
Jacksonville, Florida, Knoxville, Tennessee, and Atlanta, Georgia.
This year's grain forecast (15 percent less that last year) has
sent feed prices soaring and reduced livestock prices, particularly of young
feeder calves, for District cattlemen.

Two area bankers report that

calf prices in Florida and Alabama hit a low of 18 to 20 cents per pound,
compared to last year's calf price of 57 cents per pound.

There is a

general reluctance among District bankers to take on new customers in

- 20 ­

livestock production.

A large Atlanta-based agricultural cooperative

has announced that it will close its Valdosta, Georgia, cattle feeder
lot.

This lot serves the major beef-producing areas of south Georgia

and north Florida.
closing.
men.

High grain prices are cited as the reason for the

District crop farmers are in much better shape than cattle­

Although the national corn crop is forecasted to be down 12 per­

cent from last year, in the District the corn crop is expected to
be slightly ahead of last year's crop.

- 21 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Although the level of activity remains high in most sectors in
the Seventh District, concern for the future has increased.

Most

observers of the general economy have adopted the standard forecast
of little or no overall real growth in the next six to nine months,
with some inclining to the view that a serious slump is quite pos­
sible.

Record high interest rates, tight Federal budget policies,

rapidly rising prices and wages, the severely depressed stock market,
international monetary instability, poor crop prospects, and the
probability of a long coal strike are among the major factors cited.
Meanwhile, order backlogs for producer goods continue to rise; strikes
have hampered output, especially of motor vehicles; consumer spending
on various "discretionary" wants is sluggish; residential construction
sinks deeper into its trough; and supplies of many scarce items have
eased, although the situation is far from "normal."
Frequent reports indicate an easing of availability of purchased
materials, components, and various finished goods.

This is most clear

in building materials (such as lumber, cement, and gypsum board), ap­
pliances and home furnishings, many nonferrous metals, petroleum pro­
ducts, and paper.

In some cases, such as oil and paper, very large

price increases (25 to 40 percent or more) have helped to balance the
market.

On the other hand, most capital goods producers continue to

exert a major effort on expediting deliveries of items they purchase,
and they complain of "huge" price increases demanded by suppliers.

- 22 -

Forecasts of steel shipments for 1974 have been raised to almost
110 million tons, close to the 1973 record.

Order books are full

for the rest of the year, and capacity operations are expected to
continue into 1975.

More foreign steel is available, but prices

continue higher than for domestic products, and steel exports also
are rising.

Plates and structurals are "extremely tight."

Most

steel companies have only a month's supply of coking coal, and a
coal strike next November, especially of a month or more duration,
would seriously hurt steel output.

Some coking coal has been pur­

chased on the spot market recently at $80 per ton, compared to $10
per ton last year.
We are warned that price increases announced for many capital
goods after decontrol will not show up significantly in shipments
until August and September or later.

Large price increases for

equipment and motor vehicles and sharply higher construction costs
are expected to slow purchases and new projects in the months ahead.
Some electric utilities have reduced capital spending to the
extent that thousands of construction workers have been released
from projects well underway.

The auto companies also are canceling

or deferring important capital spending projects.
goods producers report no letup in demand.

But most capital

In fact, they are push­

ing their own expansion plans for farm, construction, and mining
equipment, and heavy components.

Some of these companies insist

they would maintain these programs even if demand for their products
slowed down, because cutbacks in expansion programs effected in 1969-70
proved, in retrospect, to be a mistake.

Orders for heavy trucks continue

- 23 ­

very large, and a diesel engine producer is working on a three-shift,
seven-day basis.

Nevertheless, one expert predicts a drop in heavy

truck sales in late 1974 and in 1975.
Announced negotiated wage increases appear to average well over
10 percent, with 12 percent or more very common.

Some agreements are

reached only after strikes of a month or more, and often after the
rank-and-file have rejected the contract originally proposed by their
bargaining committees.

One "bellwether" contract, which covered

7,500 factory workers in Milwaukee, calls for 12.5 percent this year
and 10 percent in the second and third years--plus additional COL
adjustments, longer vacations, more holidays, voluntary overtime,
dental insurance, and a more liberal retirement plan, including
"30 and out."

New contracts for public school teachers in Illinois

call for a pay increase of 11 to 12 percent for the new term.
Except for construction, where under-capitalized builders have
been paying up to 18 or 19 percent on construction loans, there has
been no sharp rise in businesses or consumers in financial distress.
Business receivables, in fact, are turning over more rapidly than
last year, probably because prompt payment is required on goods in short
supply.
Car dealers report short supplies of some types of large cars, but
a glut of small cars.

Many buyers are said to have traded-in the small

cars they had purchased at premium prices last winter.

Consumer demand

for appliances, furniture, and airline travel has slowed recently, and
the recovery in sales of recreational vehicles is said to have aborted.

- 24 -

Cool weather across the Midwest has increased concern over the
size of the 1974 corn crop, already seriously affected by adverse growing
conditions.

Development of the crop continues to lag badly, and an

early frost could cause large additional losses.

As a result, livestock

feeding activities--cattle, hogs, and poultry--are being curtailed
sharply.

Demand for feeder cattle is said to be "nonexistent."

- 25 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Business activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District continues
generally upward.

Businessmen indicated some slackening in the rate

of growth of consumer spending while business investment and government
spending remains strong.

Employment is generally unchanged in the District.

The unemployment rate remains stable and relatively low.

Construction

activity is mixed, with home building down and commercial construction
continuing strong.

Crop prospects have improved somewhat due to recent

heavy rainfall in the District.
Growth of consumer demand has slackened in recent weeks.

Some major

retailers report sluggish sales in August, and manufacturers of consumer
items such as clothing, appliances, shoes, and household furnishings
report some slackening demand.

Automobile sales, however, have picked

up considerably from earlier in the year, and capital goods sales continue
strongly upward.

This strength in automobiles may partly reflect special

factors such as seasonal price cuts, the announcement of large price
increases on 1975 models, and apprehension attributable to the potential
difficulty of obtaining unleaded gasoline for the new models.
Manufacturing activity remains strong in several industries such
as steel, aluminum, and machine and other capital goods.

Some of these

industries continue to report large order backlogs and long delays in
delivery of component items.

One machine manufacturer reported an order

backlog of two years, and delivery delays of nine months or more was
commonly reported.

However, manufacturing of consumer durables, especially

housing-related items, has slowed.

For example, a representative of a

- 26 ­

home furnishing manufacturer reported sales increased only 4 percent
in

1974.

Construction activity also follows a divergent pattern.

Housing

permits and starts in the District are down considerably from last
year.

In some cases declines of 40 percent or more were reported.

Government and commercial construction, however, continues fairly
strong.

One exception was road building which was reported to be down,

partially reflecting the near completion of the Interstate Highway
System.
Employment in the Eighth District remains at a relatively high
level.

Total employment has remained virtually unchanged since last

year, compared with rapid growth in the previous two years.

The un­

employment rate has risen from year-ago levels, but has remained
stable for the past six months and generally remains below the national
rate.

Reports of layoffs were heard in manufacturing employment, parti­

cularly in housing-related industries.

Also strike activity in the

District has been at much higher levels in recent months than a year
ago.
Time and demand deposits at commercial banks have continued to
increase in the District in recent weeks, but savings and loan associa­
tions in St. Louis have suffered a net withdrawal of deposits.

Both

types of institutions reported a movement toward higher yielding time
deposits and a decline in passbook savings accounts.

State usury laws,

particularly in Missouri, have virtually stopped home financing loans,
thus contributing to the housing slowdown in the area.

Savings and loan

- 27 ­

associations in the St. Louis area report that they are making local
loans only on homes built by contractors whom they service with con­
struction loans.

A special legislative session is currently being

contemplated in Missouri to consider the relaxation of the State's
usury law.
The agricultural situation in the District has improved as a result
of heavy rainfall recently.

Crop yields, particularly soybeans and

late corn, and pastures may be somewhat improved.

Some parts of the

District, particularly the eastern sections where the drought was
not as severe, expect below normal yields from recent years; but due to
the larger acreage planted, crop production may still be slightly
above that of last year.

The prospects for cotton and rice crops are

generally good, and cow-calf operations have improved due to the favor­
able prospects for fall pastures.

- 28 -

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The prevailing mood among Ninth District directors is one of
moderate pessimism.

There is no longer talk of a strong economy

in the second half of 1974.

Instead, directors foresee high rates of

inflation coupled with modest rates of real growth continuing at least
into the first quarter of 1975.

Directors generally feel that tradi­

tional fiscal and monetary policies provide the best way to bring
inflation under control.

They are opposed to the reimposition of

wage and price controls.
Some directors believe that a depressed housing industry and
possible cutbacks in planned outlays on plant and equipment will
hold down the rate of increase in gross private domestic investment
in the second half.

Consumer spending should pick up if workers

register real income gains, but the increased spending may not lend
much buoyancy to the economy.
Directors feel that high prices for farm crops may help insulate
the District economy from national fluctuations in income and em­
ployment.

But one director cautioned that this insulating effect

may be less than perfect since low cattle prices have already resulted
in reduced spending by some of the District's ranchers and farmers.
Crops in the Ninth District are in fairly good condition, the main
exception being large portions of South Dakota, where drought conditions
have cut yields far below normal.

Crops in Minnesota are good but will

be late in maturing, raising the possibility that an early frost could
do major damage.

Provided that weather conditions are favorable through

- 29 ­

the fall months, many District farmers should do well, since farm
prices are expected to remain at very favorable levels.
There is less hope for the livestock producer, however.

Ac­

cording to one director, the market for feeder cattle is bleak.
The contract buying of feeder cattle has been the slowest in years.
Many producers will either be holding their animals over until spring
or will be forced to sell their animals at auction.
Some directors indicate that consumer spending in the District
has held up fairly well into the third quarter of 1974.
dollars the gains over 1973 are sizable.

In current

For example, respondents to

our August Industrial Expectations Survey reported that second­
quarter sales were up 26 percent from a year ago; sales gains of 20.5
and 17.6 percent are expected in the third and fourth quarters.

In

real dollars, the advances were substantially lower.
Capital spending had been expected to bolster the second-half
economy, but directors now feel that capital expenditures may fall short
of earlier expectations.

There have apparently been some cutbacks

in planned expenditures on machinery and equipment, especially in those
farming areas where uncertain crop prospects and low livestock prices
have had a depressing effect on spending.
Inventories in the District have been increasing, and at least one
director feels that the rate of inventory accumulation has been excessive.
Another predicts that the rate of accumulation will fall off sharply
by the end of 1974.

On the other hand, according to the Industrial

Expectations Survey, many firms still feel that their inventories are
less than adequate.

- 30 -

Two directors expressed concern over the current financial
problems of utilities.

Capital flows have dried up at the very time

that utilities are being called upon to expand capacity and to provide
environmental safeguards to their operations.

Investment credits and

loan guarantees are being considered as possible ways to increase the
flow of capital.
Ninth District directors see inflation as a primary concern, and
they generally feel that traditional fiscal and monetary policies offer
the best hope of bringing inflation under control.

Directors are opposed

to the use of wage and price controls, at least under current conditions.
They have mixed views about jawboning.

Some view it as an imprecise

and ineffective economic weapon; others say it has favorable psychological
effects; and yet another feels that jawboning can be effective in curbing
monopolistic elements in the economy.

A savings incentive program was

proposed by one director as a policy alternative to complement fiscal
and monetary policy.
Several directors feel that a limited public works program may be
needed to aid unemployed workers in coming months; other directors
believe that there are more efficient ways to assist the unemployed.

For

instance, one director suggested that income supplements might be a more
desirable approach.
Many directors also stressed the importance of curbing expectations
in helping to stop inflation.

One director said that rates of inflation

in the second half and in early 1975 will depend on whether effective
economic leadership is exerted at the national level; a failure to exert
such leadership, he said, may result in a worsening of inflation.

- 31 -

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District bankers and department store executives worry about
the trend of business.

Although loan demand remains strong, slow

deposit inflows are tightening credit, and bankers are becoming more
cautious in their lending policies.

Retail sales softened in recent

weeks at major department stores, where managers now consider inven­
tories to be more than adequate.

On the brighter side, the tourist

season is finishing strong, recent rains have improved the agricultural
outlook, and automobiles are selling fast.

The increase in demand for

new and used cars, dealers concede, probably will mean a slow starting
1975 model year.
Chamber of Commerce and travel officials in the Tenth District
Western states report a rebound in July-August tourist flows following
a slow start at the beginning of the season.

While through June, tourism

in Colorado, Wyoming, and New Mexico was 5-10 percent below that of last
year, there was considerable improvement in July and August.

Colorado,

in particular, expects the late season increases to fully compensate
for the slower June.

Fear of gas shortages and the lower speed limit

have seemingly shifted or possibly compressed the season.

The most

serious "energy crisis" casualties appear to be the secondary attractions
which are being bypassed this season as tourists travel directly to major
destinations.

Automobile sales have shifted into high gear throughout

the District in recent weeks.

Most dealers in domestic cars report that

their August business was as good or better than last year, and the best
month of the model year.

Heavy buying continues in the small and inter­

mediate categories, but big cars are selling better, too.

"I could have

- 32 ­

sold another 8 to 10 Thunderbirds this month," said a Ford dealer.
The demand for used cars also has jumped, pushing up prices.

New car

dealers agree that the announcements of higher prices and new devices
on 75's have stimulated the surge of interest in 74's.

Consequently,

they expect a slow start on sales of 75's, although about half of those
contacted were optimistic about prospects for the model year as a
whole.
A recent softening of retail sales at District department stores
contrasts sharply with the current clamor for new cars.

The demand

for home furnishings and appliances has dropped considerably.
year ago, you couldn't get enough home freezers.
overstocked."

"A

Now everyone is

Several controllers of major department store chains

worry that sales may continue to sour.

All noted that the supply

situation was much improved--"the best it's been in a year," said
one.

Inventories are reported as adequate or excessive.
August rains came too late to be of much help to the parched

District corn, but in time to revive pastures and to improve prospects
for grain sorghum and soybeans.

With feed grain production now

estimated to be 15 percent below last year, prices likely will stay
strong, further compounding the problems of the cattle feeding industry.
Additional moisture is needed in Nebraska, Colorado, and Western Kansas
to prepare seedbeds for the winter wheat crop.
Deposit inflows at large Tenth District banks remained sluggish in
August.

Business loan demand continued strong at these banks, although

total loans declined somewhat due to a drop in loans to farmers and to
financial institutions.

- 33 -

Many of the bankers contacted expressed concern over what they
appraised as worsening economic conditions.

Reflecting this concern,

their overall mood was one of caution with respect to new loan demand.
Some of the bankers contacted indicated they have recently changed
their policies with respect to new borrowers.

Loans to new customers

will be sharply curtailed or discontinued, although an effort will
be made to accommodate older customers even if they are experiencing
temporary difficulties.
Exceptions to this policy were noted for new borrowers in energy
related fields.

Some bankers contacted specifically noted that loans

were growing for extracting oil,

shale, gas, and coal and for the manu­

facture of equipment in these industries.

Also, a few bankers indicated

that new loans were being made to small independent oil well operators
who were reported to be doing well due to the current higher price of
crude.

Some concern was shown for loans collateralized by securities,

which were currently falling in price.

Continued falling security prices

could lead to a call for additional collateral in a significant portion
of these loans.
Bankers reported that real estate and heavy construction loans were
experiencing the most delinquencies.

On the other hand, loans to

cattlemen were reported to be collateralized at a higher level due to
an increase in the price of cattle.

- 34 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

An informal poll of director opinion reveals a considerable
deterioration in expectations tied mainly to the slump in stock
market prices.

Concern over bank liquidity and credit quality is

evident, but primary worries are on the status of the economy.
Most directors believe the nation will be facing very difficult
business conditions for at least the remainder of 1974.

However,

most also believe we have no choice but to stay with a heavily
restrictive monetary policy to dampen inflation.

They believe

that possible increased restraint in fiscal policy might permit
some modest easing of credit restraint.
Increased output of petrochemicals accounts for much of the
continued growth in industrial production in the Eleventh District.
Petroleum refining has grown steadily since March when foreign
oil began flowing to Texas refineries.

Crude runs to stills have

now climbed well above the levels that prevailed prior to the
Arab oil embargo,

and expanded refinery output has increased

feedstocks to chemical producers who are hard pressed to meet
soaring demand.

Industrial production has also been boosted by

gains in textile output.

Shortages of fibers have eased and

have allowed textile producers to replace badly depleted inven­
tories of finished goods.

Paper producers,

on the other hand,

report the availability of wood pulp remains tight, but they
have been able to increase output nonetheless.
The boom in drilling continues, although constrained by
availability of equipment and trained manpower.

Nearly a third

- 35 ­

of the wells being drilled in the nation are in Texas, and drilling
activity in the State is running 25 percent ahead of last year's
pace.

Despite more drilling, crude oil production in the State is

little changed from a year ago, while natural gas production is
down slightly.

However, total crude production in all of the

District states is below year-earlier levels because of reduced
outputs in Oklahoma and Louisiana.
Residential construction in Texas continues to deteriorate.
Housing starts have fallen sharply for three consecutive months to
the lowest level since February 1967.

Savings and loan executives

report the rate of deposit losses has accelerated, resulting in
further sharp reductions in lending activity.

For example, the

president of the largest savings and loan association in Houston
claims he is "completely out of the home lending market."
The decline in residential construction is also impacting
heavily on the sales of home furnishings.

At the retail level,

department store executives in the District attribute the recent
drop in retail sales to sharply lower purchases of furniture and
appliances.

In addition, furniture production by Texas manufacturers

has fallen for three straight months.
There are indications that the eight-month slump in new car
sales may be easing.

New car sales in Texas' four largest metro­

politan counties were 13 percent higher in July than in the previous
month.

Dealers attribute the turnaround primarily to customers

who are scrambling for the remaining 1974 models in order to avoid
the higher list prices on the 1975 models.

- 36 -

The labor market in Texas is generally "tight."

The unemploy­

ment rate is currently 4.0 percent, and initial claims on umployment
insurance in the state are at the lowest level since last January.
The latest statistics show that employment in manufacturing, which
had declined in the spring, has recently registered strong gains.

In

addition, the average workweek in manufacturing has stablized at a
seasonally adjusted 40.7 hours after falling earlier this year.
Despite the deterioration in home building, the reduction of construction
jobs has been modest, as many workers have been able to find jobs
in nonresidential construction.

Also, the increase in oil well

drilling has resulted in a substantial rise in mining employment.
Crop production in the southwest has been reduced sharply due to
severe

drought conditions; and therefore, much of this year's harvest

will come from irrigated farmland.

Based on August 1 conditions, pros­

pects for the dryland cotton, grain sorghum, hay, and peanut crops in
the District states were poor, with total crop output expected to lag
1973 levels by at least a fifth.

Hardest hit are some West Texas

counties where less than 10 percent of the dryland cotton acreage is
expected to be harvested.

Because of the drought, the Texas Department

of Agriculture estimates crop receipts will be $1 billion less than a
year ago.

An additional $1 billion loss will result from lower cattle

prices and leave Texas farmers and ranchers with cash receipts of about
$4.4 billion.

Recent rainfall has improved range and pasture conditions

and has slowed the marketing of livestock to near seasonal levels.
However, ranchers fear that limited supplies of higher priced feed will

- 37

force large reductions in the sizes of breeding herds.

The sale of

such a large number of cows and calves would initially glut the market
and depress cattle prices.

But in the long run, cattle production

would be hampered by a sharp cutback in breeding stocks, and the price
of beef could skyrocket.
Limited supplies and high prices of agricultural inputs, parti­
cularly livestock feed and fertilizer, are of deep concern to agricul­
tural lenders.

A leading authority on agricultural finance in Texas

predicted that farmers, ranchers, and agribusiness firms are entering
a perilous new era where financial risks are higher than a few years
ago because of larger capital requirements and volatile fluctuations
in farm prices.

- 38 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors report more pessimism and uncertainty about the
economy.
concerns.

High interest rates and inflation are singled out as major
The weakest sectors are residential housing and industries

such as forest products which are dependent upon housing.

Lack of

demand is beginning to affect retail sales in some areas, but agri­
culture, manufacturing, and mining remain strong.

Banks face heavy

demands for credit, and they are being very selective in making loans.
Our directors expect little recovery in general activity during
the rest of 1974, and they report that there is much more pessimism
and uncertainty, particularly about prospects for controlling inflation.
High interest rates are thought to be slowing business investment
spending and further depressing the housing industry.

With a few

exceptions, inventory holdings do not seem to be excessive, but many
firms are building up stocks to avoid delivery delays and shortages.
Residential construction, both for single units and apartments,
shows no sign of recovery.

This lack of activity is causing more

shutdowns by lumber and plywood mills in the Pacific Northwest.

The

only buoyant sector in the forest product industry is pulp and paper.
Business capital spending is being adversely affected by the high cost
of funds, so that expenditures are climbing more slowly.

Nevertheless,

manufacturers in sectors such as steel and electronics, stimulated by
large order backlogs, are expanding capacity.

Nonresidential construction

remains high, but shortages of structural steel are causing problems
for contractors.

Mining production, expecially copper and coal, is

running above last year's levels.

- 39 -

The general slowing of the economy is affecting retail sales.

For

example, a large Portland department store reports sales declines for
the past three weeks.

So far, retail inventories have been kept in line

by tight controls, and firms do not regard them as excessive.

Sales

of durable items are mixed; freezers are selling well, but demand is
weaker for other large-ticket items.
Automobile sales are improving.

Purchases of 1974 models have been

stimulated by the announcement of higher prices for 1975.

Although sales

are still below those of a year ago, they are much higher then in recent
months.

Because production and dealer allocations had been cut back

earlier this year, the recent jump in sales has kept domestic car in­
ventories to reasonable levels.
cars are quite high.
soon.

In contrast, inventories of imported

The jump in current sales is likely to be reversed

Sales of 1975 models are likely to suffer from buyer resistance

to the recently announced auto price increases.
Agriculture throughout most of the District continues to benefit
from good crops and prices, with the principal exception being livestock.
Oregon had a record winter wheat crop, and shippers are facing a local
shortage of storage facilities.
unsettled.

The livestock picture is described as

Feedlot producers are cutting back their operations because

of higher costs, and they are bringing cattle to market earlier.

Con­

sequently, prices will be weaker, but later in the year higher prices
are likely.

One element of uncertainty in the livestock situation is

the size of the grain harvest and its effects on feed prices.
Banks in the Twelfth District are still facing very strong loan
demand, and they are following restrictive policies in allocating available

- 40 ­

funds.

Loans are being limited to productive uses; and in many cases,

only current customers' applications are being approved.

Several large

banks reported that the growth of business borrowing is slowing, due
to a combination of high interest rates and restrictive loan policies.
Consumer lending is stronger than would be expected, considering the
reduced level of consumer durable sales.

Problems for borrowers are

probably most serious in real estate because saving institutions have
been losing funds and commercial banks are not able to meet requests.
Interest rates are now reaching 10 1/2 percent, and downpayments of 20
percent or higher are being required.

Savings and loan associations

in California suffered extremely heavy deposit runoffs in August as
their customers have been shifting to market instruments bearing higher
yields.

Commercial banks also have been experiencing withdrawals from

savings accounts, and they have had to rely primarily upon the money
markets for funds to meet loan demands.

