CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 9, 1974

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 17
Seventh District - Chicago page 20
Eighth District - St. Louis page 23
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 25
Tenth District - Kansas City page 28
Eleventh District - Dallas page 32
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*

On balance this month's comments indicate a further slowing
in overall economic activity and more widespread pessimism regarding
the near-term outlook.

Residential construction remains in a depressed

state throughout most of the nation.

The situation in the housing

sector is causing a marked decline in consumer outlays for durables
related to housing, and aggregate real consumer spending appears to
be weakening further.

Business capital spending continues relatively

strong although there are further reports of delays and cutbacks of
previously scheduled outlays.

The manufacturing sector presents a

mixed picture with reduced demand pressure and fewer shortages in
some industries, particularly those industries serving primarily the
housing and consumer durables sectors, but continued tightness and
shortages elsewhere.

Several Districts report that the improved

supply-demand balance in some industries has reduced the upward
pressure on prices for certain raw materials and intermediate industrial goods, but no precipitous softening of industrial prices is yet
evident.

Adverse weather conditions are apparently restricting crop

yields and hampering the growth of farm income in the central portion
of the country, and conditions in the livestock industry have deteriorated further.

Most Districts report more restrictive bank lending

policies and a consequent slowing in the growth of business loans.
Thrift institutions experienced further net deposit outflows in
several Districts during September.

Retail sales appear to be generally flat in current dollar terms
implying the possibility of some decline in real consumption during
recent weeks.

Boston, New York, and Philadelphia report that consumers

are more cautious and bargain conscious.

Several Districts indicate a

further decline in sales of big ticket items, notably furniture and
home appliances.

Cleveland and Chicago report new model automobile

sales are off to a slow start.

Dealers in the Minneapolis and San

Francisco Districts fear that higher prices, difficulties in obtaining
financing, and the recent spurt in 1974 model sales will constrain
new model sales in coming months.
Conditions in the construction sector remain dismal, although
Philadelphia reports a higher rate of nonresidential building than last
year due to increased public works construction.

Dallas, on the other

hand, foresees a sharp curtailment of nonresidential outlays in coming
months due to a lack of interim financing.

Nonresidential building

permits have dropped by 50 percent in the Dallas District during the
last three months.

No District expects any near-term improvement in

the residential sector given the pervasive lack of mortgage credit.
Business fixed investment remains the strongest sector of the
economy, although there are additional signs of a reduced rate of
planned capital expansion.

Atlanta and San Francisco report sizable

reductions in planned outlays by utilities.

Chicago notes a reduction

in the demand for certain types of capital goods due to postponements
and cancellations by utilities and automobile manufacturers.

In the

Cleveland District machine tool orders, while still strong, are running
somewhat below their peak earlier this year.

Conditions in the manufacturing sector are spotty, reflecting
the sluggishness in the housing and consumer sectors on the one hand
and the relative strength of capital spending on the other.

Industries

closely related to housing and consumer durables (lumber, glass, textiles,
furniture, and appliances) are noticeably weaker.

In addition, several

Districts (New York, Chicago, Kansas City, and San Francisco) report that
some industrial materials, particularly fuels, certain chemicals, and
paper, are more readily available.

The easing of supply constraints in

these industries is contributing to less aggressive purchasing and some
declines in order backlogs.

Cleveland, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas

indicate somewhat softer prices for chemicals, fuels, and other materials,
but no major break in industrial prices has occurred to date.

Steel

markets remain tight in most Districts, due in part to the prospective
coal strike.

Both Cleveland and San Francisco suggest an easing in the

steel situation in coming months, however, due to the increased availability of foreign steel.
The agricultural outlook appears generally weaker.

Atlanta

reports favorable harvest yields with the exception of the hurricanedamaged Louisiana sugar cane crop.

But Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis,

and Kansas City indicate that early frosts will substantially reduce
corn and soybean yields, reducing farm incomes and increasing feed costs.
The demand for business loans remains strong in most Districts,
although St. Louis notes a leveling off following the sharp upward trend
earlier this year.

Philadelphia, Richmond, Minneapolis, Kansas City,

and Dallas all report slower growth in outstanding loans and commitments
due to more restrictive bank lending policies.

Several Districts indicate

that both banks and thrift institutions are restricting new loans to
established customers.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Our Directors' outlooks remain mixed.

Those close to primary

products and producers goods see many lines as being "sold out forever,"
while Directors more familiar with retailing worry about the vitality of
the economy.

Whereas concerns last month focused on high Interest rates,

this month those expressing misgivings discussed layoffs and demand
weaknesses as well.
We specifically inquired about discounting policies.

Though most

responses dealt with regional behavior, the experiences of certain firms
dealing in a wide range of national wholesale markets were Included.
The picture is surprisingly uniform:

there is very little discounting

from list prices, with the possible exception of retail prices on
expensive lines.

Even in cases of Improving supply and deliveries,

lists seem to be firm.

Industries facing softer demand prospects seem

to do little more than offer better terms.

One Director, however,

anticipates discounts In textiles and home furnishings so that the
goods keep moving.
All Directors entertain a gloomy outlook for general economic
conditions.

Nonetheless, metals, chemicals, machine tools, military-

related hardware, producers' metal products, and diesel engines were
lines singled out for their generally strong performance.

With one

exception, all Directors noted a worsening of unemployment in their
regions, and all anticipate a deterioration of the situation in the future.
In the Boston area, major employers are releasing significant numbers of
employees, and one large firm servicing a national consumer market has
just announced a 2 percent across-the-board lay-off.

One telephone

October 10, 1974

CORRECTION

Current Economic Comment by District
(Red book)

On page 1 of the report for the First District (Boston),
the figure in the bottom line should be 20 per cent rather than
2 per cent.

company is reporting furloughs of personnel while another faces
historically high delinquency rates.
Income squeezes on firms and households are encouraging less wasteful practices.

Supermarkets report that consumers are becoming more

sophisticated in their purchasing behavior, paying closer attention to
bargains and specials.
from the previous year.
positions.

Electricity consumption has declined 6 percent
Firms are closely managing cash flows and money

Demand deposits have fallen behind those of a year ago according

to two banking Directors. Firms are also learning to run their businesses
more efficiently, and this development may soon affect purchase orders.
High interest rates still plague utilities.

A state legislator has

Introduced a bill which would relegate one major utility to the status of
a power distributor; the state would assume power generation responsibility.
In any case, it is one Director's opinion that today's crunch may lead
to a power shortage in the 1980's.
All of the academic correspondents contacted this month, Professors
Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin note further deterioration in the economic
outlook.

Eckstein reports that businesses have universally adopted more

cautious behavior with regard to inventories and hiring even in those
industries where markets have held up.

He now forecasts real growth

to be less than 1 percent next year with no increase in constant dollar
business fixed investment.
real

Tobin points out that the weakening in the

economy, particularly in investment behavior, is consistent with

his presentation to the Board last spring.

Samuelson cited George

Perry's forecast of a 7 percent unemployment rate by mid-1975 and Perry's
statement that the major error of the Summit Meeting was not to have
realized the severity of the current recession.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District Directors and other business leaders who were
contacted recently on balance felt that retail sales were holding up
better than had been expected.

There continued to be reports of easing

shortages in a number of lines along with persisting tight supply conditions in others.

The respondents did not think that firms were

raising prices because of apprehension of a return to price controls.
No significant easing of liquidity pressures was noted.
Regarding consumer spending, the Buffalo Directors generally
characterized retail sales, other than automobiles, as being stronger
than had been expected, a sentiment shared by an official of a nationwide chain of department stores.

An upstate businessman, a Director,

felt that although the higher price for 1975 automobile models might
have an initial adverse impact on auto sales, if the new models appealed
to the publicjsuch sales would return to normal.

In this context, a

New York City representative of a major auto manufacturer stated that
while only a few days had elapsed since his firm's new models had been
introduced, dealers were reporting a very favorable public reaction to
the design and engineering improvements in the firm's 1975 models.
On a more restrained line, a number of the respondents indicated
that although retail sales levels appear to remain high, consumers are
bargain hunting to a greater degree than before.

And a senior official

of a high quality New York City department store with branches in the
suburbs reported that his firm had taken a gloomy view early in the
year, but had been "pleasantly surprised" until September; since then,
his firm's business had turned "soft," particularly with respect to

durable goods and big ticket items.
Concerning supply conditions, the president of a multinational
chemical firm reported some easing in certain lines of chemicals and in
packaging products, while the chairman of a major oil company characterized the supply picture in the petroleum industry as quite strong,
with substantially higher inventories of fuel and heating oil.

The

president of an upstate bank stated that supply conditions in general
had eased somewhat, a sentiment expressed by several other respondents.
The retailers that were contacted reported some easing in textile
products and another observer reported a greater availability of certain
lumber products.

The Buffalo Directors, however, stated that supply

conditions remained tight for critical items used in manufacturing such
as stainless steel, zinc, paper products, metal casing and welding rods,
and noted that in general delivery times for manufactured goods were
much longer than last year.
York State agriculture

A Director closely associated with New

reported that fertilizer and box material re-

mained in tight supply and that rapidly rising prices as yet had not
dampened the demand for these products.
Respondents expressing an opinion on the price situation did
not think that firms were raising prices because of fears of a return
to price controls.

Rather, the rapid increase in prices was attributed

to higher operating costs and declining profit margins.

A senior

official of a large multinational firm based upstate stated that business
generally recognized that if price controls were reinstated

such a move

might well be accompanied by mandatory price roll-backs.
Comments regarding the unemployment situation were received
before the release of the September unemployment figures.

At that time,

the respondents attributed the continued relatively strong employment
picture in the face of weakness in some other economic indicators
primarily to the limited extent of the decline in industrial production

and to the strong corporate profit picture, which has induced

less layoffs.
Views regarding the impact on liquidity positions of the recent
decline in short-term rates were best summed up by the Buffalo Directors.
No significant easing of liquidity pressures was noted by these Directors.
They generally felt that current short-term rates could be tolerated by
large industries

but that liquidity pressures continue to be particularly

intense for the small businessman.

Moreover, while short-term rates may

have gone down, there has been little change in long-term rates, posing
problems with respect to long-term financing for industry and municipalities.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

September was a slow month for most businesses In the Third
Federal Reserve District. Manufacturing activity was off and employment
opportunities also softened.

Prices continued their inexorable rise.

Area retailers reported weakness in the sales of most lines of merchandise.
Most of these businesses have been unable to keep their sales volume ahead
of inflation.

In the construction industry strength in the public works

sector has offset the weakness of residential housing.

One of the few

industries in the region that shows real strength is commercial banking.
Virtually all of the major banks have more loan business than they can
handle and, in fact, are discouraging attractive new business in an effort
to reduce their reliance on money market sources of funds.

The results

of a survey of manufacturing executives in the District suggest further
weakening of the area economy during the last month.

New orders are

lower for the first time in three months, and production is catching up
with the order backlog.

Shipments rose during the month and delivery

times on orders in process were cut. For the most part, inventories
were steady during the month.

These businessmen also report some

softening of their need for labor.
This short-term sluggishness is reflected in the outlook these
businessmen hold for the months ahead. On balance, they still expect
business conditions to improve by March, but the ranks of the pessimists
are swelling.

Most respondents expect new order activity to be holding

steady in the months ahead. Unemployment will probably be up in these
industries as manufacturers shrink both their workforces and their average
workweeks.

Capital spending during the next six months is not expected to
change very much from current levels.
are feeling the slowdown quite keenly.

Retailers in the Delaware Valley
Only one of the four major retail

chains surveyed was managing to keep its volume ahead of inflation. The
concensus is that consumers are downgrading the quality of their purchases,
looking for sales, and avoiding many big ticket purchases that could be
deferred.

The outlook is for continued weakness through the Christmas

season.
Construction activity in the District is mixed but clearly on the
plus side.

The value of construction contracts awarded so far this year

is up 40 percent over the comparable figure from last year.
above the national level of activity in this industry.

This is well

Residential

building is down dramatically, but nonresidential construction is ahead
of last year's pace.

However, the major factor giving the industry its

current strength is public works construction.

The value of local

contract awards in that sector of the industry is up almost 200 percent
over last year at this time.
Third District banks report that their business loan growth has
slowed, but the reason has been restrictive lending policies rather than
lack of demand.

Virtually no new business is being accepted, and well

established customers are required to show that their loans are intended
for "productive" rather than speculative uses.

The lending restrictions

have not been directed at any one class of business borrowers.
Finally, inflation shows no sign of abating. The glimmers of hope
reported last month have all but disappeared from the results of our latest
outlook survey.

The businessmen anticipating higher prices for both the

goods they buy and the ones they sell outnumber those expecting prices to
hold steady by more than two to one.

Only a handful of respondents expect

any reduction in prices by next March.

It looks like inflation psychology

is well entrenched and will not soon be dislodged.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

There are signs of some slowing In the pace of District manufacturing
activity, an easing in supply conditions for many items, and a moderate
reduction in the pervasiveness of industrial price increases. Machine
tool orders remain strong, although below the peak reached earlier this
year.

The domestic steel market continues to be tight, but world steel

demand is easing.

Banks report strong loan demand and increasingly

stringent loan policies.

S&L's generally continued to lose deposits in

September and early October; few mortgage loans are being made.
Early returns from our monthly survey of manufacturers indicate
some weakening in new orders and backlogs during September.

Production

apparently continued to rise moderately, while inventory accumulation remained
large. Firms note an easing in delivery schedules and in labor utilization.
Inflationary pressures continue to be extremely pervasive, although the
proportion of firms paying higher prices has declined slightly in recent
months from the peak levels reached in the spring and early summer. Recent
reports of purchasing agents in the Cleveland area mention signs of price
resistance on the part of industrial buyers and a gradual slowing in the
percent of companies paying higher prices.
Among the industries showing current weakness are building
materials firms and consumer goods producers.
have cut output and employment.

Several major glass producers

Two large appliance firms in the District

are laying off workers as a result of sluggish sales. A major tire firm
reports excessive inventories of tires. Unless new car sales strengthen,
it is likely that output and employment will be cut later in the year.
(Auto dealers in northern Ohio say 1975 new car sales are off to a slow
start with consumers interested mainly in the 1974 models.)

Executives from three large machine tool firms In the Ohio area
say that new orders are still strong, although somewhat below the peak
levels reached last March and April.

Ordering by heavy equipment producers,

especially mining and earthmovlng machinery, continues to be high.
Machinery firms report the high cost of money is affecting the ability
to increase production.

Shipments can be increased, builders complain,

only by borrowing money at interest rates around 15% to build component
inventories.
Steel industry sources report no slackening to date in the demand
for U.S. steel. Order books are solid through 1974. The tight steel
market has caused customers to be less demanding with regard to
quality; and with less steel rejected at the mills, finished steel
output has been running at a higher percentage of capacity.

The tight

market also has forced steel customers to carry their own inventories
rather than have the mills hold them.

Contrary to the domestic

situation, steel industry economists report an easing in world steel
demand

and a recent surge in steel imports.

Expectations are that

foreign steel prices (now at a premium) will drop next year to whatever
level is necessary to sell steel in the U.S. One economist predicts an
end to domestic steel shortages in the second quarter of 1975.
Steel mills continue to be hampered by shortages of coking coal.
Two major steel firms both said that in the event of a coal miners'
strike they would begin cutting production Immediately unless the government
gives indications of ordering the miners back to work.

An executive with

a large coal company confirmed reports that a coal strike would have
immediate repercussions on steel output.

Utilities have almost normal

inventories of coal—between two and three months supply.

The spokesman

estimated that the utilities could withstand a four-week coal strike.

In the financial area, bankers report that tighter loan policies are
being applied to all types of borrowers, and few new customers are being
accepted.

Utilities are borrowing to the maximum of their credit lines and

are expected to continue so until other markets Improve. REITs are said to
have all they are going to get.

Banks notice weakness in loan demand

from housing-related customers such as furniture and appliance dealers.
Strong credit demand from manufacturers Is anticipated during the current
quarter.
Spot checks with S&L's in the Cleveland area generally reveal sizable
losses in deposits during late September and early October.

One of the

area's largest S&L's, however, has been a net gainer in deposits thus
far in October, following extremely heavy losses in September.

The

recent improvement was attributed to a heavy promotional campaign to
attract deposits.

Other S&L executives do not expect an improvement

in their deposit flows until the yield on T-bills falls below 7 percent.
They are prepared for a massive advertising campaign when rates are at or
below that figure.

Presidents of four local S&L's all remarked that demand

for mortgage loans is still high, despite lending rates in the 10 to 11
percent range (with a third down).

No one is encouraging loans, and loans

are made selectively only on the basis of past customer relationship
of a high recommendation.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

The September survey of Fifth District businesses reveals a
continued slowing in most sectors of the District economy, with the manufacturing sector showing the greatest decline.

This decline seems to be

centered in a few industries, but they are Industries which contribute
significantly to the Fifth District economy, including the textile and
furniture industries.

Construction, particularly residential construction,

continues in a slump, and the effects are beginning to ripple throughout
the District economy, impacting on employment and production in several
important industries.

New orders declined almost across the manufacturing

sector, while inventories of finished goods continued to accumulate.
The six months expectations of manufacturing firms turned decidedly
pessimistic.

In the banking sector, reduced demand and restrictive

bank lending policies have slowed the growth of business loans relative
to the first half of the year.

The personal savings situation shows

continued weakness.
Survey responses from the manufacturing sector indicate broad
and, in many areas, steep declines in the level of activity.

Some decline

in shipments was indicated, but a more accurate assessment of the trend
might be based on the volume of new orders and the backlog of orders.
Thirty-seven percent of the manufacturing respondents indicated declines
in shipments while only 28 percent indicated increases.

On the other hand,

58 percent reported a decrease in the volume of new orders and 51 percent
reported a reduced backlog of orders.

The last six months have shown a

consistent, or perhaps accelerating, decline in new orders while the
volume of shipments has generally remained firm.

September represents

only the second month since March In which shipments, orders, and backlogs
each showed a general weakness.

Additionally, there was some further

inventory accumulation in the finished goods area.

Forty-eight percent

of the manufacturers surveyed now feel inventory levels are excessive.
More than twice as many manufacturers reported reductions than reported
increases in the number of hours worked per week.
Although there are indications of a general weakening in the
District economy, a review of the individual industries represented in
the survey shows a few large industries are greatly influencing the
overall picture.

In the textile industry, shipments, orders, and backlogs

were all off sharply, inventory levels were considered excessive and
expectations were generally pessimistic.

During September, there were

scattered reports of textile firms slowing or ceasing production.
Recent announcements include one-week closings of six plants by one
firm and the dropping of a product line by another.
Similar conditions are reported by survey respondents in the
furniture and fixtures industry where shipments, orders, and backlogs
were down sharply and current inventory levels are considered excessive.
Expectations among furniture manufacturers surveyed were decidedly
negative, with one respondent feeling there is "no improvement in sight."
Conditions in the furniture and fixtures industry are, of course, closely
related to conditions in the depressed residential construction industry.
Various reports show continuing declines in building permits issued and
high and rising unemployment among residential construction workers. Cutbacks in other industries are also being tied to the current housing market.
For the second consecutive month, a major sheet glass producer has closed
a production facility in the Fifth District.

The lumber and wood products

Industry reports conditions very similar to those reported by the textile
and furniture industries.
Several factors, such as rising prices, tight credit conditions,
and delays in obtaining materials, are having a depressing effect on
the expectations of those manufacturers surveyed.

Sixty-five percent now

expect national business conditions to worsen over the next six months
and almost as many, 58 percent, foresee a similar decline in their
respective market areas.

Perhaps more indicative of the general mood,

the number expecting their own level of production to decrease now
exceeds the number expecting it to Increase over that period.
Retailers responding to the September survey present a somewhat
more optimistic picture, although the responses are difficult to interpret.
Sales are generally reported to be increasing but it is not clear whether
this indicates a real increase or merely increases in dollar volume.
Sales of big ticket items relative to total sales continued to decline
during September.

There is some Indication that inventories are accumulating

beyond desired levels although this condition may not yet be widespread.
In the banking sector, the efforts of banks to restrict business
loan activity are having some impact as aggregate business loan expansion
slowed relative to the first half of the year.

There are also some

indications that business loan demand is slowing as well.

Commercial and

industrial loans outstanding at District weekly reporting banks have
shown essentially no growth over the past four months.

Consumer savings

deposits at commercial banks remain weak, having declined through
September.

Final July data for S&L deposit activity in the Fifth District

(excluding West Virginia) shows a net decline in savings of $49.8 million.
Preliminary data for August indicate

a net savings drop of $77.2 million.

Realized net farm income rose an unprecedented 68 percent in
1973.

But District bank agricultural specialists, in a recent opinion

survey, indicated a belief that net farm income will decline this year
because soaring farm production costs will more than offset the slight
gain in gross farm income.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Inflation continues to concern most area businessmen, but fears
of recession are becoming more widespread. While the region's crop
outlook is good, Hurricane Carmen destroyed part of Louisiana's sugar
cane crop. Mobile horn* plants in the District are closing or laying
off workers.

While new commercial projects and Industrial plants

continue to be announced, several cutbacks and delays have been reported.
Foreign trade in the region appears to be booming.
Florida Directors are pessimistic, largely because of the depressed
conditions in housing.

In south Florida, it would take about two years to

fill up vacant condominiums and housing coming on the market.

The slump in

housing is now spreading to other sectors of the economy. Directors in
Birmingham, Nashville, and New Orleaas expressed growing concern over a
possible recession.

One New Orleans businessman summed up this feeling by

stating that although people in this region were more concerned with problems
of inflation than recession or depression, there is growing concern that a
further wringing out of the economy will cause undue hardship to the small
businessman and the average income citizen.
Hurricane Carmen, which hit along the Louisiana coast, destroyed an
estimated $100 million—about 20 percent—of the states sugar cane crop.
The unharvested rice crop was also damaged.
in Louisiana this year.

The soybean crop is very good

The Florida citrus industry is pleased with its

near-bumper crop and reports the fruit is in excellent condition.

Georgia's

tobacco and corn crops may turn out to be the best in several years.
peanut crop is also excellent:
last year.

Georgia's

the harvest should be 10 percent more than

Tennessee's crops have generally done much better than nation-

ally; only soybean production appears to be down.

One large Georgia-based mobile home firm, which had four operations
in Florida, has filed bankruptcy. Mobile home plants in South Georgia
and in Mississippi have been laying off large portions of their labor force,
and at least one plant has closed down operations entirely. A Tennessee
appliance manufacturer announced a production cutback and layoffs as a
result of the decline in residential construction and mobile home sales.
A downturn in the retail fabric market has resulted in a general slowdown
in Georgia's large textile industry. Heavy layoffs have not as yet been
announced, but companies have reduced operations.
cut back from six to five days.

The workweek has been

Buyers are ordering on a short-term basis

and in smaller quantities than normal.

Orlando, Florida's

Martin-Marietta

Corporation recently announced a large layoff; it is the second large layoff
at the defense plant this year.

The only industry which seems to be booming

is Alabama's steel fabricating manufacturing.
and order backlogs are well above normal.

Reports Indicate that profits

The Lockheed-Georgia Company

also received some good news; it has been awarded an additional $150 million
order for 48 more C130H transport planes.
Announcements of new commercial and industrial projects continue.
The largest is a new chemical plant for the Baton Rouge, Louisiana area,
which will employ some 2,000 workers when completed.

Once again this

month, several previously announced projects have been cut back or postponed.
Southern Company, parent company of Georgia Power and Alabama Power, has
suspended plans for construction in both states.

This will cut Southern's

building program in the next three years by $1.7 billion.

Florida Power and

Gulf Power Company of Florida are also reducing and postponing construction.
In New Orleans, the Pan American Life Insurance Company has postponed

indefinitely the previously announced $26 million office building-hotelshopping complex.

New and expanded industry projects have been delayed

in the Huntsville, Alabama

area because of the slowing in the economy.

Rumors about the stability of one of the Alabama savings and loan
associations were rampant—so widespread that a public statement was made
by the association's chairman, the district attorney, and the president of
the Federal Home Loan Bank to reassure public confidence.

Even though all

deposits were covered by the Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corporation,
people were lined up to withdraw their funds.
Foreign trade in and out of Florida ports has

taken a 50 percent

jump over last year. The port of New Orleans also handled more ocean-going
cargo in July than a year ago.
Alabama

In August, a Liberian freighter left Mobile,

headed for Saudi Arabia loaded with southern pine lumber products.

Lumbermen hope this is a start of lumber exports, since the industry has
suffered from the decline in residential construction.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The economic situation in the Seventh District has weakened in the
past month.

Shortages of purchased materials and supplies are much less

significant, and in some cases the change has been dramatic.

A concerted

effort is being made by many firms to reduce inventories or, at least,
restrict further expansion.

Consumer demand for discretionary items has

slowed, especially for appliances and furniture.

Some softness has been

noted in certain, but by no means all, capital goods. Housing activity
remains at "crisis levels," and a distinct cutback is underway in commercial
and public construction.

Price inflation in the nonfarm sector has slowed,

at least for raw materials.

Announced wage settlements cluster in the

area of 12 percent per year.

Corn, soybeans, fruits, and vegetables have

been hard hit by early frosts. Attitudes, generally, have become much
more pessimistic, and many firms have "contingency" plans to be effected
if prospects deteriorate further.
In the manufacturing sector, the most significant development has
been the easing of shortages.

Improvement is noted in fuel, paper, industrial

chemicals, most nonferrous metals, and of course, residential building
materials.
cases.

Purchasing departments have been deferring deliveries in some

Some price softness is reported in fuel, chemicals, and fibers.
Very high interest rates

and limited supplies of funds, coupled with

reduced demand for some finished goods and ready availability of purchased
supplies, have created pressures to reduce inventories, even though inventories are not generally excessive, relative to current activity.
Despite easing in some sectors, supply constraints are still severe
in many areas, particularly those related to capital goods.

Iron ore, coke,

structural steel, steel plates, aluminum, nickel, diesel engines, electric
motors, castings,

forgings, bearings, hydraulic components, hoists, axles,

transmissions, and fasteners remain very tight—many say "as bad as ever."
Consumer purchases of major appliances and furniture dropped off
significantly in recent months, partly because of the decline in residential
building.

Sales of 1975 car models have been below expectations, with

sharply higher prices a factor. Airline travel has only equaled year-earlier
levels, also with sharply higher prices.

Consumers appear to be conserving

their resources for necessities and contractual obligations.
Fuel supplies, Including natural gas, appear to be comfortable in
this District. Major oil companies have followed independents in cutting
gasoline prices.

Electric utilities say their "send out" has been below

forecasted levels.
Current high prices for materials in ample supply are soft

and could

be vulnerable to significant declines, such as those that have already
occurred in the spot commodity market.

Finished goods prices remain under

upward pressures because of large increases in wages and other costs.
Orders for capital goods have slowed in some categories, mainly
because of postponements or cancellations by public utilities and auto
producers.

Demand for equipment for mining, heavy construction, transportation

(highway, rail, and water), chemical processing, oil exploration, pollution
control, steel production, and for manufacture of machinery remains very strong
Many smaller commercial and industrial construction projects have
been postponed or cancelled because of financing problems.

Some very large

residential developments have been abandoned, with no plans for revival.
Steel output is expected to be near capacity throughout 1975,
despite an expected 10 percent drop in shipments. Mill inventories of steel
are badly depleted and must be rebuilt, and imports are expected to rise.

Although steel order books are full, overall, auto industry demand is off,
and appliance manufacturers have been cancelling, not merely postponing,
orders.
Frosts, two to three weeks ahead of normal, have dealt a severe
blow to corn, soybean, fruit, and vegetable crops—especially in Illinois
and Wisconsin.
further.

Prices of canned goods are likely to rise substantially

Early frosts came on top of heavy spring rains followed by

serious drought. Uncertainties facing crop and livestock producers have
been increased by the recent government moves to cut exports. High feed
prices are leading to a sharp reduction in production of hogs and poultry.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District generally remains
strong.

Manufacturing output continues to increase with the exception

of housing-related products.

The supply situation for most raw materials

appears to have eased with the removal of wage and price controls.
Little change was reported in the dollar amount of retail sales, except
for appliances which were down somewhat.

Employment is little changed

from the beginning of the year, and the unemployment rate in the Eighth
District remains well below the national rate. The agricultural situation is somewhat mixed, with the effect of recent cold weather not yet
known.
Manufacturing firms in the capital goods and heavy equipment
industries report strong demand for their products.

The demand for

steel continues especially strong, although part of the demand may be
transitory, reflecting the expectations of a coal strike and higher steel
prices following the settlement.

Many firms are apparently stockpiling

steely and long delays for delivery are reported.

The only major weak-

nesses in manufacturing appear to be those industries which are housingrelated, such as lumber and appliances.
Raw materials shortages have generally eased in recent weeks.
Wood and lumber shortages have disappeared as a result of the removal
of price controls and the slackened demand in the housing industry.
Fewer shortages were also reported in the paper and paperboard industries.
Some shortages are still reported in chemicals, especially petrochemicals,
and in the steel and aluminum industries, but the supply situation in
other metals such as brass and copper appears to be easing.

Major retailers report that sales In dollars have In general
not changed significantly In recent weeks, although appliance and
wholesale clothing sales are down, and shoe sales apparently have
leveled off after slowing in the early months of the year.
Employment in the District continues at a generally high level.
Employment has shown some recent upturn, partly as a result of strike
settlements, and no widespread layoffs are reported.

The unemployment

rate in the District remains relatively low, well below the national
rate.
The agricultural situation is not clear.

The effect of early

frosts in the northern parts of the District has not been fully
assessed, while in the southern parts of the District, harvests have
been delayed by heavier than usual fall rains. Yield prospects for
rice, cotton, and tobacco are good, while corn and soybeans yields
will fall below levels of recent years due to the drought during the
summer months.
The demand for business loans has apparently leveled off following a sharp uptrend in the early months of the year.

One large

bank reported no increase in business loans for several weeks.

Savings

and loan associations generally report that they are able to meet
previous commitments

but are not making new home loans.

The associa-

tions have recently experienced a net outflow of savings, although
some report that the runoff was less than expected.

The movement from

passbook accounts into four-year certificates at thrift institutions
was reported to be continuing.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Although District business activity is currently stronger than
in the nation, signs of weakness are emerging.

The livestock industry's

depressed condition combined with poor weather which has significantly
cut crop production has made the prospects for farm income a primary
concern. District retail sales so far this year have increased at
faster rates than nationally, but retailers are uncertain about the
future.

However, District resort operators look for good business this

winter. A lack of mortgage funds nationally has also hurt District
homebullding, but not as severely as In the nation.

Business loan

demand continues strong at District banks with no letup foreseen.
After increasing very sharply in 1973 and 1974 the outlook for
District farm income is not very encouraging.

Early frosts in September

combined with a wet spring and a dry summer have significantly reduced
District crop yields.

Although higher prices will offset part of the

production decline, gross receipts from the District's 1974 harvest will
probably be down slightly from 1973's level. Gross receipts from District
livestock sales are also expected to be down from a year ago. The
marketing of livestock this year will not be off significantly but prices
are down considerably from a year ago.

This softening In gross farm

income comes at a time when farmers' production costs have been rising
rapidly.

Consequently, District net farm income is expected to weaken

considerably in the last half of 1974 and into 1975.
Relative gains in District retail sales have outpaced comparable
increases in the nation so far this year, but retailers are concerned
about the future. Much of the strength in District retail sales can be
traced to large farm increases in 1973 and early 1974 which have spurred

retail spending outside of the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metropolitan Area.
Discussions with District retailers have revealed that sales this summer
were good. However, most admitted that higher prices accounted for a
nukjor part of their recent sales gains.

Our contacts reported good

sales of apparel and home improvement items and declines in big ticket
merchandise such as furniture and major appliances.

Freezers and

similar items are in great demand and in very short supply. District
retailers are cautious in assessing their fourth quarter sales outlook
and some fear was expressed that this year's short Christmas shopping
season might cut into their business.
Automobile sales in July, August, and early September were
exceptionally good, according to a survey of regional sales managers.
Despite large sales in the last two months, cumulative sales for 1974
are still below those for 1973, however.

On the other hand, truck sales

continue to run well ahead of last year.

The supplies of large luxury

cars are very low in the District.

Current inventories of smaller cars

are greater than normal, but dealers say they are confident of selling
them once the higher priced 1975 models are on the market. Automobile
dealers are worried about the impact of the 1975 model prices on their
sales and that current high sales of 1974 models might cut into their
future sales.
District resorts reported a very good summer and look for
business to remain good. An Increase in business by local people and
group vacationers this summer was noted by several resorts. They also
reported that family groups stayed longer than in the past. With regard
to their winter recreational business, resort owners are anticipating a
very strong winter season and report that reservations are well ahead of
last year's at this time.

Residential construction is off in the District but not as
severely as in the nation.

The number of housing units authorized in

the District for the seven-month period ending in July was 9.5 percent
lower than those for the same period a year ago, as compared to a 38.4
percent decline nationally.

Savings inflows have been off at District

thrift institutions, and mortgage lending has declined. Mortgage loans
made by Minneapolis and St. Paul S&L's in August were 41 percent below
the August 1973 level.

Interest rates and nonprice terms of mortgage

loans made by Twin Cities financial institutions have stiffened during
the past three months.

Despite a substantial cutback in recent months,

outstanding loan commitments at District S&L's are at a high level due to
the large volume of commitments made in early 1974 when savings inflows
were unusually heavy and were expected to continue at a higher rate.
Business loan demand continues strong
letup is foreseen.

at District banks and no

Discussions with the three largest banks in the

Minneapolis/St. Paul area indicate that they consider their loan demand
strong and foresee no change over the near term. Consequently, these
banks are raising interest rates and tightening other terms and conditions
on new commitments.

The outlook for loan demand at District rural areas

will be largely influenced by farm Income developments.

Because of lower

net incomes, spending on capital items and consumer durables will fall,
resulting in lower loan demand for such purposes. However, refinancing
needs will increase to cover production costs not met by the year's income.
In addition, feeder cattle loans will be soft for some time, but ranchers
may demand more credit to cover holding their cattle over the winter months.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District firms are now facing less of a "sellers'
market" for materials inputs than they did only a few months ago.
Supplies are more readily available, and price increases are moderating
somewhat.

With business weakening, inventory growth is being watched

more carefully and purchasing policy is becoming less aggressive.

In

agriculture, concern over frost-damaged crops and the possibility of
export controls have created uncertainty over future feed costs, but
the picture for profits in the livestock industry and for food prices
remains gloomy.

Loan demand at Tenth District commercial banks is

holding up fairly well, with business and consumer instalment loans
up, and farm loans and loans to financial institutions down.
Results of a survey of purchasing managers in the Tenth District
suggest some easing in both the availability and prices of materials.
These tendencies are not evident across the board, as some industries
and some commodities are still faced with short supplies.

The contrast

with only a few months ago is evident, however, with a significant
number of respondents now reporting shortening lead times, improved
availability, some moderating in the number and degree of price increases,
and a lessening in the use of allocations.

As a result, several firms

report that they are pursuing a less aggressive purchasing policy.
Inventory accumulation targets are also being reduced in some instances.
There is a definite indication that part of the change is due to current
w d anticipated slowdowns in demand for these firms' output.
Textiles, corrugated paper, and some chemicals were specifically
listed as being more readily available to purchasers.

The supply situa-

tion for iron and steel does not show as much improvement as for other

goods. A major manufacturer of offroad vehicles reports very little
improvement in either availability or lead times of many important
items.

Other firms, however, do report some slight easing in steel

with allocations larger and lead times down a little.

One respondent

reported that reinforcing bars and mesh have become much easier to get.
With certain exceptions--mainly in metals—the purchasing
managers are leaning toward a less aggressive purchasing policy. For
example, one respondent said his firm was no longer "taking everything
we can get, as was the case six months ago." All of them seem to be
keeping a close watch on their inventories, with an eye to paring them
down in light of a weakening business situation. At the same time,
the experience with shortages and allocations appears to be pushing up
the level of what is viewed as "normal" real accumulation.

Inventory

reductions will be selective and cautious; one respondent says his firm
is "comfortable with most of the excess."
The majority of respondents believe themselves to be facing
less of a "sellers' market" than in the recent past. Although prices
generally are still rising, increases apparently are somewhat smaller
and less frequent

and cover fewer items.

(Two makers of steel products

noted that prices in the "gray" market have fallen sharply.) A firmer
stand by purchasing agents is credited with having some effect on the
price situation. Yet price at time of shipment seems to be more the
rule than the exception. Moderation in price increases is not universally
reported, however.

A tire manufacturer reports "terrible price increases

(for materials) in the past 90 days," with more expected to come.

Reversing a recent trend, farm prices declined 2 percent for
the month ended September

with cattle, hogs, soybeans, and corn

contributing most to the decrease. However, growing concern over the
frost-damaged crops in much of the corn belt has resulted in significantly stronger grain prices since mid-September, portending another
year of high feed costs for livestock producers and rising food prices
for the consumer unless various measures are taken to slow export
demand.
Even assuming export controls and a decline in grain prices,
profits in the livestock industry will likely remain small for the
next several months.

Hog producers are responding by reducing far-

rowings and liquidating brood-sows while cattle feeders are increasing
the culling rates for cows.

Since adjustments proceed more slowly in

the cattle industry, beef supplies should remain adequate through 1975,
but pork supplies are likely to be off substantially, pushing prices
up.
In the District, the planting of the new winter wheat crop is
progressing well.

Most of the seeded acreage in the southern half of

the region has germinated and is growing.

Moisture conditions are

generally excellent, although parts of western and central Kansas,
where some wheat was "planted in the dust," need rain to assure a
stand.

Rain also is needed in Nebraska where the wheat is now being

seeded.
Tenth District bankers contacted this month were divided in
their opinions about the strength of loan demand but in general they
thought demand was holding up fairly well.

Reports indicate that

consumer instalment and business loans continue to Increase, but farm

loans and loans to financial institutions have declined.

Some of the

decline in farm loan demand is due to liquidation of inventories by
cattlemen.
Many of the bankers surveyed indicated there has been some
tightening of loan policies, such as a reluctance to make term loans.
It appears that tighter loan policies have been selectively applied.
Loans to new customers have been discouraged.

Also, term loans are

being discouraged to avoid being locked into present interest rates
in case interest rates should rise in the future.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Growth in business loans at commercial banks in the Eleventh
District has abated since midsummer as bankers reportedly have tightened
lending policies in an effort to avoid further reducing their liquidity
positions.

Nonetheless, loan officers report demand has remained strong,

and they have encountered only minimal resistance to high interest rates,
mostly by smaller borrowers.

Tight conditions in capital markets have

resulted in considerable demand pressures on banks as companies have
relied more heavily on bank credit lines for capital expansion. Much
of this borrowing was originated on a short-term basis, and these loans
have been rolled over as customers have been unable to secure long-term
funds in the bond and equity markets.

In addition, high prices for

some raw materials have also contributed to a greater loan demand as
businesses have tried to build up inventories of scarce materials.
Lenders are relying on greater selectivity in granting loans
rather than raising interest rates to hold down borrowing.

Bankers report

they are closely screening loan applications, and typically only requests
by old customers are considered. Moreover, all "speculative type" loans,
particularly construction loans, are being discouraged.
All of the bankers surveyed said they are not actively seeking
new consumer loans because of the low profit margin available under state
interest ceilings.

They are, however, attempting to accommodate their

old customers. Much of the recent strength in consumer borrowing reflects
personal loans to maintain current living standards, including the greater
use of bank credit cards. However, automobile loans are up substantially,
and some bankers report a rise in borrowing to purchase recreational vehicles.

Commercial builders in the District warn of a severe curtailment
in nonresidential construction activity in coming months. Most builders
interviewed feel commercial construction has held up fairly well because
of the long completion time required for most projects—typically more
than a year.

But as jobs are completed, builders are finding little

new work—as evidenced by the 50 percent drop in nonresidential building
permits in the past three months.
Real estate loan officers at leading District banks generally
agree that the outlook for commercial building is bleak. Obtaining
interim financing is "nearly impossible" according to contractors,
although some long-term financing is believed to be available.

But

the increased restrictions on loan requirements have sharply reduced
the number of all loans granted. None of the bank loan officers interviewed will make interim loans unless builders have an "Ironclad"
commitment for long-term financing that completely covers the cost of
construction.

As a result, new commitments are reported to be at less

than half the level of a year ago.

But some banks have experienced much

sharper declines and claim new commitments are at a "standstill." For
example, a large bank in Houston has made only one new commitment in
the last month.
Even when funds are available, the cost of borrowing is often
prohibitive.

Larger banks in the District are currently charging 14 to

15 percent on interim loans plus a 1 percent a year fee. And most builders
cannot make a profit on these terms.

Even the cost of the available

supply of long-term funds has rendered many projects economically
infeasible.

In El Paso, for example, two development projects were canceled

because permanent financing was so expensive that construction could no
longer be justified.

Manufacturers of chemicals and plastics report no letup in
the heavy demand for their products.

Because production is running at

full capacity, unfilled orders have reached the highest level in the
history of many of the firms contacted. Most manufacturers have been
forced to allocate their output among old customers and are not taking
orders from new buyers.

Shortages of raw materials for industrial

chemicals and plastics have eased somewhat, and some leveling off in
prices was reported.

Fertilizer production, on the other hand, is

still hampered by shortages of nitrogen and phosphate.

Capital spending

plans remain strong in these industries with only minor revisions due
to high financial costs.
Steel producers report that while overall demand is heavy, there
has been a letup recently in new orders for reinforcing steel rods and oil
field pipe.

The decline in construction activity, first in residential

building and then in commercial building, accounts for the softening in
the demand for reinforcing rods. However, the big accumulation of field
pipe inventories represents months of overbuying by the petroleum industry
to hedge against possible shortages of drill pipe. However, even in these
product lines, steel manufacturers plan no letup in production this year
in order to rebuild badly depleted stocks of their own inventories of
finished goods.

Therefore, faced with capacity limitations and improved

availability of scrap metal, firms are going ahead with ambitious expansion
programs despite tight capital markets.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Our Directors report continued concern over the inability of
government to control inflation.

The general trend of economic activity

exhibits little change from recent months.

Housing construction remains

weak and the lumber and plywood industry is cutting employment.

Agriculture

in the District, except for beef, is experiencing an excellent year.
Business investment remains heavy although some planned expenditures
may be revised downwards.

Banking conditions reflect the economy and

are basically unchanged with good loan demand but little change in deposits.
The difficulty of controlling inflation remains the major policy
concern of our Directors; there is a need for more strenuous efforts by
the Federal Government to reduce its budget deficits in order to reduce
the burden on the Federal Reserve.

Directors support a steady monetary

policy integrated with use of all the powers of the Federal Government to
control inflation. An additional concern of some Directors is the need
to prevent any failures of large banks in view of a growing uncertainty
about the soundness of the banking system. Failures would have a domino
effect on small banks who have purchased CD's of the large banks.
General conditions in the economy do not appear to have changed.
Consumer spending is reasonably good, but there are weaknesses in spending
for durables and a decline is expected in automobile purchases.

The

weakest section remains construction. Housing construction shows no sign
of recovery, and further declines in apartment construction are reported.
Public construction is lower in several states because of higher interest
and other costs.

Most of our Directors reported little or no change in Investment
plans In their regions, and overall, investment activity appears to be
strong.

However, instances of revisions in plans are reported by

several Directors.
Issues.

Public utilities are having difficulties in floating

One large utility has made major reductions in its long-term

construction budget, reportedly cutting $1 billion out of planned capital
budget between now and 1985.

Rising construction costs have also led

other firms to revise their plans.

For example, a large California

dairy cancelled a project originally estimated at $3-1/2 million when
the estimate was revised to $5 million.

Other firms have postponed

projects in expectation of lower interest rates next year.
Recent increases in capacity are beginning to reduce supply
shortages.

One bank reports that California electronics components

manufacturers in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties have expanded capacity
sufficiently so that supply now nearly matches demand.

In petrochemicals,

some price cuts have occurred already due to the emergence of excess
supply.
so.

In the steel industry, demand is still high, but it may not remain

The price differentials between U.S. and foreign steel prices have

narrowed, and foreign competition is becoming more serious. There is
still a waiting period for steel and users must accept a restricted
allocation.

However, some buyers have cancelled their steel order

allocations, and this actioft often indicates a softening in demand.
At the moment, the majority of our Directors think sales of automobiles
in 1975 will be weak.

Recent price rises have stimulated sales of leftover

1974 models, but this is expected to be at the expense of 1975 sales.

In

addition to higher posted prices, problems of obtaining finance and the
prospects of higher gasoline prices are also discouraging buyers. Dealers

are receiving requests for 48-month contracts by customers.

Foreign

car demand 1s not likely to be better either, particularly since U.S.
compact car prices are reasonably competitive.

Japanese cars remain

in the best position in terms of sales activity, but European sales
are lower! domestic truck sales, in contrast, appear to be good.
Agricultural prospects in the District are reported to be
excellent.

Ten percent smaller crops are reported for wheat, potatoes

and apples, but price rises more than offset the lower production,and
farm Income continues to grow.

The only exception to this picture is

beef, where producers face rising costs with unchanged demand.
Bankers report loan demand is strong but deposits show only
slight change.

Some banks have experienced a shift from demand to

time deposits, and others report a continued drain of deposits because
of small investors shifting to government or government guaranteed issues.

