CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 21, 1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 4
Third District - Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District - Cleveland page 10
Fifth District - Richmond page 13
Sixth District - Atlanta page 17
Seventh District - Chicago page 21
Eighth District - St. Louis page 24
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 26
Tenth District - Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District - Dallas page 32
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.]

The general tone of this month's REDBOOK reports is somewhat less
confident.

Virtually all districts note improvement in conditions, but

there are frequent mentions of unsatisfactory gains. Retail sales have
increased, but mainly in soft goods with consumers showing continued
caution on big-ticket purchases.

Inventory adjustments are largely com-

pleted at the retail level (unless sales recede again), but many manufacturers plan further liquidations.

General price inflation continues,

despite weakness in some commodities, and there are fears that increases
in the price level will accelerate.

References to weak job markets do not

seem commensurate with the substantial gains in employment reported for the
nation. Unemployment remains at depressingly high levels in all districts.
Reports on capital expenditures suggest further weakness, overall. Construction activity has shown no sign of revival except for single-family
homes. Fears of substantial disintermediation are slowing new loan commitments by thrift institutions.

Business loan demand at commercial banks re-

mains sluggish for the most part. Harvests of major agricultural crops
have been generally very good, but Hurricane Eloise caused extensive
damage in some parts of the South.
Boston's report indicates widespread discouragement with economic
trends and emphasizes "hazards" to business. Richmond finds the improvement "less widespread," and San Francisco says the recovery is "slower
than expected." Most districts sound some notes of caution. Perhaps the
strongest pictures are presented by Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Dallas.

Retail sales have Improved modestly in most districts, mainly in
apparel and other nondurables.

Only Dallas reports a "marked pickup"

in big-ticket items. However, Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Dallas find
that auto dealers are pleased with the reception accorded 1976 models.
Chicago and Philadelphia say that consumer credit delinquencies have been
reduced.
The inventory correction continues. Most districts draw a contrast
between manufacturers1 continued efforts to reduce inventories and the
success of retailers in bringing stocks into line with anticipated sales.
Cleveland emphasizes the continued overhang of steel inventories, and
Kansas City points up the recent stocking of steel to beat the October 1
price increase. Needs to replenish depleted inventories account for much
of the Increase in output of chemicals and textiles since last spring.
Continuing price inflation remains a major consideration almost everywhere. Cost-push inflation reflects rising labor costs, higher prices
for energy, outlays to control pollution, and high interest charges. New
York observers see inflation in the 6 to 8 percent range and some fear
a "reacceleration."

None of the districts reported views that the infla-

tion rate would slow substantially next year.
Dallas and Philadelphia report a significant rise in manufacturing
employment and in the average workweek.

But Chicago finds that demand

for workers continues weak, and Minneapolis says manufacturing employment
declined further in the summer. The weakest job market appears to be in
New England where unemployment increased to 12 percent in August.
Most districts reported that capital expenditure prospects appear
soft for the next several months at least. Cleveland says capital goods
orders have strengthened, but from "very low levels" last spring. Chicago

says most manufacturers of capital goods and components are still cutting
output, but demand for large mining and earth moving equipment remains
strong. Richmond says 40 percent of manufacturers consider capacity
"excessive." Dallas reports a very high level of oil and gas exploration in
proven fields, but riskier ventures have been deemphasized and exploratory
offshore drilling is at a "virtual standstill."

San Francisco reports weak

orders for commercial aircraft and reductions in investment plans for
aluminum and lumber.
Sales and construction of single-family homes have Improved this year
throughout the nation, and added gains are expected in 1976 if credit conditions permit. But slowing Inflows of funds to thrift institutions constitute
a threat to further recovery. New apartment building is at very low levels.
Office space is in excess supply with Atlanta reporting a vacancy rate of
20 percent.

Chicago says architects have "nothing on the shelf or the

boards."
Atlanta comments at length on the damage done to crops and buildings
by Hurricane Eloise and the associated adverse impact on tourism. New
York observers are apprehensive over the spreading impact of the financial
problems of New York City. Unsettled conditions in the municipal bond
markets have "virtually halted" major new commitments on government construction projects throughout the state.

FIRST DISTRICT—BOSTON
The directors of the First District are more unsettled this month. They
are aware that the economy may not trace out a classic recovery; "to look around
and see the wreckage, it is hard to feel cheerful." Many more problems, many
more hazards seem to be plaguing business. There are suspicions that "our system
doesn't work right." New England unemployment in August increased to 12 percent
from 11.1 percent for July. Rhode Island's figure improved substantially, dropping to 13 percent, but significant deterioration in Massachusetts (13 percent)
and Connecticut (11.4 percent) more than compensated.
Banking directors report sluggish or declining asset portfolios. All components of loan demand continue weak, and consumer credit has shown only feeble
activity.

Inventory liquidation seems to be reaching a nadir, but firms which

are in positions to restock are proceeding extremely cautiously.

Consequently,

banks are improving their money market positions, unwinding liabilities and
buying Treasuries. The lack of profits continues to restrict municipals investments to local issues, at best. New York City evokes divided attitudes, but
none of the directors is intimately involved.
The banking directors expect short-term interest rates to remain flat for
a few months.

There is hope that recent money stock data may occasion a fall

in the federal funds rate.

"It would be regrettable if short-term rates rose."

Retail sales in the district have yet to recover convincingly. Most markets have seen only feeble increases in volume since April.

One more successful

retailing director reports a softening in activity for the last three weeks. He
is stocking cautiously for Christmas, and business uncertainties are moderating
his optimism for spring.
inventories.

In general, retail outlets have not begun restocking

There seem to be few reported ripples from Grant.

Although sup-

pliers may have been caught, it was no surprise to our retail director. The
firm had lost identity in a highly competitive market.

A director from Connecticut has become more optimistic about his state's
prospects for 1977-78. Foreign companies anxious to locate in the U.S. have
been impressed with Connecticut. Also, corporate headquarters of U.S. firms
have been moving to the state. Defense contracting is continuing strong as
well. Other New England states cannot look forward to these sources of growth
at this time, and concern about long-term development is becoming substantial.
Capital goods producers and manufacturers of intermediate goods are still
working off backlogs.

So far there has been little stimulus for the First

District in these industries. One director has identified a "key factor syndrome." Business is paying close attention to interest rates:
are depressing, a fall is encouraging.

rising rates

There are reports that the war against

inflation is misplaced if it requires high interest rates. With sluggish
business and sales uncertainty, current rates are very high in both nominal and
real terms. Lower rates would be necessary to bring out investment, expand capacity, and nourish the recovery, according to this view. Financial markets
are much more than a veil over the real economy, and business is not poised
to spring or encouraged to do so by high interest rates, a director reports.
Professors Houthakker, Solow, and Tobin were available for comment this
month.

Houthakker is still comfortable with general developments, while Solow

and Tobin are very concerned about the propriety of policy.
Houthakker feels that the economy and policy are on the right track. He
feels that a very vigorous rate of growth will prevail for a few months driven
by exports, consumers, and an end to inventory liquidation; he then looks forward
to growth of about 7 percent by the end of 1976 as business investment assumes
a positive role.

Inflation will slow to 4 percent at that time. He cautions

against rapid money growth, and hope6 that policy will favor the low end of the
5 to 7-1/2 percent range.

He fears that the considerable money expansion in

Europe should be discouraged, perhaps through official discussions: such

European policy will present some danger that the dollar will become unduly
strong, or that domestic monetary policy may be unfavorably undermined.
Solow is not impressed with Ford's proposed fiscal program, but he also
believes the Fed need not be too concerned since there is little chance of
enactment. He expects rates of growth of 8 to 10 percent for the near future
which is not out of line with a natural rebound—especially given the foregoing
collapse.

Such rates of growth need not imply that a sustaining drive for re-

covery has surfaced, so he remarks that the Fed need not feel tempted to lean
against the wind. He notes that most optimistic forecasters have assumed money
growth in excess of 7-1/2 percent. Policy is not doing its part:

"I have seen

no calculation of cyclical increases in velocity that would make 7 to 7-1/2 percent money growth appropriate in this economic situation.

It is an empty belief

that this time will be different."
Tobin emphasizes that velocity increase is related to money growth. Low
money growth and high interest rates tend to cause a more sluggish expansion
of GNP (or even a stalling of growth) which yields slow velocity expansion, at
best. Tobin also stresses that high long-term interest rates reflect market
expectations of rising future rates of interest, coupled with risk. There is a
positive relationship between inflation and interest rates because the market
has learned that price increases entail tight policy.

The Fed should permit

money growth to exceed 8-1/2 percent and explain that such a policy does not
include a compensating stringency in the future. A temporary increase in money
growth is appropriate for recovery; in fact, a recovery without big U.S. budget
deficits requires this policy.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK
According to Second District directors and other business leaders, consumer demand should continue to provide the major near-term impetus to the
business recovery. Respondents at the retail level sensed rising consumer confidence, and they generally expected a better Christmas season than last year.
However, a strong upturn in residential construction and capital spending does
not appear imminent. Despite continued industrial slack, most of those questioned
foresaw inflation in the 6 to 8 percent range because of underlying cost pressures.
Some respondents felt that New York's financial plight might have some impact
on the business recovery.
Prospects appeared good for further improvement in retail sales.

The Buf-

falo branch directors cited higher personal savings and less indebtedness as
strengthening the financial position of households and consumer confidence. Expectations were for a better Christmas season than a year ago. .Some respondents
reported good gains in apparel, but the chairman of a New York City-based department store chain did note that furniture sales had been lagging. However,
the department store chairman foresaw a strong near-term profit performance for
the retail industry.
Outside of the retail area the outlook was not so optimistic.

No one ex-

pected any quick and marked improvement in business fixed investment or in
residential construction. A number of respondents from industrial establishments
mentioned present price-cost margins as unfavorable to a rapid resurgence of
investment.

The president of a large multinational oil company was pessimistic

with respect to the petroleum industry's ability to finance the capital expenditures required to meet the nation's energy needs. He regarded higher prices
for domestic petroleum products as a necessary but not sufficient condition
for generating needed cash flows. The chairman of a large concern manufacturing
capital goods had yet to see any signs of recovery as bookings were still quite

weak.

No futher recovery in residential construction was forseen by the

directors of the Buffalo branch because of such factors as previous overbuilding and high construction costs. However, an economist for a New York City
brokerage firm expected declines in both inflation and long-term interest rates
to provide an eventual uplift to the housing sector.
Despite the presence of forces which might ease price pressures, a number
of respondents were uneasy with the prevailing degree of inflation, and some
feared an eventual reacceleration of inflation. Among the factors cited as
dampening price rises were continued slack in productive facilities, increased
price competitiveness of foreign goods in industries such as chemicals, and
competition among petroleum refiners faced with low capacity utilization. On
the other hand, some respondents were concerned that a steady rise in wages,
energy costs, and environmental control costs could push inflation upward. One
New York City-based clothing manufacturer said that textile prices had started
to recover toward last year's high levels and that delivery lead times were lengthening as some suppliers were unprepared for the quick turnaround in the apparel
sector. Although not particularly fearful of a marked reacceleration of inflation,
the Buffalo branch directors generally expected a 7 to 8 percent rate of price
rise. While there was no expectation that price controls would soon be imposed,
a few respondents feared that discussion of price control might trigger widespread
anticipatory price rises.
A number of respondents felt that the New York financial crisis did pose
some risk to the economy.

However, most of those questioned did not think that

the crisis would totally undermine the recovery.

The Buffalo directors thought

that the recovery might be temporarily delayed but expressed more concern with
the probable reallocation of funds away from municipal securities.

On the other

hand, they felt that the longer-run implications could be favorable if the cur-

rent crisis prompted greater financial responsibility at all levels of government. There were reports of concern expressed by some European foreign exchange dealers that default could have an unfavorable psychological impact
on the dollar. A quite pessimistic note was sounded by the president of a
large New York City-based construction firm specializing in government sponsored construction through New York State.

He offered a bleak outlook for

area public construction as unsettled conditions in the municipal bond
market had virtually halted major new commitments.

THIRD DISTRICT—PHILADELPHIA
Economic recovery is taking hold in the Third District. For the third
month in a row, area manufacturers report that business conditions have
improved. New orders and shipments continue to increase, and there are
additional declines in inventories. At the same time, employment has increased and the manufacturing workweek has lengthened.

However, prices

paid for supplies as well as those received for finished products are both
higher. The outlook for the next two quarters is for the expansion to continue. Manufacturers expect new orders and shipments to be higher, and no
further cuts in inventories are anticipated.

In addition, these businessmen

expect both work forces and the average workweek to expand.

But it's antic-

ipated that prices will continue to climb and capital spending will rise only
slightly. Area retailers report increased sales and look for an upward trend
through the spring.

Bankers report that deposits are level or off slightly,

while loans remain flat.
Manufacturers in the Third District, responding to this month's business outlook survey, report a higher level of economic activity compared
to last month. This is the third consecutive month in which 35 percent
or more of the respondents have indicated an improved business climate.
In fact, none of this month's respondents reports a decline in economic
activity. More than one-fourth report higher levels of new orders, and
shipments are up for a similar proportion of the respondents. Inventories
are down, on balance, but the cutbacks are smaller than those reported in
the previous few months.

Of the manufacturers surveyed this month, the

proportion reporting lower stocks exceeded those reporting higher ones by
only / percentage points.

In July, by comparison, declines exceeded additions by 43 percentage
points. The current expansion in manufacturing is also reflected in employment, which is up again this month, and in the average workweek, which
is longer.
The outlook for the next six months remains optimistic. More than 80
percent of the executives polled look for an increase in overall business
activity.

Seventy percent expect new orders to be higher by April, while

68 percent anticipate an increase in shipments.

Inventories are expected

to stabilize over the period. In addition, almost 40 percent plan to add
to their work forces, and there are plans to lengthen the workweek further.
Modest increases in capital spending are also expected, but plans are still
cautious with almost two-thirds of the manufacturers polled planning to maintain current levels.
Retail executives report increases in sales after adjusting for seasonal
factors. Apparel and fashion items are reported to be selling well and one
contact indicates very good sales of hard goods. These executives look
for a strong Christmas season and most expect sales to trend upward through
the spring. Most of the merchants contacted feel that consumers are more
price conscious than in the past and one notes, "as a result, It becomes
more difficult to maintain profit margins, let alone increase them." All
of the retailers indicate that their inventory-sales ratios are at desired
levels, but one anticipates some supply problems by year-end because manufacturers aren't building inventories fast enough. Most of the merchants
report that in terms of credit collections they see signs that consumers are
finding it easier to pay bills on time.
On the price scene, manufacturers report that prices they pay for
their supplies, as well as prices they charge for their finished products,

are up from last month. Prices paid are decidedly higher with none of the
respondents reporting lower prices and close to 60 percent paying higher
ones. Prices charged are up somewhat as well with a little over onefourth reporting increases.

The outlook for the next six months is for

additional increases. More than three-fourths of the manufacturers surveyed expect to be paying higher prices by April, and 70 percent expect
to be receiving higher prices for the products they sell. Retail executives report that, in general, the prices they pay and charge continue
to move up.
Area bankers report that, after adjusting for seasonal factors, demand
deposits are level or down slightly and savings accounts are flat. Most
of the financial executives contacted report that they lost deposits to
the Treasury during the latest offering, with one banker indicating a gross
outflow of at least $15 million. All of the bankers surveyed are aware of
California Federal S&L's offering of mortgage-backed bonds last month,
and the majority report that they're looking into it as a possible way of
circumventing Regulation Q ceilings and of achieving a better alignment
of maturities. Loan volume is reported to be level or down somewhat,
and the outlook is for it to pick up as recovery continues. One banker
reports a slight pickup in consumer lending, and he looks for a further
increase of 10 percent next year. These bankers look for short-term interest rates to rise gradually, and they expect inflation to be in the 6 to 7
percent range through next year. The majority of those contacted feel
that if prices climb at a faster pace while M^ grows at 7-1/2 percent or
less, the chances of the recovery aborting will increase. There is
general agreement that the tax cut in effect now should not be allowed to
lapse, at least until the economy expands further.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND
Recovery in the Fourth District seems to be proceeding slowly. Manufacturing activity has been Improving from its early spring low; but as in recent,
previous recoveries, the upturn is slower here than for the United States.
Liquidation of steel inventories is not expected to be completed for several
months, and capital goods producers report strengthening from very low levels
last spring. Retailers report consumers are still cautious. Mortgage lenders
are apprehensive over prospects for residential construction mainly because
of last month's slowdown in deposit inflows.
Recovery in manufacturing has been under way for several months but is
still relatively slow. This bank's index of manufacturing activity shows a pickup since the March low that is somewhat slower than for a comparable period of
recovery from the 1970 recession. Most of the strength in the present recovery in
manufacturing is coming from nondurable goods producers.

Tire production picked

up sharply in response to a pickup in sales as well as smaller declines in inventories.

Chemical and plastics firms, where inventories have been cut to desired

levels, also report a gradual pickup in orders and output from early 1975 levels.
A large supplier to the auto industry reports medium-sized trucks are beginning
to sell well and that car frame orders have picked up.

Steel orders have weakened

sharply in recent weeks, and economists with three major producers expect little
real improvement until early next year.
to beat the October 1st price increases.

Orders and shipments bulged in September
One economist expects orders and produc-

tion are at the low point of the year because inventories will have to be liquidate<
at the same high rate as last quarter. They expect that the October price increases
will hold, despite a $30 to $50 per ton advantage foreign producers have over
domestic prices. Orders from capital goods producers remain weak.
A recovery in capital goods typically lags an overall recovery and latest
reports from capital goods firms in the district suggest no significant upturn

until next year. A large machine tool builder notes that incoming orders have
risen moderately from a trough in the first quarter of 1975, and he expects a
50 percent increase in new orders for 1976. A manufacturer of printing presses
reports an increasing number of inquiries in recent weeks that he expects will
result in a rising trend in new orders.

Several tool and die producers note

a small but definite upswing in orders since June, mainly from appliance and
farm implement producers. A financial officer of a major firm that produces
material handling equipment, auto parts, and trucks reports that its business
low occurred early last spring. He does not expect much improvement in its
automotive products until next year. A heavy duty truck producer reports production and orders have been climbing slowly from a low in March, while its
construction machinery remains on a high plateau.
Consumers remain cautious, especially with respect to durable goods. According to a major chain headquartered in the district, real sales of soft goods
have risen 4 to 5 percent since the spring of 1975.

Sales of major appliances

are still weak, although the decline from 1974 levels will narrow to 1 or 2
percent in the present quarter, and sales are expected to exceed year-earlier
performance in the first quarter of 1976. Retail stocks of major appliances
were brought into balance by midsummer, and retailers have begun to place orders
for early 1976 sales. Markdowns over the next several months are unlikely to
be as prevalent as they were during most of 1975. An executive with a major
discount chain also reported that soft goods and home improvement products have
picked up in recent months. An economist with a national food chain in the
district noted customers are still very selective and cost conscious. Consumers
will pay high prices for quality food and meat but are buying less.
Residential construction awards in the district rose at about the rate they
rose in the United States in the first eight months of 1975, but mortgage lenders

are apprehensive over prospects because of the net outflows of savings experienced
by some savings and loans. Of the four S&Ls contacted, two reported net outflows of funds in September (both have had net gains so far in October), one
reported net inflows, and one reported net inflows only because of successful
promotional programs for opening of a branch.

One of the largest S&Ls in the

district reported net outflows of $1.0 million, in contrast to a $1.7 million
increase in August and a recent high of $6.0 million in March. Liquidity in
each of these associations has been cut from an 11 to 12.5 percent range
during the summer to as low as 7.5 percent.

These associations expect to take

on new commitments cautiously, and generally expect that mortgage rates will
rise another 1/4 point within the next few weeks.

Bankers contacted also

expect another rise in mortgage rates shortly after usury rate ceilings are
raised.

Several banks expect heavier mortgage loan demand in coming months

as S&Ls cautiously take on new commitments, but these same bankers state that
restricted portfolios may hold down their mortgage lending.

FIFTH DISTRICT—RICHMOND
The October survey of Fifth District business conditions suggests a
continuation of the recent pace of recovery. Manufacturers continue to
report increases in shipments and new orders, although improvement in the
orders picture was apparently less widespread than a month ago. Inventories
continue to decline, and there is some indication that they are coming into
line with desired levels. The number of manufacturers reporting inventories
as excessive is the smallest in over a year, although it still amounts to
one-third of the respondents.

Some improvement in unemployment rates is re-

ported, but it is not clear that increases in employment are the primary
factor in this improvement. Our survey of retailers suggests further general
improvement in sales, while sales of big-ticket items relative to total sales
seem to have stablized.

In the banking sector consumer and real estate loans

have continued to post modest but steady gains. Business loans, however,
continue sluggish in most parts of the district.

In agriculture, lower prices

and a smaller volume of sales of flue-cured tobacco have combined to reduce
the value of marketings some 12 percent, or over $100 million, from a year
earlier.
Manufacturing respondents to our October survey report continued increases in shipments and in volume of new orders.

Increases in new orders,

however, were not quite so widespread as in the previous month and backlogs
showed little change. The diffusion of survey responses this month suggests
the greatest, or at least the broadest, inventory liquidation of the year.
Over 45 percent of the manufacturers surveyed report declines in materials
and almost 40 percent report declines in finished goods Inventories. One
respondent stated explicitly that his firm is shipping from inventories.

This widespread inventory runoff has now continued for six months and may
be tapering off. One-third of our respondents, the smallest number in over
a year, still view current inventory levels as excessive. About one-sixth
report current levels as too low.
While little change in manufacturing employment during September is
reported, there does seem to have been some increase in hours worked per
week. Respondents reporting increases outnumber those reporting decreases
by three to one. Employee compensation and prices continued to move up
across a broad range although only one-fourth of the manufacturers reported
receiving higher prices during the month of September. Approximately 40
percent of the manufacturers believe that current plant and equipment
capacity is excessive, but almost 90 percent feel current expansion plans
are about right.
Concerning the outlook for the next six months, there persists a basic
mood of optimism although it is not as pervasive as in some recent months,
and there is actually less optimism expressed in the outlook for the respondents' respective industries.

Fewer than half of those responding expect

the level of production in their own firms to improve during the next six
months.
The October survey of retailers suggests improved sales during September
but sales of big-ticket items relative to total sales were apparently unchanged. The prolonged relative decline in sales of big-ticket items would
suggest that although such sales may have stabilized, they continue at a
very low level.

Inventories at the retail level declined further during the

month and have apparently been brought into line with desired levels. The
number of retail employees appears to have declined somewhat, while our

survey respondents were unanimous in reporting increases in employee compensation. All respondents reported paying and receiving higher prices.
There also appears to have been some deterioration in the outlook as 80
percent of our retail respondents now expect the level of business activity
and of sales in their respective firms to be unchanged over the next six
months.
Asset expansion among Fifth District banks has followed an irregular
pattern in recent weeks, with advances in some loan categories offset by
weakness in other areas.

Bank interest in investments has also weakened.

Consumer instalment loan volume at weekly reporting banks continued to show
strength in September as compared to earlier months. Real estate loans also
expanded in September and are running about 7-1/2 percent above a year
earlier. Contrary to expectations expressed in August, and again as recently as mid-September, business loan volume has been weak. The notable
exceptions are loans to the retail trade and tobacco industries, where
seasonal influences have resulted in strong gains. Demand deposit growth has
continued but the rate of inflow of consumer time deposits has fallen and
savings deposits have suffered an absolute decline. Rate competition is
also affecting S&L deposits. CD attrition continues. Average daily member
bank borrowings increased in September to their highest level since January,
but net federal funds purchases of member banks fell by about one-third
from the August level.
District cash farm income for the January to July period was up about
1 percent over a year ago. The seven-month figure represented the first
year-to-date period which showed an increase over the comparable period
in 1974.

Flue-cured tobacco prices have improved in recent weeks, but the

season average price as of October 2 was still running 6 percent under

last year's level. September 1 estimates indicate that the district's 1975
production of field crops, with the exception of tobacco, soybeans, and
sweet potatoes, will be under 1974 levels.

SIXTH DISTRICT—ATLANTA
Retail sales, hampered by adverse weather associated with Hurricane Eloise,
made slow improvement.

Signs of renewed single-family residential construction

activity appeared in some areas, while nonresidential and multi-family residenti
construction remained largely dormant.

A potential for renewed inventory ad-

justments continues to exist. Layoffs and wage disputes created crosscurrents
in labor markets.

Coal has stimulated business activity in the district.

The impact of Hurricane Eloise on the regional economy has been considerable.

Substantial wind and water damage to tourist accommodations occurred

in coastal Florida. Foul weather diminished tourist traffic and limited the
growth of retail sales, particularly in coastal areas.

Substantial damage

to corn and peanut crops, pecan groves, farm buildings, and homes occurred
in rural Alabama.

Mid-Louisiana reports a disappointing soybean crop because

of heavy rains; however, the sugar cane crop is reportedly the largest ever.
Excessive moisture has also hampered corn and soybean yields in Tennessee.
Despite the hurricane's effects, directors report slow improvement in
retail sales in many areas. However, sales in many localities remain below
1974 levels.

Scattered reports are received of renewed reluctance to buy.

The strongest recovery in sales appears to be in Tennessee, where gains in
relation to 1974 levels are indicated.
The torpor of the construction industry continues, except for scattered
reports from directors and lenders of renewed activity in the single-family
residential sector, particularly in the state of Tennessee.

A scarcity of

mortgage funds is a recurrent theme in assessments of construction activity.
Concerning the nonresidential sector, the latest survey of office space in
Atlanta finds a vacancy rate of 20 percent, with continuing increases in

store as additional structures are completed.

Excessive stocks of commercial,

office, and warehouse space are noted in reports from Florida.

In Louisiana

and Mississippi improvement is noted in building permits granted, but much
of this activity is governmental. Large electrical generating plant construction projects are reported in both Louisiana and Alabama.

The multi-

family residential market remains depressed, with sales of condominiums during
August in the Miami area 69 percent below the 1974 level. In Jacksonville,
although condominium sales were the best this year, only 4.3 percent of the
1,500 units in inventory was sold.
Two reports emphasize a continuing potential for renewed inventory
reductions, should demand fail to increase as expected.

Customers of an

iron foundry, thinking that their inventory adjustments were complete, had
increased their orders. Now sales of fabricated metal products have failed
to meet expectations, and a hold has been placed on foundry shipments
scheduled for late September.

In addition, although a large retailer notes

lengthening delivery times and short supplies of piece goods, he states that
insufficient increases of demand could cause a stock liquidation similar to
that in 1974.
A membership survey by a purchasing managers association in Georgia found
the following trends:

lead times are lengthening on goods ordered; higher

prices are reported by 40 percent, as in the previous month; 55 percent report
prices unchanged; three-quarters anticipated higher prices over the next three
months, compared to two-thirds in the previous month; reductions in inventories
are indicated by about one-third and unchanged stocks by about 60 percent.
District labor markets were buffeted by strikes and layoffs but benefited
from rehiring in certain industries.

The strike by flight attendants against

National Airlines, which began September 1, still continues.
issue is comparability of wages with those of other carriers.

The central
Proposals for

a five-year, no strike agreement are being considered by seven unions
which represent National Airlines employees.

An indefinite layoff of 500

workers, in addition to the 750 furloughed in March, began October 6 at
the Ford tfotor Company assembly plant near Atlanta. These additional
layoffs during a period of the year in which production is usually high are
explained by weak demand for the intermediate-sized models manufactured at
the plant. Near Birmingham, a lack of orders for steel has caused the
shutdown of a U.S. Steel Corporation plant which employs 700 to 800 workers.
A Georgia chemical manufacturer has recalled 600 workers after a shutdown
which lasted for six months, following settlement of a dispute concerning
terms for extending a labor contract. A Florida iron foundry has recalled
its second shift for molding of heavy castings.
off in April.

These employees were laid

In Tennessee 300 workers have been recalled by a manufacturer

of baseboard electric heaters and electric can openers. An additional 200
employees are expected to be recalled within four to six weeks when production
of portable electric fans resumes. In Alabama depletion of the state's unemployment conpensation pension funds has necessitated a deduction, beginning
October 1, of one-half of 1 percent from workers' paychecks in order to
fund unemployment compensation payments.

This is the first time in the history

of the state program that such contributions have been necessary. Borrowing
from the federal government will also supplement the fund.
Coal is creating significant business activity in the district. Two
deep shaft coal mines are to be sunk near Birmingham at a cost of about $50
million each. Production is expected to begin in 1978.

Coal will be furnished

under a long-term contract to six Japanese steel companies.

In Mobile, Alabama,

the prospective increase in coal exports has resulted in an effort to expand
port facilities to accommodate increased shipments of coal.

Construction of

additional coal-powered electrical generating plants has led to an announcement
by Southern Railway of plans to build facilities for coal loading, storage,

and blending at an Alabama location.

Following its completion in 1977,

this plant will receive coal from barges on the Mississippi River and then
distribute it to trains for transportation to generating plants.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO
Observers in the Seventh District agree that an upturn in the general
economy has been under way since the spring. The expansion is expected
to continue, probably through 1976, with total output and the average price
level both up about 5 to 6 percent year-to-year.

Many important district

manufacturers of capital goods and components are still cutting output or
at least have noted no improvement in demand. Large retailers report that
consumers are still cautious. Nevertheless, there is little concern among
informed observers in the district that the upturn will "abort," as expressed elsewhere.

Demand for workers continues relatively weak. Virtually

all goods and supplies are readily available.

Inventories are generally in

line at the retail level and manufacturers increasingly are achieving a
desired balance.

Some types of equipment are being offered at "discounts

from list," but underlying pressures to raise prices as and if markets
permit are strong. Construction prospects remain very poor. Harvesting
of generally excellent crops is proceeding at a faster-than-normal pace.
Commercial bank loan demand remains slow.
It appears that executives are less convinced of the durability of
the uptrend than their forecasting teams.

Market analysts for certain

firms producing both business equipment and consumer goods say that
operating managers are "scared" and are tending to under-schedule production,
despite possible lost sales.

This caution reverses the pre-recession exu-

berance that resulted in excessive inventories.
The preponderance of producer equipment manufacturing in this district
accounts for the less pronounced recovery here.

Demand for materials handling

equipment, logging equipment, and lighter construction and farm equipment,

and machine tools is still sliding. Producers of certain large equipment
for mining and earth moving continue to operate at the limits of their
capacity.

Overall, producers of equipment in this district, however, appear

to be reducing output. Analysts expressed surprise at the increase
reported for the business equipment component of the FRB index for August.
Heavy truck sales remain at a very depressed level, but there are early signs
that a revival is under way because of continuing gains in highway freight.
Increases in sales of all classes of trucks are expected for 1976, but not
to the peak levels of 1973-74.
Large retailers report some gradual improvement in sales in recent months,
both from catalogs and at stores, but physical volume is still below last
year.

Gains are reported for all regions, but the north central area remains

relatively weak.

Credit sales volume has increased relative to total sales

and delinquency experience has improved. A Chicago-area department store
chain has begun to honor both major bank credit cards, the first full-line
department store in the area to do so. Reports of changes in sales by product
line are quite mixed, although auto parts and related maintenance are strong
everywhere.

Outlets for furs, jewelry, expensive cars, and other luxuries

report that sales remained strong throughout the recession.
Unemployment remains at high levels in the district and appears to
be rising further, especially in Illinois.

Increasingly, manufacturing

operations are being shifted to other areas, mainly the South, where compensation scales may be only half as great.

Only in rare cases is organized labor

prepared to make concessions on existing contracts.

Teachers and other

public employees have been successful in forcing substantial advances in compensation despite budget stringencies.

Unexpectedly heavy enrollments at

large public colleges, attributed to weak job markets, have overloaded facilities and some schools will not accept new applications for the spring.

Virtually all materials and finished goods are readily available.
(Oil and natural gas will not cause problems in the district this winter.)
Price concessions are reported in some markets, but virtually all manufacturers expect to increase prices further as demand improves.
Steel executives are indignant over the recent CWPS report which they
believe understates future demand and drastically underestimates the
industry's needs for capital. The October 1 price increases for steel seem
to be holding up.

Steel imports are running at a lower rate than expected.

Steel consumption is expected to be up 6 to 7 percent next year, which could
mean a 15 percent rise in shipments because user inventories have been reduced
this year. By year-end 1976 shortages could be a problem again.
Construction activity has not improved, except for some rise in singlefamily housing. The recent trend toward disintermediation has caused S&Ls to
closely restrict new commitments.

In the Chicago area single-family home

permits have increased this year, but are almost 40 percent below the
average for 1971-73. Permits for apartments are down sharply from last year's
low level to a rate only one-fourth as great as in the good years. Architects
for residential, commercial, and industrial projects have "nothing on the
shelf or on the boards."

A large surplus of office and store space exists

in all major centers. Mobile home shipments are expected to total only
220,000 units for 1975. A pickup in both conventional housing and mobile
homes is expected for 1976, but a significant rise for both sectors depends
on availability of credit which is increasingly uncertain.

EIGHTH DISTRICT—ST. LOUIS
Business activity in the Eighth District continues to increase somewhat
according to recent reports of area businessmen.

The recovery, although rela-

tively slow, appears to be fairly broadly based. Manufacturing continues to
expand; several firms report production near capacity levels.

Consumer durables

production is reported to be up from the rate of earlier months. Retail sales
are increasing somewhat on a seasonally adjusted basis. Residential construction
is increasing, but nonresidential construction remains generally at a low ebb.
Savings inflows at thrift institutions have slowed considerably in recent months,
and mortgage rates have been rising.

Commercial and industrial loans at large

district banks have increased somewhat in recent weeks.
Manufacturing continues the improvement noted in previous months, although
activity is still well below year-ago levels. Respondents report an upturn in
production of consumer durables. Appliance sales are also up, spurred by increased residential construction.

St. Louis area manufacturers of clothing,

lubrication and welding equipment, and materials used in construction report production at near capacity levels; some have recently added additional shifts.
Employment has increased somewhat, according to the latest available data.
In some states and metropolitan areas, however, there has been little or no
gain. A similarly mixed picture is presented by unemployment; but the rate of
unemployment in the St. Louis area has declined somewhat from the 9 percent peak
in the summer.
Retail sales are increasing, with many firms indicating the real volume of
sales at about last year's rate following a seasonally adjusted low near the
end of the year. Automobile sales are reported to be less than in the same
period last year, but new model sales are reported to be off to a good start.
Sales of foreign cars appear especially strong.

In the agricultural sector, prices of meat and feed grains remain relatively high. Demand for pork is expected to remain relatively strong and
pork prices relatively high through most of the next year, but some short-term
weakness is expected in broiler prices. Most of the Kentucky tobacco crop was
cut and housed early because of drought, but the crop is reported to be good.
A good soybean crop also appears in prospect, but the cotton crop in west Tennessee is characterized as a "disaster."
Many parts of the district report rising activity in residential construction, but little or no recovery in nonresidential construction.

The apartment

vacancy rate in the St. Louis area is reported to have fallen from 14 percent
last year to only 2 percent now. The industry representatives believe that such
a low vacancy rate will provide incentive for a sharp increase in construction
of new apartments.
Mortgage rates in the district have risen and lenders anticipate further
increases. Withdrawals from passbook accounts are reported at both thrift institutions and commercial banks. Thrifts report a new inflow of funds, although not
at the rapid rate experienced in earlier months.

Total time deposits at large

district banks have shown little change over the last few months.

Total loans

at these large banks have increased somewhat in recent weeks, paced by increases
in commercial and industrial loans. This increased loan demand appears to be
more from intermediate-sized firms than from large ones.

Some banks report

rising credit demands for plant expansion and for building inventories. Consumer
instalment loans have shown little change in recent weeks.

NINTH DISTRICT—MINNEAPOLIS
Entering the final months of 1975, the district's economy appears
to be improving, despite continuing poor performance in a few key sectors.
Retail spending picked up markedly in early summer.

Farm income prospects

have been fair to good, and labor market conditions have stabilized. Bank
loan growth has recently improved, but savings deposit growth at district
commercial banks and savings and loan associations slowed somewhat during
the third quarter. Construction and manufacturing activity, however, have
not yet begun to recover.
Minnesota retail sales rose sharply in May and remained at high levels
through July. According to retailers' reports this sales upturn continued
at a slower rate into August and September. Home appliances have been
selling, and clothing sales have been good. Back-to-school promotions did
extremely well in some stores, depleting inventories, while promotions in
other stores were disappointing.

Inventories are being kept in close check,

and retailers generally expect sales to continue to increase this fall.
Although still down from a year ago, recent district automobile sales
have continued stronger than national sales. However, this region's share
of the national market has dropped from last year's peak and is approaching
the traditional level. Last year at this time the price increase on 1975
models spurred very strong sales of the remaining 1974 models.

This year

dealers reported generally weak sales of the remaining 1975 models. Dealers
attributed this to the fact that the price increases this year are not as
large as last year and that there is a substantial increase in gasoline
mileage on the 1976 models.

The district's summer tourist business was excellent.

The number of

tourists was up throughout the district, and many resort owners reported
improved profits.

Expectations for winter business are good: advance

reservations at some resorts are already ahead of a year earlier.
Total district cash farm receipts for the first half of 1975 were down
sharply from 1974 but remained above 1973 levels.

Future receipts from crop

marketing should remain fairly high since prices have been strong and district
prospects have indicated improved harvests over last year.

On the livestock

side, feedlot operators remain hesitant to expand, though the third quarter
did see a modest increase in the number of cattle on feed.
The sharp rise in district unemployment earlier this year appears to be
ending. In July-August the district's unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted,
was 6.8 percent and was up only 0.1 percent from the second quarter. This
contrasted to 0.6 and 1.1 percent increases in the first and second quarters.
This summer's marked increase in district "Help Wanted" advertising reflected
the recent improvement in district labor market conditions.

Manufacturing

employment continued to decline this summer, though at a slower rate, and
initial claims remained substantially above a year ago.
The second-quarter pickup in homebuilding was not sustained in the
third quarter. Housing unit authorizations in July-August only matched
second-quarter levels. Recent figures, though improved from the beginning
of this year, were well below the numbers issued in the early 1970s. Also,
district nonresidential building spending remained down from a year ago.
Savings deposit growth at district commercial banks and savings and
loan associations slowed somewhat in the third quarter, following rapid
growth during the first half of 1975. The slowdown largely reflected the
growing attractiveness of U.S. Government Securities, whose yields have risen
above the highest rates that savings institutions are permitted to pay.

Mortgage loans closed and mortgage loan commitments by district S&Ls
continued to climb rapidly in the third quarter. However, if past
relationships prevail, S&Ls will soon be scaling back the volume of
new loan commitments to match the slower savings growth. Loan growth at
district commercial banks strengthened substantially in September from
the weak pattern that had existed during 1975.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
The signs of economic recovery are confirmed by increased manufacturing
activity in the Tenth District.

Manufacturers' inventories as a whole appar-

ently are still higher than desired, with stock runoffs proceeding and expected
to continue until the end of 1975. Materials prices are viewed as bound to
rise. Despite record or near-record crops of wheat, corn, and soybeans, farm
prices in the aggregate have posted firm gains. This increase in farm prices
is attributable to reduced supplies of pork and to grain exports. Bank loan
demand is weak, except for a small increase in consumer instalment credit
(primarily auto loans). The weakness in commercial loans reflects both inventory liquidation and little construction activity.
Inventory liquidation by district manufacturers appears likely to continue
until year-end. While some purchasing agents say that they have completed their
reductions in inventories, most want to reduce their stocks some more. Inventory levels of certain materials, notably steel, reflect recent stockpiling,
rather than unintentional accumulation.

Agents welcome improving business as

an aid in getting inventories down to desirable levels quickly, not as a reason
for ending the liquidation. Buyers are now able to get what they need, but
several expect shortages to develop as things tighten up in the months ahead,
tfeny agents report recent price increases by their suppliers; all expect prices
to go up in the near future.
Although August beef production was 6 percent above a year ago, total
red meat output actually fell 5 percent for the month due largely to a 28
percent decline in pork production.

However, the record high hog prices

that farmers are presently receiving are expected to foster larger farrowings
in the near future. The recent hog and pig report indicated that farrowings

may rise 6 percent above year-earlier levels in the December-February quarter.
Meanwhile, cattlemen are continuing to reduce inventories, with the August 1975
cattle-kill 9 percent over last year and 29 percent over August 1973. These,
cutbacks in meat production, together with the bright prospects for grain
exports, have bolstered farm prices. The index of prices received by farmers
rose 3 percent in the month ending September 15, and now stands 18 percent over
the 1975 low reached in March.
Corn and soybean harvest is progressing rapidly in most areas. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture now estimates corn and soybean production at 5.74
billion bushels (a record) and 1.47 billion bushels (second highest on record),
respectively.

Rapid harvesting may result in some price softening in the near

term as the trade nervously awaits removal of an export embargo to the USSR.
The Russian sunflower seed harvest is now anticipated to be even worse than
had been expected and this may increase U.S. soybean exports, providing export
bans are lifted before Russian needs for vegetable oil have been filled from
alternative sources.
Wheat seeding is progressing on schedule in the Tenth District except
for delayed planting in southwestern Kansas and western Oklahoma due to lack
of moisture.

The general concensus is that winter wheat acreage in 1975-76

will be about the same as 1974-75 acreage in 1;he district.

However, it is

expected that more fertilizer will be applied this year than last? reflecting
lower fertilizer prices as well as the general optimism of farmers on wheat
prices.
Tenth District banks continue to report that loan demand is generally
weak and few bankers expect significant improvement by year-end. Business
loan demand is strong only in energy-related businesses.

Caution on the

part of businesses in rebuilding inventories and in expanding capacity

Is holding down loan demand.

Construction lending for one- to four-family

structures has increased somewhat, but lending for multi-family structures
is still very low.

Large inventories, along with high construction and

financing costs, are depressing the demand for construction loans. Consumer instalment lending has increased slightly in recent weeks. Several
banks reported a small pick-up in auto loans, while others reported above
seasonal use of credit cards.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Despite the suspension of the oil depletion allowance, drilling activity
in Texas continues at a rate nearly 20 percent ahead of a year ago. Higher
prices for new oil and natural gas sold in the intrastate market account for
most of the 7,855 wells drilled so far this year. Most efforts, however, are
concentrated on developmental drilling—recovering more oil from proven fields—
while riskier exploratory drilling has been deemphasized.

Lack of a national

energy policy is cited as the major factor that has led oilmen to steer away
from high-risk ventures.

Exploratory drilling offshore, for example, has come

to a virtual standstill.
Increased drilling activity worldwide has continued to fuel the demand
for oil field equipment.

The state's largest manufacturer of oil field equipment

estimates demand is running 25 percent ahead of a year ago.

Several producers

report a year's production of unfilled orders on their books.
are also experiencing brisk sales.

Industry suppliers

Some steel fabricators, for example, have

been able to sustain high production levels by shifting resources to their oil
field equipment business and away from construction-related products.
The current upswing in the Texas industrial production index has been largely due to the recovery in petrochemicals—the biggest sector in the index. Chemical manufacturers now warn the recovery may be short-lived.

The recent strength

has been mainly due to a heavy influx of orders by user industries to replenish
inventories.

But because purchases by users are currently outpacing their sales,

new orders are expected to fall once stocks have been brought up to desired
levels. The upturn in chemical production, which is dependent on petroleum-based
feed stocks, has stimulated much of the 10 percent increase in crude oil refining since May.
Apparel and textile manufacturers also report production continues to grow
on a deluge of new orders that; began last April.

Clothing retailers, especially

large chain stores, are rebuilding inventories. One indication of the strength
of the wholesale market was the quantity of orders placed by retailers with
manufacturers last summer. According to one industry spokesman, area manufacturers accepted one-third more orders than they could comfortably produce without extending delivery schedules.
Commensurate with increased manufacturing activity, the labor market for
production workers in Texas continues to improve. After declining during the
first half of the year, factory employment has risen since July, and the trend
will likely continue.

The average manufacturing workweek, seasonally adjusted,

is 40.9 hours, substantially above the February low of 39.7 hours.- Moreover,
the layoff rates for major Texas cities have been at least halved since January,
and recent gains in the quit rates suggest workers sense job prospects are
improving.
A survey of new car dealers indicates consumer interest in the new models
is much higher than it was a year ago.

Improved gas mileage and a smaller in-

crease in sticker prices were cited for the more favorable reception of the
1976 models.

In addition, buyers appear more willing to accept the added ex-

pense of optional equipment.

(It must be remembered, however, that this year's

models come stripped down, and the back seat in one car is optional.) A Fort
Worth dealer feels buyers plan to keep their new cars longer and are willing to
spend more for a model equipped for their individual needs.

Several dealers

warn that sales this year may be slowed by a shortage of new cars. Auto workers
appear reluctant to work overtime this fall and heavy demands for some smaller
models are expected to keep dealer inventories below desired levels.
Since April, sales at Eleventh District department stores have been increasing at a brisk pace.

Over the past 60 days, however, the composition of sales

has changed somewhat as there has been a marked pickup in purchases of durable
goods, especially big-ticket items.

Executives with the leading stores attribute

much of the increase to greater response to a normal level of promotional
activity.

The manager of a Dallas store points out that recent big-ticket pur-

chases were being made by customers who differ from the typical buyer two or
three years ago. Then, customers were predominantly interested in buying "the
top of the line," with prices playing a secondary role. Today's buyers, on the
other hand, are extremely price conscious and are trading down in their purchases.
Agricultural conditions in the Eleventh District remain generally favorable.
Harvests of corn and grain sorghum are about two-thirds complete and ahead of
last year's pace. The cotton harvest is on schedule but only one-fourth finished.

Cold, wet weather on the High and Low Plains of Texas late last month

has substantially reduced the expected yield of cotton from September 1 estimates. Wheat seeding is progressing well, but much of the dryland crop needs
rain to establish a stand.
Livestock are in good condition. However, top soil moisture is limited,
and fall grazing prospects are deteriorating.

Heavy marketing of livestock

continues as ranchers closely cull herds in anticipation of high feed costs this
winter. The number of cattle and calves slaughtered in Texas through August of
this year is 42 percent larger than in the same period of 1974 and compares with
only a 16 percent increase for the nation.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO
Our directors view the recovery as slower than anticipated.

Business

investment plans are cautious and inventories continue to be held down to
levels matching orders. Residential construction activity shows mixed trends
in this district but on balance is recovering despite some problems associated
with higher interest rates. Demand for loans is described by banks as being
steady rather than strong, with the greatest weakness being in industrial or
national accounts.
The pace of economic recovery is slow and business conditions reflect
that situation. Few of our directors report any major change in their investment plans.

They regard plant capacity as adequate to meet existing demand,

and in industries such as aluminum and lumber investment levels have been reduced somewhat.

Businesses also appear to be keeping inventories in line with

sales, and no directors report any significant increase in order backlogs.
Firms are experiencing a major reduction in estimated delivery times and report
no shortages.
Orders for commercial aircraft remain weak, but orders for electronic
equipment have increased.

The lumber industry faces both lower volume and

prices, while prices for pulp and paper remain steady. No recovery is expected
for lumber until construction activity recovers.

In contrast, demand for cor-

rugated paper products is stronger, reflecting increased consumer demand. Generally, retail sales appear to be a major source of strength in the recovery,
and retailers appear to be reasonably optimistic about sales over the rest of
the year.
Residential housing activity is improving, but there remains considerable
variation across the district.

Construction expenditure increases as high as

40 percent above last year are reported in the Seattle area. Vacancy rates are

low—less than 5 percent—and home prices have been pushed up accordingly.
In California most of the activity appears to be centered in the north.
Usually southern California accounts for 60 percent of the housing starts, but
currently 68 percent are in the northern half of the state.

The Bank of America

expects that there will be a modest uptrend for the state as a whole over the
next six months, despite this weakness in southern California.

Some directors

think that higher interest rates, in part caused by Treasury borrowings, may
restrain the housing industry until 1976, when lower rates are expected. In
Oregon the recent rise in interest rates has pushed mortgage rates close to
the state's 10 percent ceiling on loans under $50,000. Further increases would
cut real estate financing in that state.
Agricultural prospects in this district appear to be good. Farmers continue to expand acreage under cultivation and they are encouraged by reductions
in some costs. For example, nitrogen-forming fertilizers, which had been $220
a ton in early 1975, are now offered at $64 a ton. Farm equipment dealers have
large inventories, and significantly reduced prices are being offered. The
strength of Russian grain orders, however, remains an unknown factor for wheat.
Storage facilities for potatoes and other crops are being increased in eastern
Washington and Idaho to meet increasing demand for frozen and processed foods.
Bankers describe the demand for loans as being steady with no particularly
strong sectors. Loan demand is greatest in such categories as consumer credit,
small business, and retail loans.

Some banks report agricultural loan demand

as being somewhat weaker and they ascribe this to the increased liquidity of
farmers. Over the past few months there has been a strengthening of loan demand
in California from utilities, areospace, and retail industries.

General manu-

facturing, transportation, aluminum and forest products are weak.

Several banks

commented on the lack of demand from their national accounts and heavy industry.

