CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 10, 1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . .

4
7
i

First District - Boston . . . .

. . . . . .

1

Second District - New York

. . . . . .

4

. . . . . .

7

.

Third District - Philadelphia
Fourth District - Cleveland

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Fifth District - Richmond .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

Sixth District - Atlanta

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

Seventh District - Chicago
Eighth District - St. Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

.

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Tenth District - Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Eleventh District - Dallas

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

Twelfth District - San Francisco

. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

SUMMARY*

The tone of the Redbook this month can be described as "cautiously
optimistic."

Virtually every District reports that its economic slide has

bottomed out and its economy is moving in a positive direction.

The

recovery process described by Boston and Chicago is still quite weak,
while the rebound in Minneapolis and Dallas is somewhat more solid-­
though not robust.

Unemployment rates are still very high, but this

month's reports suggest distinct progress in most Districts.

However,

inflation shows some well-publicized signs of heating up again.

An

analysis of the national economy by sector produces an equally mixed
picture.

The manufacturing sector is weak but seems to show distinct

signs of improvement.

New orders are up and inventory stocks are down.

Retailers report sales slightly above last year's levels, and tourism is
rather strong.

Current crop prospects in the agricultural sector are

inconclusive, and farm earnings for the first six months of 1975 are below
those of 1974.
country.

Construction is still very weak in most regions of the

Bank lending to consumers is picking up, but commercial loan

demand remains soft.

Disintermediation is also showing signs of becoming

troublesome in a few Districts.
One of the most encouraging developments to surface in the reports
this month is a brightening in the job markets across the nation.

Many

Districts report declining unemployment rates, albeit from very high
levels.

St. Louis reports that total employment is finally rising again

in its region, and one Minneapolis director describes the labor market in
a part of that District as "tight."

Philadelphia, Richmond, and Dallas

note a lengthening of the average workweek in their Districts.

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

The outlook for inflation is not as encouraging.

In varying degrees,
Directors of

most Districts report renewed concern over rising prices.

the Minneapolis Bank see "no widespread resurgence of rapid inflation" for
the present, but this confidence is not mirrored in the other reports.
Richmond, New York, Chicago and San Francisco all note the anxiety of
their respective business communities over the prospect of rekindled infla­
tion.

Despite substantial amounts of unused capacity, several basic manu­

facturing industries are reported to be raising prices.

The fear of a

reimposition of price controls is mentioned by San Francisco as a reason
contributing to the recent price hikes.
In most parts of the country manufacturing is starting an upswing.
Richmond, Atlanta and Philadelphia all report higher levels of new manu­
facturing orders.

Petroleum, chemicals and metals are strong in the

Dallas District, while mining and pollution control equipment are bright
spots for Chicago.
nearly over.

The process of cutting inventories appears to be

The only consistently weak area in manufacturing is the

capital goods sector, especially for New York and Chicago.
Retail sales are a bit more encouraging.

New York and Dallas both

note that department store sales are quite strong in their regions.
sales are also showing gradual improvement.

Auto

Richmond and New York also

mention that the tourist business in those regions does not seem to have
suffered much from the recession.
region to region.

The agricultural reports vary from

Chicago is optimistic since recent rains have improved

the chances for record crops in several states within that District.

How­

ever, Kansas City reports that rainfall has come too late to help the fall
crops in its area.

Both Richmond and Kansas City report that cash

receipts from farm marketings for the first half of 1975 were below levels
posted a year ago in their regions.

The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of
the country.

Atlanta, St. Louis and Minneapolis report marginal improve­

ments in the health of that sector, but these areas are clearly the
exception.

The general picture is still one of weak or sluggish markets

for single-family housing and very depressed markets for multifamily units.
Nonresidential construction is also badly depressed.

The dual culprits

are reported to be high construction costs and uncertainty about future
mortgage rates and financing.
The situation of the country's banking community has changed little
in the last few weeks.

Loan demand is generally weak, with the exception

of consumer loans which are showing some life in Richmond, St. Louis and
Kansas City.

Boston notes that loan officers in its area are still "occu­

pied with a lot of workouts."

The picture on deposit flows is rather

mixed with some Districts reporting net inflows while others report mild
outflows.

Disintermediation is not yet a serious problem, but several

Banks mention concern in their regions that it could become serious.
Kansas City and St. Louis both indicate that the possibility of future
disintermediation may be a drag on recovery of the housing industry.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The directors remain convinced that the economy has recovered; they
are also convinced that the recovery will be modest, requiring patience.
They have not yet become optimistically aggressive in their thinking.

Lay­

ing a few tempered plans, the directors are responding conservatively and
tentatively to improvements in business conditions.

The July unemployment

rate for New England dropped to 11.1 percent from June's 11.5.

Massachu­

setts' rate is unchanged at 12.3 percent while those of Connecticut and
Rhode Island dropped to 9.5 and 14.9 percent, respectively.
The retail trade picture is mixed.

In general, volume is not coming

back convincingly, despite national trends.

One director, engaged in

retailing, continues to report strong sales.

He admits to outperforming

others in his area and reports that sales were well above plan last month.
This month, sales are running less ahead of expectations.

In view of this

experience, he is stocking somewhat more in anticipation of a good fall
season.

He reports that manufacturers' inventories are well in hand and

distress merchandise is dead and gone.

Retail bureaus in other cities and

states report a much blander state of affairs.
sary spark to business.
recent months.

Promotions remain a neces­

The banking reports continue as they have in

All categories of loan demand are weak and there is little

evidence of any imminent activity either.
Businessmen seem to be facing a lot of problems and they have no great
confidence in an agonizingly slow recovery.
occupied with a lot of workouts.

Basically, loan officers are

In particular, the bankers report that

developers are principally trying to get out from under their commitments.
Also, savings deposits have begun to show significant weakness at commer­
cial banks and savings banks alike.

Interest rates are expected to

continue their climb, but only modestly.
depressed in New England.

Construction activity remains

Big projects are sparse, so active firms

scramble to pick up small jobs.

The future seems to hold little prospect

for keeping busy, however.
Directors selling to manufacturers report that business has not
changed a lot.

Shipments are weak and order backlogs are providing the

basis for production.

They are encouraged by reports of declining inven­

tories in the economy, but they have yet to see any activity in new orders.
Professors Houthakker, Eckstein, Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin were
available for comment this month.

Houthakker is confident about the

economy and the direction of policy; the others discussed various misgiv­
ings.

Houthakker sees a relatively slow recovery, and, given the circum­

stances, he feels this is the appropriate path for the economy.

We should

not become terribly concerned about price scares; however, should OPEC
raise oil prices more than $1.50/barrel, or should crop prices move mark­
edly, monetary policy might be more expansionary.

Otherwise, he is content

to see M1 grow near the lower end of the 5-7.5 percent range.
Eckstein, on the other hand, is very worried about prices.

He feels

the Fed should speak up against instant oil price decontrol, a major factor
in the 1976 dilemma of the Board; however, even without decontrol he feels
that money growth must exceed 8 percent next year.

He believes 7.5 percent

money growth is a good long-run number, so it is the task of policy to
repress inflationary shocks in every way possible so that money demand is
not forced to grow at too rapid a rate.
Samuelson is also worried about prices.

In view of depressed levels

of capacity utilization, he expects no endogenous price pressures until
1977.

However, exogenous pressures on prices may weaken the outlook.

The

recovery is weak, and those who paint a rosy picture depend on an inventory
cycle to carry the economy.

Only luck would make 7.5 percent money growth

optimal from 1975:11 to 1976:11.

If things begin to boom, policy may reduce

money growth below 6 percent.
Solow shares the opinions of Eckstein and Samuelson.

He feels that the

economy is in a critical phase and that overly restrictive policy may retard
economic activity.

Current policy is too restrictive; a more aggressive

money target is needed until vigorous growth is firmly in hand.
Tobin remains of the opinion that the economy is so low and has so far
to go that there will be plenty of time later to worry about fine tuning
once the economy begins respectable growth.

He does not feel comfortable

forecasting big increases in velocity to permit current money targets to
finance the recovery.

The preconditions of previous recoveries were much

more encouraging than the current situation; weak fiscal stimulus, dishev­
eled balance sheets, and an insecure future temper his forecast of velocity
increases.
targets.

He too would like to see a substantial upward revision of money

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The gradual improvement in business conditions indicated in recent
months by observations of Second District directors and other business
leaders remains in evidence.

According to our respondents, the retail

sales picture continued to improve in August and early September, and some
retailers reported they were now understocked in some lines.
capital spending, however, remains weak.

Business

The weakening of business loan

demand in the District appears to have abated, and most loan officers con­
tacted recently looked for a pickup in demand in the near future.

The

strengthening of the dollar on the foreign exchange market in general was
believed to be likely to have little impact on U. S. trade.
Perhaps the brightest spot in the current economic situation has been
continued improvement in the retail sales picture.

The president of a

nationwide chain of department stores reported that his firm had cashed
many Federal income tax rebate checks.

While this suggested that a large

part of the rebates was spent rather than saved, the retailer anticipated
consumer demand for general merchandise to continue to rise well into 1976.
He reported that his company, which had experienced a large inventory over­
hang a few months ago, was now understocked in apparel lines.

Retail sales

in upstate New York, which already had been picking up in recent months,
improved further in August, and resort areas were reported to have had a
very good tourist season.

Although retail sales in New York City continued

to lag behind the nationwide performance, reflecting in part the high rate
of unemployment in the city, sales at large department stores showed the
best improvement since September 1974.
to have continued in early September.

This improvement, moreover, appears
Merchants were generally optimistic

and reported very good business over the Labor Day holiday, when many large

department stores remained open.

An even better performance was shown

over the past month at stores in the suburbs.
On the darker side, business spending on plant and equipment apparently
remains weak.

For example, the president of the department store mentioned

above saw no evidence of a reactivation of capital spending plans in his
industry, noting that the current emphasis was on increasing the produc­
tivity of existing facilities rather than on expansion.

The chairman of a

multinational oil company stated that business capital spending in general
appeared to be lower than had been expected last spring.

He reported that

his own firm had cut its investment plans for 1975 by $100 million before
the year began and by another $300 million in January because of deterio­
rating profits.

The Buffalo Branch Directors also saw no evidence of a

reactivation of capital spending plans that had previously been shelved,
with one director citing continued excess capacity, escalating building
costs, and relatively high interest rates as factors inhibiting capital
spending.

An upstate banker in a resort area, however, reported on plans

for expansion of tourist facilities.
A number of respondents expressed concern over a possible resurgence
of inflation.

Among others, the president of a large nonferrous metal

firm stated he was "fearful" about inflation.

He pointed to the currently

low price/cost ratio in his industry and to the large proportion of capi­
tal spending for environmental protection adding nothing to productive
capacity.
prices.

These factors, he felt, would put upward pressure on materials
The chairman of the oil company felt that the current spending

pattern, with consumers' outlays rising while business capital spending
was not, could well have inflationary implications.

And the Buffalo Branch

Directors believed that fear of a resurgence of inflation was a major fac­
tor behind businessmen's currently cautious mood.

Regarding the demand for business loans, the Buffalo Branch Directors
reported no further weakening in such demand, as did the majority of the
loan officers at commercial banks in and outside New York City who were
contacted recently.

Moreover, nearly two-thirds of these loan officers

expected loan demand to be stronger over the coming months, with virtually
all others anticipating no change.
We recently asked our directors and other respondents about their
opinions regarding the possible impact on United States foreign trade
stemming from the strengthening of the dollar on the exchange markets.
Most respondents felt that this impact would be negligible.

They agreed

that this strengthening had not significantly eroded the competitiveness
of U. S. exports to date, and was not likely to do so in the future, and
that imports would not be spurred significantly.

In their opinion, U. S.

prices of goods continue to be attractive vis-a-vis those of foreign goods
because of the greater rates of inflation experienced by many other coun­
tries.

A senior economist at a large New York City bank stated that the

strength of the dollar in recent months was only a rebound from an under­
valued position.

The present rate in his view is nearer the equilibrium

rate and is more desirable over the longer run.

The chairman of the oil

company thought that the strengthening of the dollar should make OPEC coun­
tries less aggressive in raising oil prices this fall.

The president of

the nonferrous metal concern, however, believed the stronger dollar to
have been a factor in the increase in aluminum and stainless steel imports.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Business conditions in the Third District continue to improve.

Area

manufacturers report that new orders and shipments are higher this month
than last while inventories are lower.

Employment is also marginally higher,

and the average workweek has been extended.

However, prices paid for sup­

plies and received for finished products are both up over last month.

At

the same time, these businessmen look for further improvement over the next
six months.

Manufacturers expect new orders and inventories to be higher,

and they anticipate adding employees and lengthening the workweek.

Prices

are expected to climb, however, and capital spending plans are cautious
six months out.

The market for existing housing is active, but there's

little vigor in new housing starts.

Retailers report that sales are flat or

up slightly, and they look for some improvement through year-end.

Area

bankers report level demand deposits while savings accounts are steady or
off slightly.

In addition, bankers indicate that loan demand is flat.

Third District manufacturers, responding to this month's Business Out­
look Survey, report economic expansion for the second consecutive month.
Almost 40 percent of the respondents report an improvement in overall busi­
ness conditions this month.

The level of new orders is generally higher

and fewer than 10 percent of the respondents indicate a drop in new orders
this month.

Last January, by comparison, almost half were reporting a

decline in new orders.

Shipments of manufactured goods are up as well.

Overall, inventories are down, but there are some signs that they are stabi­
lizing.

Half of the manufacturers surveyed report no change in their

stocks on hand.

Employment is also a "plus."

Manufacturing work forces are

up slightly this month, and for the first time in a year the average work­
week is longer.

The longer-term outlook in manufacturing is optimistic.

None of the

executives surveyed expects a decline in general business activity within
the next six months while almost 90 percent anticipate improvement.

In

fact, none of the respondents expects new orders to be lower through March
and most expect them to be higher.

Moreover, almost one-third of the

executives polled plan to increase their inventories over the period.
Prospects for employment are bright as well.

None of the respondents

anticipates a reduced work force or shorter workweek, while 43 percent plan
to hire additional employees and 40 percent foresee a longer average work­
week.

Plans for capital spending are still conservative, however, with

almost 60 percent of the respondents expecting to hold the line through
late winter.
Retailers in the area report that sales are even with or slightly above
the levels of the last few months.

Soft goods and some heavily-advertised

appliances are reported to be selling well.

One retail executive looks for

sales to stay flat in real terms through the rest of this year while another
expects sales to improve by the end of the year and looks for a strong
spring.

All of the merchants contacted report that inventories have been

reduced below their 1974 levels and that inventory/sales ratios are where
they want them.
On the price front, manufacturers report higher prices this month com­
pared to last for their supplies as well as for their finished products.
One-half of those surveyed report paying higher prices compared with one­
fourth last month.

In addition, prices received for finished manufactured

goods are up slightly this month.

This is the first time since February

that the number of respondents receiving higher prices exceeds those receiv­
ing lower prices.
further.

For the longer term, manufacturers expect prices to rise

More than three-fourths of the businessmen polled expect to be

paying higher prices six months out, while almost 70 percent anticipate
receiving higher prices for the products they sell.

Retailers in the area

report paying slightly higher prices for their supplies while trying to
keep the prices they charge "competitive."

One merchant notes that his

store is finding it somewhat easier to pass along small cost increases.
The resale housing market in the area is reported to be brisk, but
new starts are minimal.

One MSB official notes that demand is strong and

there's heavy mortgage lending for used housing.

But he sees the antici­

pation of higher interest rates hampering new housing starts.

Though

mortgage rates at this contact's bank are currently 25 basis points below
Pennsylvania's legal ceiling, he feels that if the recent net outflow of
savings continues into next year, mortgage rates will go to the ceiling and
mortgage lending will be impeded.
Bankers in the District report that, in general, loan demand is flat.
The outlook is for lending to increase modestly with the recovery, but no
big pickup is foreseen during the next year.

Area financial executives

expect the economy to recover gradually with annual real growth in the
4-6 percent range through most of 1976.
improvement in unemployment.

In addition, they see only slow

All of the bankers contacted feel that infla­

tion is still a major concern and one expects double-digit inflation within
18 months.

Another banker in the District is concerned about how the recov­

ery will be financed, noting that improvements in bank liquidity have not
been substantial, and that it will be difficult for banks to raise capital.
Area bankers look for short-term interest rates to trend upward, and all
express concern over the projected Federal deficit.

They feel that bor­

rowers will be "crowded out" to some degree, and that this will put a damper
on recovery.

-10-

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Economic recovery in the Fourth District appears to be spreading
beyond consumer goods to include some types of capital goods.

Consumer

goods industries have improved gradually in response to further improve­
ment in spending and an end to reductions in inventories.
is not expected to hamper recovery.

The coal strike

Employment in the District has shown

little improvement in recent months.

Upward price pressures remain intense

but less widespread than reported last month.
Financial officers and economists in the appliance, automotive, glass,
and machinery industries reported production and orders have risen from
winter and early spring lows.

A producer of electrical and gas ranges

reported significant increases in sales since June had led to a 16 per­
cent increase in output in September and had boosted their operating rate
to 70 percent of capacity.

Another appliance producer noted production of

small appliances had picked up sharply in July and August, because of
relatively short supplies at the retail level; but sales and orders of
major appliances were still weak.

He expects only a 10 percent increase

in sales of major appliances in 1976 because of continued weakness in
housing.

A director with a machine tool firm reported incoming orders

were very strong in August.

A major glass producer that is a chief sup­

plier of the auto industry reported that orders have picked up strongly
since the trough in January-February 1975, but that future gains will slow
unless automotive output rises more than is projected.

An economist with

a machine tool firm stated its recovery appeared to be V-shaped.

Its net

orders rose 11 units in August while net orders declined 25-35 units a
month at the trough last winter.

He expects orders for small cutting tools

-11­

to increase about 25 percent over the next 12 months, or typical for the
first year of recovery.

An executive with a machinery firm reported print­

ing press orders began to pick up late in the second quarter after a fourth­
quarter low.

A financial officer for a truck and construction and

agricultural machinery producer stated orders for heavy duty trucks have
picked up rapidly each month since spring, but orders for earthmoving
machinery and mining machinery softened in August.

An economist for a

major producer of electrical machinery reported orders this quarter will
be above depressed second-quarter levels because of special export orders
this quarter.
Conditions in steel have changed abruptly in the past month as a
result of customer efforts to beat the October 1 price increase.

Econo­

mists with three major steel firms in the District report that September
order books are full, especially for the flat rolled products.

One pro­

ducer expects hedge buying will boost September shipments 20-25 percent
from the July low.

October shipments are now expected to fall back to or

slightly above the July level.

No real recovery is expected until the

first quarter of 1976.
The wildcat coal strike caused coal production to slip 7-8 million
tons.

An economist with a major coal producer reported that many miners

have returned to work.

He expects a moderate rise in coal output in 1976

(up about 5 percent from 1975) and a small price hike in coal around year­
end.

In his view, the industry has ample capacity to accommodate a

stronger rise in demand.

EPA regulations that restrict use of high sulphur

coal represent the main short-run problem for management.
As reported last month, most of our contacts do not expect capacity
or material shortages to hinder the early stages of recovery, except those
industries (especially steel and chemicals) heavily dependent on natural

-12­

gas.

The wildcat coal strike will not hinder utility or steel operations

where ample stocks of coal are reported.

Contacts in machine tools,

electrical machinery, heavy duty trucks and steel expect no capacity con­
straint for their products at least until early 1977 because of current
low utilization.

A steel firm and a capital goods producer are concerned

that they will not generate enough cash flow to support long-run capital
expenditure plans.
Our Monthly Survey of District Manufacturers shows that most respon­
dents experienced increases in new orders and shipments in August and are
still liquidating inventories.

For September, continued improvement in

orders and shipments, and a slower rate of inventory liquidation than in
recent months are anticipated.

The proportion expecting expansion in

employment and hours worked also rose.
Employment and unemployment have not improved much since the trough
in April despite improvements in several key District industries.
have been confined largely to automotive and household goods.

Recalls

A glass

producer has recalled the bulk of workers laid off during the recession.
Scattered recalls in steel are largely attributable to the bulge in
September order books rather than any fundamental improvement in market
conditions.

Generally, rubber, chemical, and capital goods have had few

recalls despite reported rising trends in orders and output in recent
months.
Consumer spending continues to climb, although real gains are appar­
ently relatively small.

A director in the consumer recreation business

commented that their revenues are 11 percent above last year.

A financial

officer for a large department store stated sales in August were better
than in previous months as well as a year earlier although big-ticket
items remained rather weak.

He noted no deterioration in collections.

-12a-

Auto sales in the District have been climbing gradually for the last
several months, but two large dealers reported inventories higher than a
year ago.

Both reported customers are buying fully-equipped cars, although

customers show more interest in the top-of-the-line smaller cars rather
than standard size cars.

A director reported his bank lengthened maturity

on car loans to 48 months because of the high price of cars.
Several directors and chief executive officers again expressed appre­
hension that current renewed cost-price pressures would inhibit overall
economic recovery.

However, our Monthly Survey of Manufacturers shows that

the percent of respondents who expect no change in prices for September
exceed the percent who expect further increases in prices.

The only con­

crete comments on price increases came from an official in the rubber
industry who reported higher costs of synthetic fibers and certain raw
materials, and a container and glassware producer who reported that glass­
ware prices were increased 5 percent in August.

On the other hand, weak

market conditions have inhibited price increases for machine tools and
certain other types of machinery.
Some bankers noted continued weakness in commercial and industrial
loans, and one expects no sizable pickup until early 1976.

Another banker

reported higher demand for credit from a paper and container company that
plans a sizable buildup of stocks in the fourth quarter of 1975.

A small

banker commented that raising the usury rate ceiling in Ohio resulted in
additional mortgage loans by his bank.

Mortgage loan demand is generally

reported to be strong, and a financial officer with one of the largest
savings and loans in the District remarked that mortgage rates were
increased again to discourage demand.

-13-

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

The September Survey of Fifth District Business Conditions reveals
continued improvement across a broad range of economic activity.

Responses

indicate sizable increases in manufacturing shipments and new orders along
with greater backlogs of orders and further reductions of inventories,
particularly of raw materials.

Inventories of finished goods apparently

declined only slightly during August.

Over 40 percent of manufacturing

respondents still view current inventory levels as excessive.

Employment

seems to have increased slightly in the manufacturing sector while hours
worked per week increased for the fourth consecutive month.

Among retail­

ers participating in our Survey, sales were generally up for the month,
and sales of big ticket items relative to total sales remained unchanged.
Prices apparently rose across a wide range as substantial numbers of manu­
facturers and retailers reported paying and receiving higher prices.

In

the banking sector, commercial and industrial loans outstanding at Weekly
Reporting Banks have declined over the past several weeks while consumer
loans continued to post modest but steady gains.

Both demand and time

deposits have shown weakness during August.
Among manufacturers responding to the September Survey, one-half
reported increases in shipments and in the volume of new orders during
August.

In addition, those reporting increases in backlogs of orders out­

numbered those reporting decreases by two to one.

In each of these areas,

the improvement was more broadly based than at any time in recent months.
These improvements in the level of business activity seem to be most pro­
nounced in the basic industries and in consumer related areas.

Textile

mills, apparel and related products, and furniture and fixtures accounted
for a sizable portion of the improvement along with primary metals and

-14­

chemicals.

Judging from the Survey, those industries which seem to be

lagging are in the machinery and equipment, and electrical equipment areas,
although the food industry also reports little change.

Inventories of

materials held by manufacturers declined further during August while
stocks of finished goods showed little change.

As in August, over 40 per­

cent of the manufacturers feel current inventory levels are excessive.
But almost all of those surveyed are satisfied with current expansion
plans.
Prices seem to have taken a turn for the worse during August, as
over half of the manufacturers responding to our Survey report paying, and
over one-third report receiving, higher prices.
yielded much the same results concerning prices.

The Survey of Retailers
The indicated price move­

ment may have contributed to the minor deterioration of the outlook for
the next six months.

While our Survey respondents remain basically opti­

mistic, that feeling seems to have weakened slightly in the past month,
despite the fact that recent optimistic expectations have been largely
borne out by business developments.

One manufacturer surveyed specifically

noted his expectation that the level of business activity will improve
during September and October and then fall off for the remainder of the
year.
Other results from our Survey of District Retailers also support the
view that business activity is continuing to improve.

Over one-half of

the retailers surveyed reported increased sales during August.

During

that period, sales of big ticket items relative to total sales remained
unchanged.

In view of the improved level of total sales, the situation in

big ticket items may be significant.

Judging from our monthly surveys,

sales of big ticket items have been declining, in both absolute and

-15­

relative terms, for the past year.

If the relative decline has abated

and total sales are, in fact, beginning to increase, the general recovery
may be due for a substantial new impetus from the durable goods sector.
Inventories at the retail level declined slightly during the month
and most Survey respondents view current levels as about right.

There is

also general satisfaction, among the retailers surveyed, with the number
and size of outlets presently operating.

Retailers also remain basically

optimistic with regard to the outlook over the next six months, expecting
improvement nationally, locally, and within their own firms.
There is a widespread expectation among Fifth District bankers that
business loan demand will increase, at least moderately, by the end of
the year.

Nevertheless, commercial and industrial loans outstanding at

Weekly Reporting Banks over the past several weeks have declined from the
level reached after a surge in demand during July.

There has been no

easing in the firm credit standards that have become common at District
banks.

Consumer loans continue to post modest but steady gains, and it

appears that some banks are becoming more interested in these types of
loans.

In fact, District banks seem more receptive to making most types

of loans, with the exception of multifamily mortgage loans.
Both demand and time deposits have shown some weakness during August,
and savings deposits at Weekly Reporting Banks declined for the first time
this year.

CD holdings have remained rather steady, while average net

Federal funds purchases and discount window borrowings have increased to
offset liability declines in other areas.
The District's cash receipts from farm marketings during the first
half of the year were 2 percent under the same period last year.
trict decline is much less than that for the nation, however.

The Dis­

-16-

Better quality marketings and improved grade prices have combined to
bring about an upward trend in the general average price for flue-cured
tobacco over the past several weeks.

Flue-cured prices for the season

through September 5 averaged 7 percent below a year earlier, however.
With gross sales also down (probably because many farmers are holding
their tobacco off the market in hopes of further improvement in prices),
value of sales is 14 percent under a year ago.

-17-

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Depressed sectors of the regional economy show signs of reviving.
Some purchasing managers enjoy a buyer's market; others question how long
it can last.

Poultry and livestock producers in the Sixth District are

already feeling the pinch of higher feed prices, partly as a result of
export sales of grain.

Impending shortages of natural gas pose relatively

mild problems for commercial and residential customers, although for cer­
tain industrial customers the outlook is less bright.
Recently announced changes in production suggest recovery in various
sectors which were previously depressed.

A Tennessee manufacturer has

announced a 16 percent increase in the production of gas and electric
ranges beginning in early September.

The increase is attributed to

increased orders over the past two months and will result in additional
employment and restoration of operations to 70 percent of capacity.

Pro­

duction is resuming after a one-year lapse at a large sawmill in Georgia.
Also, a Florida plant, which manufactures corrugated shipping containers,
is resuming production as of October 15, following an expansion program.
A Tennessee furniture manufacturer expects to begin by late September the
manufacture of a new line of furniture.

Production will begin with the

rehiring of employees laid off since last spring and over the next six
months should result in an expansion of employment.
Tourist activity appears to be strong in many areas, according to
reports from directors and other sources.
tax revenues show increases.

Hotel occupancy and associated

Some brightening has appeared in the housing

market, as new permits have increased and inventories in South Florida
and other areas are declining.

A large life insurance company reports a

-18­

decline since February in its policy lapse ratio, followed by a leveling
off of the ratio of policy loans to policy reserves.

These developments

are regarded as signs of economic strengthening.
Members of a Georgia Purchasing Managers' Organization, surveyed from
June through August, indicate that delivery times are stabilizing.

The

proportion reporting faster deliveries has declined markedly as of
August, with most respondents indicating little further change in that
month.

A marked shift has also occurred in the movement of prices.

The

percentage reporting higher prices has risen from 25 to 40 percent; the
proportion responding that prices are the same as in the previous month
has risen from 43 to 60 percent; and the proportion reporting declining
prices has fallen from one-third in June to zero in August.

Survey

results indicate that order backlogs are increasing on the whole.

Through­

out the period, declining inventories are reported by a substantially
greater number of respondents for raw materials than for finished goods.
Conversely, a larger proportion of respondents report increases in finished
goods stocks than those indicating growth in raw materials inventories.
Conversations with individual purchasing agents convey an impression of
shorter delivery times and sporadic price negotiability.

Use of escalator

clauses in contracts for items as diverse as heavy equipment and food ser­
vices is reported.

Reemergence of delays in delivery for items such as

fabricated metal products, plant, and certain printing supplies is
attributed by some to overly zealous inventory reductions by suppliers
rather than to shortages of goods at the point of manufacture.
This District's important poultry and livestock industry is feeling
effects from grain sales to Russia.
rowed the profit margin for eggs.

The increased cost of feed has nar­
Further feed cost increases or a decline

-19­
in retail prices may result in additional bankruptcies among producers and
a further curtailment in the size of the nation's egg flock, now at its low­
est point in 30 years.

In the broiler industry, placements have increased

in response to an improved feed-price ratio.

Although hog production has

again become profitable because of reduced output, producers' decisions to
increase the number of hogs await indications concerning the size of the
corn harvest and its effect on the price of feed.

Cattle producers had

hoped for increased prices of lightweight feeder calves as a result of lower
feed grain prices, but instead witnessed further declines in cattle prices
as Russian purchases increased the cost of grain.

A substantial number of

producers may be unable to survive another year of depressed cattle prices.
Recent press reports indicate that, with the possible exception of
Tennessee, shortages of natural gas will be felt primarily by industrial
users served on an interruptible basis.

Reports of adequate supplies for

residential and commercial customers come from the state energy office in
Atlanta as well as a large utility company which maintains underground stor­
age facilities for natural gas and a variety of supplementary sources of
supply.

The principal pipeline supplier of gas also confirms the adequacy

of supplies, except for large industrial customers such as electric utili­
ties using gas as a fuel for boilers.
Executives of two major regional electric utilities discount the threat
posed by a gas shortage to their companies' operations.

One relies primar­

ily upon coal as a fuel; the other, which in the past has depended primarily
upon natural gas, is in the final stage of an extensive conversion program
to permit alternate use of fuel oil.
supply and storage of liquid fuels.

Provisions include facilities for the
A series of nuclear-powered generating

facilities is being constructed by a major regional utility holding company,
and additional coal-powered units are also under construction.

Utility

-20­
spokesmen voice the opinion that users of natural gas have been tardy in
developing alternate fuel sources, in part because of reluctance to con­
front the problem and also because of the impediments to additional invest­
ment posed by shortages of capital.
A leading electric power supplier in this region anticipates a normal
cyclical increase in industrial demand for power because there is no expec­
tation of natural gas shortages severe enough to seriously curtail the
operations of its customers.

The technical difficulty was also noted of

conversion from gas to coal as a boiler fuel.

Use of coal involves substan­

tial materials handling problems and requires storage facilities and much
more complicated equipment with reduced reliability.

-21-

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Signs of improvement in business activity in the Seventh District are
becoming more evident.

Consumer confidence is strengthening and most

merchants are less gloomy.

Demand for workers has increased slightly.

Steel orders have increased, only partly because of the price rise sched­
uled for October 1.

Most firms are completing inventory liquidation pro­

grams, notably for steel, but also for other items.

Overall, the producer

goods industries are still slipping, but mining equipment and pollution
control equipment remain very strong and order cancellations in other
lines are much less frequent.
more significant again.

Increases in industrial prices are becoming

Single-family home building activity has improved

significantly, especially in the Chicago area, but remains far below ear­
lier peaks.

Recent rains have stabilized the deteriorating crop picture

in Iowa and crops in District states east of the Mississippi look excel­
lent, even better than reported earlier.
A survey of consumer confidence for the Chicago area showed a clear
improvement in the third quarter from the low ebb reached early in the
year.

Most retailers have noted some improvement in sales since July,

with a good volume of sales of back-to-school items.
items involving use of credit are still sluggish.

Sales of big ticket

Auto sales may have

been aided by a desire to avoid price increases on 1976 models.
Various evidence, including help-wanted ad volume, suggests a modest
increase in demand for workers in the past month or so.
have recalled some workers.
on indefinite layoff.

Steel companies

About 12 percent of the auto workers are still

While this is down from 39 percent last February,

no further improvement is likely in the short run.

-22-

Unemployment was estimated at 9.6 percent in August in the Chicago
area, 11.6 percent in the city, and 40 percent among Black youths.

While

estimates of local unemployment should be regarded skeptically, there is
little question that the Chicago area's job market is weaker than the
nation's, in contrast to historical experience.

The city continues to lose

employment opportunities as such important industries as printing firms
shift operations to other areas, especially the South.

An expert estimates

that 19 percent of the population of the city of Chicago are on welfare,
compared to 9 percent five years ago.
Orders have strengthened for lighter steel products.
have marked the low point, seasonally adjusted.

July appears to

Some orders have been moved

up because of the price increases announced for October 1, but inventories
of vehicle and appliance producers and various other users are believed to
be quite lean.

One large Chicago area steel company with a strong competi­

tive postition is operating at near capacity level.

This firm's output was

threatened by the coal strike in West Virginia, which appears to have ended
this week, just in time to prevent cutbacks in operations.
The drive to reduce inventories has lost momentum, although many firms
still view their holdings as excessive.

Some firms have slowed inventory

reduction programs because of increased demand for their products, but
announced or expected price increases and possible interruptions of supplies
also are factors.
Certain District producers of mining equipment and heavy construction
equipment related to mining or resource development have maintained output
at capacity levels and are pushing plans to expand capacity.

Backlogs for

large electric mining shovels and heavy overhead cranes stretch out a year
or more.

A leading producer of diesel engines has recalled workers because

-23­
of increased demand for heavy highway trucks, but this may reflect desires
of dealers to restock in anticipation of stronger final sales.

Sales of

tractors and other farm equipment, especially combines, have improved from
reduced levels earlier in the year, bolstered by prospects for improved
farm income resulting from higher prices for crops and livestock.

Gener­

ally, however, capital goods producers have been cutting output as backlogs
have eroded.
Construction activity continues at depressed levels.

Permits for

single-family homes in the Chicago area have been above last year in recent
months, but well below earlier years.
or commercial construction.

There is little hope for apartments

A builder recently canceled a 600-unit condo­

minium project in an urban renewal area near the Chicago Loop as "too risky,"
Sales of pre-owned homes have increased, but prices averaged 9 percent
higher than a year ago, only slightly less than increases reported for the
two previous years.
the year ahead.

Prices of homes are expected to rise almost as much in

Aside from higher costs of labor, materials and financing,

rising home prices are also blamed on restrictive building codes and stiffer
zoning restrictions.
Much needed rains in recent weeks arrested deteriorating crop condi­
tions in Iowa and solidified prospects for record harvests in Illinois.
Growing conditions in Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin also have been excel­
lent.

The current state of crop development much reduces the possiblity of

damage from an early frost such as occurred in 1974.

-24-

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The uptrend in business activity continues in the District, according
to reports from area businessmen.

The rate of increase, however, appears

to be rather modest, and recent employment data indicates that the District
economy may be lagging the nation as a whole.

Nevertheless, sales at both

the retail and manufacturing level, as well as construction activity, have
continued to improve in recent weeks.

Savings flows into thrift institu­

tions have slowed recently from the rapid pace earlier in the year.
Retail sales have made further gains in recent weeks.

One retail

executive reported that sales have improved through August and that he was
fairly optimistic about continued increase as the recovery gains momentum.
Automobile sales are still substantially off from the year-ago level, but
improvement has been noted from earlier months of this year.

Some foreign

car dealers have complained that they could not obtain enough cars to sat­
isfy their customers' demands, and a waiting period of two to three weeks
is required for many deliveries.
Reports from several manufacturers indicate improvement has continued
in the manufacturing sector of the economy.

A representative of the paint

coatings business reported a gradual improvement month by month.

A major

durable goods manufacturer reported that sales improved since late last
year.

He noted that during the first four to five months of the year real

production trailed last year by 30 percent on a monthly basis, but in the
last two months it has trailed by only 20 percent.

A representative of a

cutting tools firm stated that the consumer-related part of his business,
especially do-it-yourself tools, had held up well over the recession.
This firm's sales in the first six months were up two percent over a year
ago.

In addition, manufacturers of appliances, paper and products, welding

-25­

equipment, and metal connector plates used in construction, all reported
some improvement in recent months.
Latest data for total employment show an increase for the District.
Reports of the rehires and callback of workers have been made for several
months, but only recently has total employment begun to increase in most
parts of the District.

In contrast, U. S. total employment has risen

since April, indicating that the economic recovery in the District may
have lagged behind that of the nation as a whole.
The home building industry continues to show some slight improvement,
despite the higher interest rates in recent months.

The St. Louis area,

where the inventory of homes was relatively low at the beginning of the
recession, showed a substantial improvement in building activity in the
first seven months of the year over that of the previous year.
the improvement came in June and July.

Much of

According to a housing represen­

tative, housing permits are expected to show improvement in August.

Con­

siderable amounts of funds are reportedly available in thrift institutions
for loans to the home building market.

However, expectations of higher

interest rates in the future are evidently causing these institutions to
be cautious of lending at current rates.

Representatives of savings and

loan institutions indicated that the rate of growth in net savings slowed
noticeably last month.

Higher short-term rates on government and other

securities were believed to be a chief cause of this development.

Both

banks and savings and loan institutions experienced large withdrawals
from passbook savings accounts following a steady increase in this type
of account for several months.

Total time deposits at large District

banks remained approximately unchanged from July to August.
Demand for most types of loans at District banks continues to be
rather sluggish.

Commercial and industrial loans, as well as real estate

-26­

loans, continued to decline at large commercial banks in recent weeks;
however, some upturn was noted for consumer instalment loans.

-27-

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Bank directors' comments indicate that District business activity has
begun to recover.

The demand for District workers has recently picked up,

and regional labor market conditions have improved.

District construction

activity also appears to be reviving, and several directors reported con­
siderable building activity in their areas.

No widespread resurgence of

rapid inflation was seen, but several directors look for prices to con­
tinue rising due to the increased cost of doing business.

According to our

latest Quarterly Industrial Expectations Survey, District manufacturers
expect their sales to improve in the fourth quarter and early 1976, but
experienced no sales growth this spring and summer.
A feeling that District economic activity generally has improved was
conveyed by many directors' reports that labor market conditions are stable
or improving in their areas.
tions "tight,"

A North Dakota director actually termed condi­

and three directors said workers were being recalled in

their areas.
District labor force data back up these reports of a leveling off in
joblessness.

The District's unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, inched

up 0.2 percent from April to July after a 1.1 percent jump during the pre­
vious three months.

And the District's Help Wanted Advertising Index

increased 21 percent between May and July, another encouraging development.
District initial claims, however, are still running well ahead of a year ago,
so some layoffs are continuing.
Construction activity has also improved in the District.

Housing unit

authorizations in late spring and early summer were up 13 percent from a
year ago, and directors' comments indicate that homebuilding has probably
continued to revive.

Nonresidential construction has also begun to pick up.

-28-

Concern was expressed, though, that high building costs and mortgage
interest rates could restrain future building activity.
Bank directors reported no widespread resurgence of rapid inflation.
Several directors said price increases so far have been restricted to food
and fuel; they were not aware of excessive increases in other areas.

Two

directors said their firms have not experienced any renewed inflationary
pressures.

One director associated with the food industry felt that the

impact of the Russian grain sales on food prices may not be as great as
many anticipate and that the market overreacted.
Even though directors did not see a sharp return of inflationary pres­
sures, many are worried about inflation and expect prices to continue
climbing.

Several indicated that increased business costs, especially for

labor, would force firms to keep boosting prices in order to maintain
profit margins.

One director reported considerable resistance to price

decreases even in the face of falling demand because businesspeople want
to recover their costs and protect profit margins.
price controls adds to price pressures.

The possibility of wage­

A Montana director, for example,

indicated that the list prices of farm machinery in his area have been
raised largely in response to this fear.
Essentially no growth in the District's manufacturing sales occurred
this summer, but manufacturers look for sales to pick up late this year and
in early 1976.

According to our Third-Quarter Industrial Expectations Sur­

vey, second-quarter District manufacturing sales were unchanged from a year
ago and no growth is anticipated this quarter.

In real terms, sales were

undoubtedly down from a year ago since prices increased over the last twelve
months.

Respondents foresee sales increasing 4.8 percent in the fourth

quarter, however, then advancing 10.2 percent in the first quarter of 1976.

-29-

Given price increases, these expected gains do not point to any
significant pickup in District manufacturing activity.

If realized, though,

they may be large enough to help check the decline in District manufacturing
employment (it's now about 6 percent below a year ago).

Also, manufacturers

did not revise down their sales expectations as they did last May, so Dis­
tict manufacturing activity may be stabilizing.

-30-

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Two important barometers of construction activity in the Tenth
District continue to depict a weak and struggling construction sector.
Interviews with home builders revealed a dichotomy in the market, with
higher priced houses selling well while the lower priced sector remains
depressed.

However, almost all respondents paint a very bleak housing

picture for the future.

In District agriculture, the recent rains have

generally arrived too late to benefit the fall crops.

On the income side,

first-half cash receipts from farm marketings are well below last year,
but earlier 1975 farm income estimates will probably still have to be
revised upward.

Loan demand at Tenth District banks remains weak with

the exception of consumer loans, while demand deposit growth is reported
to be strong.
Data for the Tenth District on the value of construction contracts
awarded and on the number of housing permits issued continue to depict a
weak and struggling construction sector.

While the current dollar value

of all construction contracts awarded in the District rose from June to
July, the increase was much less than in the same period in 1974.

As a

result, the value of Tenth District construction awards in July was more
than 22 percent below the year-earlier level.

On a month-to-month basis,

nonresidential awards and awards for public works and utilities rose from
June to July, while residential awards fell slightly.

In comparison with

July 1974, however, only nonresidential contracts increased slightly, as
residential contracts declined and public works and utilities awards fell
by more than one-half.
On the Tenth District housing front, a leading indicator of future
housing activity, the seasonally adjusted number of privately-owned

-31­

housing permits issued, continued its decline in June after reaching a

yearly peak in April 1975.

Similarly, the number of permits issued for

single-family units, a component of the total figure, also continued to
decline from its April high.

Despite these declines, however, both of

these statistics were well above last June's level, when the number of
permits issued fell precipitously.
Interviews with Tenth District home builders provided significant
insight into the interpretation of these data.

Without exception, respon­

dents who build houses costing above $45,000 reported a very strong year.
One builder stated:

"As far as I'm concerned, everyone must be busy now.

We're as busy as we've ever been."

Another reported starts 15-26 percent

ahead of last year, while a third reported the best year in 3 years.

For

low priced home builders, however, the situation was quite different.
Starts, in this case, were about the same as last year, very depressed.
As one Home Builder Association spokesman noted:

"We're building just for

rich people."
Expectations, on the other hand, were almost universally bleak.
While virtually no respondent reported an inventory problem, a great fear
was expressed of disintermediation from savings and loan associations,
with the consequent high cost and unavailability of mortgage money, the
price of which has already risen above 9 percent for conventional loans.
This fear of disintermediation,due largely to competition from rising
Treasury issue yields, was the principal factor mentioned as restricting
the recovery of the housing industry.
Little change has occurred in the District's agriculture over the
last month.

Several droughty areas have received rain in recent weeks,

but for the most part, the fall crops will not benefit appreciably from
this moisture due to its tardiness.

However, the rains have improved

-32­
pasture conditions and have provided good moisture for the fall seeding of
the winter wheat crop, which will soon be underway.
For the first half of 1975, cash receipts from farm marketings in the
District were 10.2 percent below the same period in 1974.
with an 8.1 percent fall nationally.

This compares

However, given the developments in

farm prices over the last five months, earlier estimates of net farm income
for 1975 will almost certainly be revised upward.

Interestingly, the sharp

run-up in grain prices during July was partly responsible for a 13 percent
drop in the placement of cattle in feedlots in seven major feeding states,
the first such year-to-year decline since February.

Should this trend

continue, the supply of grain-fed animals will remain tight longer than pre­
viously expected.
Tenth District bankers contacted in a recent telephone survey indi­
cated that except for consumer loans there were few signs of strengthened
loan demand.

Weekly Reporting Banks data for August showed a similar pat­

tern in that the total volume of loans (other than Federal funds sold) fell
more than seasonally during the month while consumer instalment loans rose
sharply.

Surveyed bankers also indicated that they had stepped up their

investments in securities in recent weeks to compensate for the continued
weak loan demand.

Deposit growth was reported to be stronger than seasonal

in recent weeks, with a large increase in demand deposits partly offsetting
a decline in time and savings deposits.
Bankers contacted in the survey were generally uncertain about the
behavior of the prime rate and other interest rates between now and the end
of the year.

Some bankers thought interest rates were on a plateau and

would remain so in the months ahead, while others thought interest rates
would continue to rise.

-33-

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

On balance, economic barometers of the Eleventh District indicate
recovery is under way.

The unemployment rate in the District states peaked

at 7.4 percent in May and by July was down to 7.0 percent.
strength in the labor market is evident.

Additional

In Texas, which accounts for

roughly 60 percent of total employment in the District states, initial
claims for unemployment insurance have fallen to about half the peak level
last February.

Moreover, the average workweek in manufacturing in the

state stands at 40.6 hours, up from the low of 39.7 hours.
In addition, industrial production in Texas--over two-thirds of all
industrial output of the District states--has trended upward since March
with increased petroleum refining and output of chemicals and primary
metals.

The rise in production levels has boosted the Index of Manufac­

turing Capacity Utilization at an annual rate of 3 percent.
Consumer spending in the District is also strengthening.

Department

store sales, seasonally adjusted, have risen 11 percent since April.
Executives of the District's leading retail stores report a solid recovery
is under way.

Increased sales are broad-based across all consumer product

lines, inventories are generally at low levels, and credit card delinquen­
cies are well within acceptable limits.
New car sales are booming.

Seasonally adjusted registrations of new

cars in the four largest metropolitan counties of Texas rose 16 percent
and 11 percent in June and July, respectively.

A survey of new car dealers

indicates August sales are keeping apace with July's sales rate.

A con­

sensus of those polled suggests that, unlike last year, price hikes for
the 1976 models are having only modest impact on sales because the
announced increases are much smaller than the markups were on the 1975 cars.

-34-

In addition, on Detroit's recommendation, dealers are down-playing the
price differential.

Dealers expect 1976 to be a reasonably good model

year, particularly since there appears to be a strong rebound in company
car sales and fleet leasing, a market that dried up a year ago.
Homebuilding in the District remains badly depressed.

While single­

family construction is down only slightly from a year ago, apartment build­
ing has fallen sharply.

In Texas, for example, the number of building

permits for multifamily units is running nearly two-thirds behind the pace
of a year ago.

Lenders report that the costs of building and operating

multifamily complexes--particularly utility costs--are rising so rapidly
that apartment construction cannot be profitably undertaken.

Even in

Houston, where homebuilding has held up better than in any District city,
multifamily construction is down more than a third from last year's level.
And in San Antonio, the inability of apartment owners to recover costs has
resulted in 41 notices of foreclosure this year, representing $45 million
in property value.
A survey of the largest savings and loan associations in the District
indicates mortgage markets are tightening.

In July, the rate of saving

inflows at District thrift institutions slowed and withdrawals increased
sharply.

In August, disintermediation accelerated.

in Houston appear to have been the hardest hit.

Thrift institutions

The largest savings and

loan association in that city had a net savings inflow of only $500,000 in
August, as compared to $7 million in July.
Houston reported net outflows in August.

Four other associations in
In Dallas, the leading S & L's

stated net deposit inflows in August were down to roughly half of July's
pace.

As a result of deposit losses, several mortgage lenders warned that

their institutions are rapidly approaching a liquidity crunch, particularly
since liquidity requirements were raised September 1.

-35-

Faced with tighter liquidity positions, most thrift institutions in
the District have raised mortgage rates a quarter of a percentage point
since midsummer.

Moreover, the consensus of the savings and loan officials

contacted is that rates will continue to climb.

The president of a large

S & L in Houston admits that in anticipation of higher yields by year-end,
he has raised loan rates above the prevailing rate to discourage borrowing
at the present time.

Instead, he plans to wait and aggressively seek loans

after rates have climbed another half point.
Rising costs of savings are also exerting upward pressure on loan
rates.

All the thrift institutions contacted reported portfolio costs are

continuing to climb.

The president of an S & L in Dallas, for example,

said the cost of his savings portfolio had risen from 5.96 percent to
6.53 percent in the past year, or nearly 5 basis points a month.

A primary

reason for increased portfolio costs, according to these lenders, is a
shift of savings out of passbook accounts into 7 1/4 percent and
7 1/2 percent certificates of deposit.
Disintermediation is expected to worsen.

Moreover, the expectation

that the country is entering another period of tight money is already
curtailing homebuilding.

Virtually all the S & L's surveyed reported that

contractors have cut back sharply on the number of units they are planning
to build to avoid being left with sizable inventories of homes when mort­
gage money dries up.

-36-

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors report a growing concern over price increases.
Inflationary expectations appear to have increased as a result of rises in
fuel and food costs.
ging demand for loans.

Interest rates are also on the rise in spite of lag­
Consumer spending is picking up slowly but construc­

tion activity remains depressed.
Consumer spending is currently being affected strongly by the prospect
of higher food and fuel costs.

For example, it has speeded up conversion

to small cars which signals awareness of the need to conserve, and a will­
ingness to adapt to lower cost substitutes.

The high current rate of con­

sumer loan delinquencies as well as high interest rates will deter
maintaining expenditures through borrowing, but credit demand will increase
somewhat, in part because of higher prices.

Growth in retail sales, there­

fore, is expected to be slow over the next six months.
Many of our large manufacturers on the West Coast expect shortages of
fuel oil and natural gas this winter and contingency planning is in effect.
No inventory build-up is being observed and operation rates continue to be
closely geared to the pace of incoming orders.

A sudden cutback in fuel

availability would translate into a decline in final sales almost imme­
diately.

Research into substitute sources of energy is being emphasized.

One large lumber manufacturer reports that his firm is already converting
its firing systems from natural gas to wood fuel.
In very few cases is the existence of unused capacity dampening the
passthrough of increased costs.

When questioned about price increases, a

leading manufacturer of aluminum responded that current low profit margins
could not justify further capital spending as long as costs continued to
escalate without offsetting productivity increases.

He anticipates a return

-37­
to double-digit inflation in the "not-too-distant" future.

Directors are

worried about higher interest rates and the reimposition of price controls.
Most believe, however, that the inflationary momentum will not be sufficient
to stop the recovery currently underway although there appears to be less
confidence today than was apparent two months ago.
Bank of America expects that the following specific forces are likely
to place upward pressure on wholesale and consumer prices over the next
six to nine months:
a.

higher than orginally anticipated growth in aggregate
demand over the period;

b.

lower than historical post-recession productivity increases,
at least initially;

c.

an increase in the price per barrel of oil due to a combi­
nation of a price increase by OPEC and partial or complete
decontrol of domestic old oil prices;

d.

a continuation of food price increases for the remainder of
this year;

e.

a continuation of relatively high wage and fringe benefit
settlements;

f.

increased importation of high priced raw materials; and

g.

increased cost pressures directly related to purchases of
pollution control equipment in a large number of industries.

The construction industry continues to show little sign of a strong
recovery.

Some nonresidential projects have been cancelled or stretched out

and state governments have placed tight lids on expansion projects.

Resi­

dential building too is almost at a standstill according to our directors,
with little hope of a major turnaround in sight over the near future.
The expected increase in food prices stems partly from the fact that
agriculture uses a large amount of fuel and that many fertilizers are
derived from natural gases and other petroleum base products.

The increased

return to farmers from higher prices is expected to be wiped out by higher

-38­

costs.

In the District's dairy farming operations, higher grain feed costs

and energy prices will further aggravate the adverse price relationships
which have held dairy farming in a depressed condition for more than a year.
Low plantings of potatoes elsewhere in the United States has resulted in a
shortage with high prices which should benefit growers in Washington where
output is normal.
Large commercial loan activity continues very quiet and demand deposits
related to usage of money are down compared with a year ago.

