CONFIDENTIAL

(FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

August 13,1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY. . . . . . .
First District -

. . . . . . . . . . ... .
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

......
. .

.

. .

.

.

. .

.

4

. .

.

7

. . . . . . .

.

10

. . . .

.

14

. . . . . . . . . ..

.

17

Seventh District - Chicago.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

20

Eighth District - St. Louis

. . . . . .

.

30

Boston

.

Second District - New York . .

. . .

Third District - Philadelphia

.

. . .

Fifth District - Richmond.

..

Sixth District - Atlanta

.

.

. . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . .

Fourth District - Cleveland

. . . . . .

. . . . . . .
. .

.

i

. .

. . . .

. .

.

. . . . . . . ....23

Ninth District - Minneapolis . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....25
Tenth District - Kansas City . . .

. . .

Eleventh District - Dallas . . . . .

. .

Twelfth District -

.

San Francisco

. .

. .

. . . . . ....27

. . . . . . . . . .

SUMMARY*

This month's Red Book District reports again suggest that the
recession has come to an end and that recovery is under way.

Assessments

The majority of the

of the strength of the upswing vary, however.

respondents expect a gradual pickup in business activity.

A somewhat more

optimistic tone, however, emerges from some reports, particularly from
those Districts where agriculture and the production of nondurable goods
loom large.
month.

Retail sales, including auto sales, increased over the past

The reduction in retail inventories apparently has largely run its

course, a development that has been reflected in increased orders to and
production by the consumer goods industries.

The residential construction

picture has improved moderately in some areas.

The capital goods industry,

however, remains depressed, with continued reduction in metal and machinery
inventories.

Crop prospects appear generally good, except in certain areas

of the Midwest affected by drought or flooding.

The demand for bank credit

is generally described as weak, except for agricultural loans.
Regarding consumer spending, Boston reports a modest growth in
such outlays, while retailers in the Philadelphia District look for a
gradual upturn through the fall.

Richmond and St. Louis report that retail

sales continue to improve, but that sales of big ticket items remain weak.
Kansas City, however, reports particularly strong sales of durable goods.
Minneapolis reports that consumer spending has improved since last spring
and that the outlook is for further expansion.

About half of the Districts

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

ii
report increased auto sales, with particularly good performance reported
by Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas.

Heavy tourist traffic is reported

by several Banks, including Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and San Francisco.
The reduction of inventories at the retail level apparently has
run its course.

Indeed, several Banks including New York and Philadelphia

report some actual or prospective rebuilding of inventories.

Increased

new orders, production, and shipments of consumer goods are reported by
several Banks, including Cleveland, Richmond, Kansas City, and Dallas.
And hand in hand with the increase in activity in the consumer goods sector,
notably textiles and other soft goods, the employment situation in those
industries has improved, as noted by Cleveland, Philadelphia, Richmond,
and St. Louis, among others.
On the darker side, the capital goods industry remains in the
doldrums.

Chicago thus notes that the less vigorous tone in that District

compared with the nation reflects the relatively greater emphasis in that
area on producers' goods.

That Bank reports that order backlogsof capital

goods producers continue to erode, that inventory liquidation at the
manufacturing level continues in full swing, and that the demand for workers
remains very weak.

Similar observations are expressed by Cleveland,

San Francisco, and Richmond, while Philadelphia characterizes capital
spending plans as less than robust.
There apparently has been some pickup in the construction of
one-family homes, as reported by Atlanta and Chicago.

On the other hand,

commercial construction--apartments, condominiums, and nonresidential
structures--remains weak in most areas.

San Francisco notes that construc­

tion of all types is being hampered by high costs.

Atlanta, however,

iii
reports the reactivation of several industrial building

projects that

had previously been shelved.
There are scattered indications that concern is mounting over
the possible development of shortages and over the resurgence of inflation
as recovery gets under way.

Concern over the shortage of natural gas was

expressed by respondents in the San Francisco, Atlanta, and Cleveland
Districts.

Cleveland, moreover, reports that while most of its respondents

in general do not expect shortages of materials and capacity to hamper the
early state of recovery, a small minority do fear such an eventuality
might rapidly develop.

A similar view was expressed by purchasing managers

in the Atlanta District and by some retailers in the Kansas City District.
Regarding the fear of inflation, Philadelphia bankers were in general
agreement that inflation remains a potential problem, and St. Louis notes
that inflation has re-emerged as a major concern of businessmen as demand
begins to pick up.

Cleveland reports that several District directors

expect the rate of inflation to accelerate.
Reports from agricultural areas for the most part continue to
point to good crops.

However, several Districts--Chicago, St. Louis,

and Kansas City--report crop damage from drought in some corn-producing
areas, and Minneapolis reports flood damage to potato, sugar beet, and small
grain crops.

Chicago and San Francisco note that sales of grains to the

USSR have put upward pressures on cereal prices.

Cash receipts by farmers

from sale of livestock and crops, however, were reported by Dallas to
have fallen sharply.

-1-

FIRST DISTRICT--BOSTON

The directors for the First District generally feel that the
"euphoria of having made the turn has worn off; we still have a lot of prob­
lems".

However, the consensus receives recent monetary policy favorably.

Although there is more talk of the nuts and bolts of putting things back to­
gether, New England business initiative remains fairly flat; a vigorous re­
covery is not anticipated.

Unemployment in the region fell from 11.9 per­

cent in May to 11.5 percent in June.

Massachusetts had 12.3 percent unemploy­

ment in June, while Rhode Island and Connecticut reported 15.7 percent and
10.2 percent, respectively.
Retailing is mixed.

A director who has reported excellent per­

formance in the past continues to do so.
form his trading area.

However, he continues to outper­

He notes that only now has retailing in general be­

gun to detect signs of some modest growth.

Inventories at the manufacturing

and outlet levels are lean: "It is a stupid retailer who forgets what we have
gone through."

As a consequence, he calculates that price pressures and

delivery delays may attend a rapid increase in sales.

Similar reports of

mixed retail performance prevail throughout the region, and some areas feature
early back-to-school promotions.
Bankers report that time deposit growth has begun to taper off, and
they report that July savings bank deposit growth has slowed "drastically" in
some areas.

Business loan demand is generally weak, due in part to inventory

liquidation and in part to business caution.

Consequently, demand deposit

growth has resulted in a runoff of certificates of deposit and purchases of in­
vestments.

The interest in municipals is weak, since the tax shelter is not

of sufficient concern to some bankers.

In any case, short-term instruments

are most appealing:"If I had a choice between a good yield and going short,

I'd go short."
Businessmen are "hopeful about the future without any solid evidence
to

prove it". Conditions have not changed substantially for several months.

Employment seems to have stabilized, and capital expansion plans are re­
maining on the table.

Over the next twelve months, some increases in new

orders and income are expected but the recovery will be deliberate.

Since

external financing remains expensive, many firms are relying on internal funds
to get back into shape.

Some reports indicate that expansion plans under way

are relying on "blind faith without a lot of information".

There are reports

that excess capacity and high materials prices are squeezing earnings; a re­
covery in demand will afford these firms chances to increase prices.

In any

event, higher output prices are necessary to add to capacity.
Professors Samuelson, Eckstein, and Houthakker were available for
comment this month.

Eckstein is very concerned about the immediate future,

suspecting that monetary policy goals should be more expansionary.

Samuelson

is also concerned that monetary policy be flexible enough to accommodate a
smooth recovery.

Houthakker believes the economy is proceeding in an orderly

manner, and he is content with recent policy expressions by the Chairman.
Eckstein is very concerned with the outlook for prices.

He antici­

pates considerable problems with food, steel, and oil-- to name a few areas-­
where price increases may threaten the recovery.

Previously, he had hoped

that the economy would be fortunate enough to get through the first year
of recovery with 7.5 percent money growth;
it.

now, he feels

we will not make

The Fed has to be in sympathetic harmony with the various influences

buffeting the economy, for better or worse. "The Fed cannot undo all the evils
of the world, and the economy cannot stand the Fed leaning against all these
hurricanes."

Furthermore, "the July

savings flow raises serious questions

about the levels of interest rates." Policy should give a "close, steady watch
to these developments; of course, we do not want an increase in the funds rate".
He feels that money growth needs to be in excess of 8 percent.
Samuelson tells a similar story with less urgency.

He feels that

"judgments (about the strength of the economy) are premature at this point";
policy dictates are not hard and clear.

However, he is concerned that the

future may hold weaker housing and automobile industries and that plant and
equipment outlays may be due for more downward revisions.
the money target should be lifted.

In such an event,

No irreparable harm would be done to err

on the expansionary side until we have secured a firm recovery.

Also, if

exogenous elements in prices are really unfavorable, a short-term loosening
of policy is in order.

In this event, we should let interest rates rise only

grudgingly.
Houthakker feels a "mild recovery is on the way", and his belief is
strengthened by recent developments.

He sees this as a desirable state of

affairs, leading to a firm, sustainable recovery.

He believes that recent

rises in interest rates may prove to be temporary by the year-end, if mone­
tary policy adheres to the 5 to 7 1/2 percent range. The stated band is
appropriate for the recovery and, in his opinion, the lower end of the target
is preferable.

He is not concerned with recent price behavior as long as

policy does not cultivate a renewal of inflationary expectations.

Specifi­

cally, farm prices worry him only a little; "they don't mean too much if the
crops come in okay".

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Recent observations by Second District directors and other
business leaders indicate a continuation of the gradual improvement in
business conditions noted in recent months.

Retail sales in July were

generally stronger than in June, and there were some indications that
retailers were starting to replenish inventories, at least in a small way.
There continued to be reports of excessive inventories at the manufacturing
level, but the list of items in excess supply has narrowed substantially.
The demand for business loans at banks has shown little buoyancy as yet, but
some indications of a forthcoming strengthening of loan demand were noted.
Regarding wages, the respondents generally expected this year's increases
to be smaller than last year's.
Retail sales have strengthened somewhat over the past several
weeks.

Despite considerable rain and unseasonably cool weather through

most of July, sales at most major New York City department stores were
slightly higher than in July 1974, with an even stronger performance
shown by stores in the suburbs.

(In June, sales in the metropolitan area

had been lower than in the comparable period last year.)

Similarly, the

retail sales picture in upstate New York was reported to be brighter than
in June, with sales also running above last year's level.
Views on retailers' inventory policies were mixed.

The

president of a large nationwide department store chain reported that
efforts to build up inventories have begun, although as yet only to a
limited extent.

Similarly, the president of an upstate department store

stated that, to a "small extent", retailers in his area were building
up inventories.

A senior official of a conglomerate felt that on the

basis of his firm's sales, merchants were cautiously building up

-5­

inventories of apparel, automobile parts and accessories and, more
aggressively, storm doors, thermopane windows and similar items.

The

president of a non-ferrous metal firm reported increased sales of his
firm's kitchen utensils line and believed that in general retailers
were relaxing their inventory policies.

One director, on the other

hand, stated that retailers were still maintaining a "relatively conservative"
approach in their inventory policies.

Similarly, the Buffalo branch

directors saw no evidence of efforts to build up retail inventories in
Western New York, but rather felt that the emphasis continued to be on
inventory reductions and improved inventory controls.
There were some indications of continued excessive inventories
at the manufacturing level.

For example, the chairman of a large New York

City bank stated that in some cases inventories of materials used in
the production of durable goods remained excessive.

The president of

the metal firm mentioned above reported excessive inventories in the
electrical goods industry and among aluminum producers--although not
among the latter's customers.

Other respondents cited instances of still

excessive inventories of various items, including steel, zinc, canned food,
and furniture.
The respondents in general reported little increase in business
demand for bank loans, but some very tentative indications of a forth­
coming strengthening of demand were noted.

For example, the chairman

of a major New York City bank observed some increase in requests for long­
term loan commitments.

On the other hand, a director observed that many

companies were seeking to stretch out repayments of outstanding loans
rather than enlarging their lines of credit.

However, an upstate New York

banker reported a "small" firming of loan demand at his bank, and a

New Jersey banker noted a modest increase in construction loans.

At the

same time, several respondents opined that the resumption of inventory
accumulation in some lines will result in stronger loan demand before long.
Regarding the wage picture, virtually all respondents agreed
that wage increases would be more moderate this year than last year,
particularly, but not exclusively, for nonunion workers.

Among others,

an official of a conglomerate stated that workers were "dreadfully afraid"
to be laid off and that this would be reflected in substantially more
moderate wage demands than last year.

The president of a Rochester depart­

ment store "definitely" excepted weaker labor demands.

Buffalo branch

directors cited instances where employees have foregone wage increases to
preserve jobs.

THIRD DISTRICT--PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District is beginning to turn around.
Manufacturers report increases in new orders and shipments, and inventory
cuts slowed from last month.

In addition, most manufacturers have stopped

reducing their work forces, and a few are adding to them.

On the inflation

front, prices paid are up while prices received are down somewhat.
longer term outlook continues to be optimistic.

The

Area manufacturers expect

new orders, shipments, and inventories to be higher six months out, and they
plan to add to their work forces and lengthen the average workweek over the
period.

But more inflation is anticipated, and caution prevails on plans for

capital expenditures.

South Jersey shore resorts generally report that

business is thriving, and the rest of the season is expected to be strong.
Area retailers report sales volumes holding steady and look for a gradual
upturn through the fall.

Bankers in the District report a slump in demand

deposits, while savings accounts are growing moderately.

Bankers also in­

dicate that loan demand is weakening.
Manufacturers responding to this month's business outlook survey
report a substantial improvement in business over last month.

One third

of the respondents report an increase in overall business conditions this
month, compared with 15 percent last month and only 4 percent in January.
They indicate that new orders and shipments are up significantly and unfilled
orders are increasing.

In addition, the proportion of respondents reporting

lower inventories dropped appreciably from last month.
picture is also considerably brighter.

The employment

Cutbacks in work forces slowed

dramatically, with almost 80 percent of the respondents reporting no change.
In addition, those reporting increases in jobs outnumber declines for the
first time since August 1974.

The length of the average workweek continues

to hold steady, with 85 percent of the manufacturers surveyed indicating no
change.
The outlook for the next two quarters is optimistic.

Area manu­

facturers expect new orders, shipments, and unfilled orders to be higher.
Furthermore, they expect projection of a net inventory accumulation to be
adding to their inventories by early 1976.

This is the first six-month pro­

jection of a net inventory accumulation in more than a year.

In addition,

over 40 percent expect the workweek to lengthen, and more than one third
anticipate hiring additional employees.

Capital spending plans, however,

remain less than robust, with more than half of those surveyed planning no
change over the next half year.
On the price front, area manufacturers report paying higher prices
for their supplies and receiving lower prices for their finished products.
Their outlook for the fall and winter is for prices paid and received to be
up.

Despite some slight easing from last month in expectations in higher

prices six months out, three fourths of the respondents anticipate paying
higher prices while half expect to be receiving higher prices for the pro­
ducts they sell.
to prices.

Retailers in the area report no obvious trends with respect

One merchant, for example, indicates that the prices he charges

are edging up slightly, but the consensus among retailers is that no signi­
ficant price movements are evident.
Business at South Jersey shore resorts is good.

As one contact

put it, "people-wise" this season is the best we've ever had.
people to be here, but not to be spending the way they are.

We expected
In general,

merchants feel that revenues are well ahead of last year, and local officials
look for a strong second half of the season.

They report that hotels and

motels are almost fully booked from the last week in July through Labor Day.
Only one resort contact reports that business is off to some degree from last
year, but he attributes it primarily to a rainy week in mid-July.
Bankers in the District report that savings accounts are growing
modestly, but the comments on demand deposits range from "holding steady"
to "disappointing".

One banker indicates that demand deposits are in a

decided seasonal slump, and no improvement is expected until late September.
Loan demand is reported to be weakening further.

One financial executive

reports a pronounced slide in loan demand and indicates that his bank has gone
out of its way to get larger customers to move any borrowing plans forward.
Most of the bankers surveyed feel that the banking industry is
liquid enough to absorb stronger loan demand in a modest recovery, but
several feel that this depends on the amount of pressure exerted by the super­
visory authorities to build bank capital.

One banker expresses the view that

"At the bottom of it all, every bank has loans that are in real trouble."
Area financial executives on the whole look for interest rates to
be level or gradually increasing through 1975.

The majority of bankers con­

tacted express little concern about the recent upturn in short-term rates,
and feel in general that Fed policy is about on target.

But one dissenter is

uneasy over the attempt to hold annualized M1 growth within the 5 to 7 1/2
percent range for any given three-to six-month period.

With a strong fourth

quarter, he sees a real risk of absorbing the recovery by letting interest
rates rise at the wrong time.

In his opinion, the FED overacted and failed

to assess the negative psychological impact of rising rates at this stage of
the recovery.

-10-

FOURTH DISTRICT--CLEVELAND

Reports from directors, financial officers, and economists suggest
an end to the recession and a beginning of recovery.

Output in consumer

goods industries, retail sales, and residential construction have strenthened
further from lows last spring, and nonresidential construction contracts
apparently reached bottom earlier in the spring.

Unemployment in the District

peaked in March, but little improvement has occurred since then.
capital goods industries remain weak.

Steel and

Upward price pressures appear to be

more widespread than in several months.
Conversation with manufacturers point out a dichotomy between
producers of consumer goods and producers of business and industrial equip­
ment.

Production and shipments of consumer goods generally have been recover­

ing, as the worst of inventory reduction has been completed.

An economist for

a tire producer reports that business reached a trough around January-February
and that output has been rising since then.

In the case of passenger tires, the

shape of the recovery has been nearly a "V", as production has been increased
in line with sales.

A supplier of glass to the auto industry and an executive

with a fastener firm also reported that orders and production have picked up
in recent weeks.

A financial officer with a household appliance maker re­

ports a turnaround in sales of vacuum cleaners, although another producer
reported plans to continue to cut stocks of electric and gas ranges in addi­
tion to the 25 percent reduction since last December.

According to an

economist with a leading producer of soap, detergents, and household pro­
ducts, sales in recent weeks have risen above year-earlier figures for the
first time this year.
Chemical and plastic producers in the District also report a
rather sharp recovery, owing to drastic liquidation of stocks in recent months.

-11-

A major producer of plastics stated that operations last month soared to
75 percent of capacity from the 50 percent rate in May.

A petrochemical

producer reports that operations have picked up to about 70 percent of
capacity, compared with 50 to 60 percent during the trough in January-February.
Steel and capital goods producers continue to report weak or de­
clining trends in orders, although steel orders in July were probably at the
low for the year, according to steel economists.

For one firm, orders for

August delivery are slightly better than for a comparable period in July,
and orders for September are stronger than for August.

One economist estimates

that liquidation of steel will be about as severe this quarter as last, while
another estimates that the bulk of the liquidation occurred last quarter.

A

financial officer with a major aluminum producer reports that orders and pro­
duction have been rising slowly

since the March low.

Several capital goods

producers and suppliers report weak and declining order activity.

A chief

financial officer with a firm that produces farm machinery reports easing in
activity, while sales of heavy trucks picked up in recent weeks from dismal
levels earlier in the year.

Sales of truck tires remain weak, and no pickup

is expected until the fourth quarter.

A major roller-bearing firm reports

that orders from farm implement producers and freight car manufacturers turned
down, and a director with a gear firm reports orders receded from advanced
levels last year.
In general, financial officers and economists contacted do not expect
shortages of materials or capacity to hamper early stages of recovery.

Two

directors, however, fear that capacity shortages will retard a recovery in
their industries because long depreciation schedules hold down replacement and
modernization of obsolescent facilities.

Our contacts in the steel, aluminum,

coal, chemicals, and rubber industries indicated there is ample room for

-12­

expansion of output before approaching peak capacity operations that would
cause bottlenecks and shortages of supplies.

An economist with a steel pro­

ducer reported operations were no more than 60 percent of capacity, an
aluminum producer reports present utilization of 74 percent, and two chemical
producers are operating in a range of 70 to 75 percent, all of which are well
below the peak rates of 1974.

Moreover, none expect recovery in their in­

dustries to be much higher than 80 to 85 percent by the end of 1976.
Shortages in natural gas supplies represent a potential obstacle to
recovery in steel and other industries dependent on this energy source.

Three

steel economists report that curtailed supplies of gas -- as little as 40 per­
cent of normal usage beginning November -- would impede a recovery in steel.
One major steel producer said limited supplies would force shutting their plants
one week each month during this winter and that his firm is beginning to stock­
pile propane as an alternative energy source.

Another has begun to stockpile

gas supplies and is also drilling wells in northeast Ohio in areas close to
steel-producing locations.

A third producer will attempt to substitute oil for

natural gas if allocations are as severe as now indicated.

A large forging

producer in northern Ohio plans to drill forty wells for his own use rather than
convert to oil.
Employment in the District has not yet shown any improvement from the
latest low in March.

Nonmanufacturing employment has risen gradually in re­

cent months, but employment in durable goods industries, especially steel, is
still weakening.

There are only isolated cases of recalls among firms con­

tacted, mainly related to consumer goods industries.

A producer of household

goods in recalling 400 workers, and a producer of flat glass for automotive
is recalling 145 workers.

For most firms that have reported a recovery under

way, employment has stabilized, and no plans for large-scale recalls are in

-13­

prospect until sustained improvement is experienced.

Steel firms continue

to lay off workers, and one large producer furloughed 1,000 workers on August 1.
Upward price pressures have surfaced, especially in those industries
where recovery has been under way. Several directors expect that the rate of
inflation will accelerate.

One fears "roaring inflation" will slow a recovery,

and another expects resumption of double-digit inflation in 1976.
ducer of copper products raised prices

A small pro­

2 to 3 cents per pound, and a major

producer of aluminum raised prices 2 cents per pound to offset labor and materials
cost increases that occurred when their markets were weaker.

An economist with

a coal company remarked that coal prices are likely to increase later this year
or early next year as demand strengthens.

A steel economist justified the

publicized increases on steel because of higher prices for materials (ore,
nickel, chrome) and labor costs; he expects competitive forces will hold the
overall increase down to 4-5 percent.
Residential construction contracts continued to recover in June.
Deposit inflows to savings and loan associations slowed somewhat more than
seasonal in July, while mortgage loans closed rose to the best level for any
month in the past two years, according to a financial economist at the Federal
Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati.

An executive with a savings and loan association

reports a slower growth in deposits, coupled with strengthening in commitments,
will sharply reduce their liquidity by the end of August and may result in some
need for borrowing.

Another official reported an unusually good volume of

deposits occurred in July and August, with the bulk in certificates.

Mortgage

rates in the Cleveland area rose about 1/4 percentage point and averaged about
9 percent for an 80 percent loan.

-14FIFTH DISTRICT--RICHMOND

Business activity in the Fifth District appears to have picked
up further in recent weeks, although there is as yet little evidence of any
significant momentum in the recovery.

The diffusion of responses in our

latest survey of manufacturers suggests an increase in order backlogs for
the first time in over a year, with further recent increases in new orders,
shipments, and employment.

Retailers report additional sales gains, although

big-ticket items continue to move sluggishly relative to total sales.

The

inventory adjustment in the trade sector appears to have been completed, but
manufacturers continue to pare down stocks of both materials and finished
goods.

Business loan demand at District banks appears to have increased

lately, and consumer loans have definitely picked up.

Meanwhile, the flow

of time and savings deposits into banks and other thrift institutions has
abated.

Our latest survey shows a further significant improvement in business

confidence.

More than two thirds of the respondents now expect business

conditions to improve both nationally and locally over the next six months.
Responses to the latest survey of District manufacturers show
continued improvement in most areas of activity, but the improvement is by
no means general.

The latest increases in orders and shipments reflect, for

the most part, growing strength in textiles, furniture, and a few other lines.
Activity in the primary metals and

machinery industries remains sluggish.

While inventories of both materials and finished goods continue to decline,
nearly half the respondents still view current levels as excessive.

Employ­

ment in manufacturing has apparently improved significantly, and this has
contributed to a general improvement in District labor market conditions.
Manufacturing respondents reporting increases in employment outnumber those
reporting decreases by two to one.

State unemployment rates are continuing

-15­

to fall as layoffs are terminated and new hires are resumed at a more
normal rate.

It now appears that unemployment has been declining since

April or May.

Survey respondents, as well as other District sources, also

continue to report increases in the length of the workweek.
The price picture has deteriorated lately.

In the latest survey,

a large number of manufacturers reported paying and receiving higher prices
than have done so at any time this year.
third received higher prices.

About one half paid and almost one

Meanwhile, almost one half report higher

average hourly earnings by their employees.
Manufacturing inventories remain well above desired levels.

Over

40 percent of the manufacturers surveyed view present inventory levels and
current plant and equipment capacity as excessive.

Nevertheless, an over­

whelming majority felt current expansion plans are about right.

Concerning

the outlook for the next six months, almost three fourths of the respondents
expect improvements in the level of production in their own firms as well as
in the level of business activity nationally.

Almost as many foresee an

improvement in business activity in their respective market areas.
The July survey of District retailers shows little change from recent
months.

Sales continue to improve, but big-ticket items remain weak relative

to total sales.

Inventories at the retail level showed little change and are

apparently at satisfactory levels despite the third consecutive month of improved
sales.

Employment at retail establishments was essentially unchanged.

Price

increases at the retail level seem to have resumed, and employee compensation
is continuing to rise.

Retailers seem to be satisfied with the current number

and size of their outlets, although 60 percent expect business conditions to
improve generally over the next six months.

-16-

Fifth District bankers now anticipate that loan demand will soon
begin to recover from its protracted decline.

In recent weeks these expec­

tations appear to have been realized, particularly in the consumer loan area.
Commercial lending officers still see signs of a potential resurgence in
business loan demand, but this potential has not fully shown up on bank
ledgers.

District banks are nonetheless preparing for this intensified

demand by structuring their investment portfolios in favor of short-term
securities.

Commercial and industrial loans increased at an annual rate

of over 9 percent in July, with working capital loans to the textile industry
playing an important part in this increase.

Bank real estate loans have not

shown signs of recovery, and it appears that much of the increased activity
in mortgage lending has been concentrated at savings and loan associations.
Meanwhile, the flow of time deposits into District banks and other institutions
dropped off significantly.
District farmers' demand for both short- and long-term credit appears
to have grown substantially during the first half of 1975.

The volume of loans

outstanding as of June 30 was 20 percent above a year ago at PCA's and 31 per­
cent larger at the Federal Land Banks.

With farm income estimates for the

first quarter revised upward, the District's January-May cash receipts from
farm marketings were only 4 percent below a year earlier.
This season's flue-cured tobacco prices, by belts, are averaging
from 3 to 7 percent below a year ago.

Quality of the crop is lower than in

1974, yet leaf firms are apparently being more discriminating over quality
tobacco.

Tobacco growers, meanwhile, have a large investment in the 1975 crop,

with production costs estimated to be at least 7 cents a pound greater than
in 1974.

-17-

SIXTH DISTRICT--ATLANTA

Economic conditions in the Sixth District have definitely moved
into the recovery stage.

Most businesses now report rehiring of workers

laid off over the past year.

Capital spending plans, curtailed during the

recession, are now being taken off the shelves.

Construction activity in

single-family housing is showing definite signs of improving.

There is

concern over a shortage of skilled labor in specific occupations, and a
natural gas shortage could cripple the District's important chemical industry.
A pickup in new orders has stimulated rehiring by many District
businesses.

Genesco, in Nashville, Tennessee, reports a jump in new orders

at the wholesale level.

Other Tennessee manufacturing industries which are

tied to construction have recently reported increased orders.

Several wood

products plants have reopened, after being closed for several months.

The

outlook for this industry, according to local businessmen, is good, and most
plants are now at full production.

In Alabama, new jobs and rehiring are pro­

ceeding more slowly, largely because of the lagging steel industry.

One Alabama

steel manufacturer closed an entire plant for the first week in July and still
remains well below full operating capacity.

However, a Goodyear tire plant in

Gadsden, Alabama, has rehired most of its employees.

The plant is now operating

on a six-day week and expects to continue to operate at this rate through the
summer.

In Louisiana, the Uniroyal Tire Company, as well as several other local

plants, is rehiring workers previously laid off.

The

Mobile, Alabama, area

reports rehiring in the shipbuilding, paper, and chemical industries.

Several

employment agencies in the District indicate a turnaround in the past two months.
A representative of Snelling and Snelling in Jacksonville, Florida, indicates
that there has recently been in improvement in the "quality" of job orders they
are receiving from local businessmen, as well as in the number of firms that

-18­

are looking for people.

This representative reports that their firm will begin

advertising on television in August.

Car dealers are also reportedly now anxious

to restock their staffs of car dealers.

But they are now looking for a new

breed of car salesmen, college-educated men who want to make a career out of
selling cars.
The two areas of greatest weakness-- autos and housing-- appear to
A regional Ford representative reports July sales in Georgia

be picking up.

and Florida up sharply from June.

The new high-fuel economy (MPG) models are

given a good deal of credit for the pickup.

Sales of imports and luxury cars,

as well as used cars, are still the strongest.

The high trade-in price of

used cars may be stimulating some new car sales.
Evidence of a recovery in the single-family housing market became
more evident.

Inflows to District savings and loans association were strong

throughout the first half of this year.

This, along with the housing tax

credit, has finally begun to stimulate sales and new construction.

Single­

family home sales in Florida are booming, according to one Florida banker.
Throughout the state, even in south Florida, sales and new starts are moving
ahead.

The condominium glut remains a problem.

Even condominium sales are

beginning to show some strength in the Tampa-St. Petersburg
tremendous glut still remains.

area, but a

The condominium glut is also a problem in

Atlanta, Knoxville, and Nashville.
Capital spending plans are apparently being taken off the shelves
and dusted off by several District industries.
announced by several area companies.

New contracts were also

In the Mobile, Alabama, area, some of the

large industrial developments and expansions shelved in late 1974 are now being
put into action.
plant.

One of the largest is the Ow Badische $100 million chemical

Union Carbide is planning to build a plant employing 750 workers in

-19-

Columbus, Georgia.

In Tennessee, pollution-control projects costing about

$78.5 million were approved by the Tennessee Valley Authority.

Most of the

projects are for modifications of their twelve coal-fired steam power plants
to meet state and Federal water-quality standards.

The United States Air

Force announced a $24.7 million C-130 Hercules contract for the LockheadGeorgia Company, pushing the total C-130 contract announcements in July to
more than $100 million.

This will stabilize employment at the huge aircraft

manufacturer.
Most area businessmen appear to have calmed their fears of shortages,
but some conflicting evidence was also noted.

In Jackson, Mississippi, the

supply of materials for manufacturers is not anticipated to be a problem, but
energy costs and natural gas availability are much more of a concern.

An east

Tennessee chemical manufacturer also expressed concern over the shortage of
natural gas.

A furniture manufacturer reports a drastic change in supply and

delivery recently.
obtain.

Several types of wood have recently been more difficult to

He indicates that the problem stems from large orders for these

woods placed by the Japanses.

Upholstery fabric prices have also gone up. A

representative of the Georgia Purchasing Managers Association reports that delivery
lead times have increased from thirty days to between forty-five and sixty days
in the last two months.
expected higher prices on

Twenty-eight percent of the purchasing agents surveyed
materials purchased in the next three months.

The

Alabama Purchasing Managers Association characterizes most purchasing managers
as "nervous" about the return of shortage conditions.

-20-

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Although signs of economic revival are much less clear in the
Seventh District than in the nation as a whole, an improvement is expected
in many sectors in the next few months.
weak.

Demand for workers remains very

Order backlogs of capital goods producers, very important here,

continue to erode.

Most companies are still cutting inventories.

Consumers

remain cautious, especially for purchases requiring extensions of credit.
Construction of single-family homes has revived somewhat, but prospects
for apartments and commercial projects are poor.

Crop projections are very

good in District states east of the Mississippi, but parts of Iowa have been
hurt by drought.

District experts believe that the Department of Agriculture

has underestimated foreign demand for United States grain, mainly because
foreign production is being curtailed by adverse weather.
Purchasing managers' reports for Chicago and Milwaukee show further
declines in output and new orders for June and July, in contrast to the improve­
ment noted in the national reports.

Nevertheless, there is greater confidence

of a general pickup as the second half proceeds.
in full swing.

Inventory liquidation continues

Employment at reporting firms continued to decline in July but

at a slower pace.
The generally less vigorous tone in this District, compared with
the nation, reflects the relatively greater emphasis on producer goods and
consumer durables.

Order backlogs of most producers of equipment for agriculture,

construction, transportation, and industry have declined sharply since the turn
of the year.

Because no near-term improvement in demand for their products is

expected, many equipment producers have been cutting inventories, reducing
employment, and stretching out expansion and modernization programs.

-21-

Sales of autos and light trucks have increased somewhat, but
there are large differences among makes and models.

With strenuous efforts

to reduce stocks of 1975 in process, evaluation of the basic strength of the
car market probably will not be possible until late October or November.
Sales of recreational vehicles have improved slightly, but sales of mobile
homes remain very poor, partly because of reduced availability of credit.
Inventories of furniture and appliances are now in line because of reduc­
tions in output rather than increased sales.
Major retail chains report that their sales in the Midwest are
weaker than elsewhere in the nation.

These companies complain of lack of

customer response to sales promotions.

Various sources indicate substantial

strength in demand for auto and truck parts for replacement purposes, as
owners delay purchases of new vehicles.
There are no procurement problems for standard material and
components.

Delivery times are very short for most items, and price

competition is widespread, at least compared with a year ago.

Prices on

some types of steel products, e.g., rebars and cold finished bars, have
been reduced.

Price competition in metal fasteners is said to be "fierce",

although demand has picked up modestly in the past two months after a sharp
decline that lasted six to eight months.

In most sectors, however, price

concessions have been much less than might have been expected in view of the
extent of the recession.

Plants have been closed, permanently in some cases.

Prices of residential building materials have remained at high levels or have
increased further in the face of much lower demand.
Construction of single-family homes has increased somewhat in the
Chicago area, but merchant builders are proceeding cautiously with a few
homes at a time.

Development of new subdivisions has not revived.

Apartment

-22­

construction remains very depressed, as financing for new projects has
been closely restricted and a large inventory of unsold or unrented units
is still on hand.

Announcements of new office buildings and shopping

centers are rare, and work on projects under construction has been slowed
or stopped in some cases.

A recent survey finds that several major buildings

scheduled for the downtown areas of Milwaukee have been postponed or canceled
because of lack of financing or because of reduced estimates of demand.
Crop prospects in most of the District remain very good, although
estimates for Iowa have been reduced because of drought.

District analysts

believe that crops in Europe and other areas will fall far short of earlier
estimates.

Foreign demand for United States grain is now expected to approximate

1972 levels, with resulting upward pressure on prices.

Our survey of farm­

land values showed a surprising 4 percent rise in the second quarter, following
more moderate increases in the previous six months.
up 15 percent from a year earlier.

Values at midyear were

Farm credit conditions have eased, as

rural banks have become more liquid and Federal funds transactions have been
less profitable.

-23-

EIGHTH DISTRICT--ST. LOUIS

Area businessmen continue to report that a modest upturn in econo­
mic activity is under way in the District.

Sales at both the retail and

manufacturing levels have improved over the past couple of months.

Accompany­

ing the increased activity are improvement in the employment picture and re­
newed concern about inflation.
institutions,
slightly.

Funds continue to flow rapidly into thrift

while demand for most types of loans is reported to be up only

Reports concerning the condition of agricultural crops are mixed.
Retail sales continue to make moderate gains.

Department store

representatives report continued strong sales of soft lines but sluggishness
among certain big-ticket items, such as refrigerators and air conditioners.
An appliance dealer, however, reported some pickup in overall appliance sales
from the levels of last April and May.

Automobile dealers report some im­

provement in sales in the past couple of months, but are quick to point out
that sales are still about 20 percent below a year ago.

They also report

that the trend toward purchase of small economy-type cars, as opposed to
full-size cars, continues.
Manufacturing activity continues moderately upward.

Manufacturers

reporting an upturn in sales include representatives of chemicals, aluminum,
lumber, paints and coatings, and certain construction items.

A major air­

craft manufacturer reported that the outlook for this industry is good.
Foreign sales of military aircraft plus United States defense contracts have
more than offset the declines experienced in the commercial aircraft market.
Commercial aircraft sales are 10 to 15 percent below the 1974 level.

This

market is expected to recover somewhat as the economy picks up strength,
although some excess capacity in the industry may keep it depressed through
the rest of the year.

-24-

Inflation has reemerged as a major concern of businessmen as demand
begins to pick up.

Several businessmen noted large price increases recently

or expected sizable price increases in the near future.
The employment picture has improved somewhat in the District, and
the unemployment rate has generally declined.
are continuing to recall workers.

Reports indicate that firms

Also, isolated reports have been received

of firms having difficulty in hiring labor in some areas despite sizable
numbers of people drawing unemployment benefits.

Latest data indicate that

the pickup of employment in the District, however, may be lagging the nation
as a whole and that the decline in District employment during the past re­
cession was somewhat more severe than the nation.
No surge in loan demand was reported by banks and savings and loan
associations, although demand is expected to pick up as the recovery develops.
Savings and loan associations report their loan requests are primarily for
financing older homes, although some slight pickup in new home loans was re­
ported.

Funds continue to flow rapidly into thrift institutions.

The sharp

increase in savings deposits in June was followed by another substantial but
smaller increase in July.

The smaller increase in July was attributed to

competition from higher yielding Government and other securities as well as
to increased spending by consumers.
All interest rates have increased in recent weeks.

Mortgage rates

in the St. Louis area are now in the range of 8 3/4 to 9 percent on an 80 per­
cent loan, compared with 8 1/4 to 8 1/2 percent a few months ago.
Crop conditions in the District are mixed.

Some areas are suffering

from lack of rainfall which is expected to affect crop yields seriously.
areas, however, report crops in excellent condition.

Overall, a large harvest

is still expected this fall, and some concern was expressed that rice pro­
duction may exceed existing storage facilities.

Other

-25NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Crop conditions in the Ninth District are still good despite
damage

inflicted by flooding as well as a lack of moisture.

Agricultural

banks have experienced little difficulty in meeting the attendant strong
farm loan demand; weak loan demand from nonfarm sectors apparently has
helped boost funds available for farm lending.

Despite greater fund avail­

ability, interest rates on farm loans have decreased only marginally since
last winter.

Consumer spending has strengthened during the summer,

reflecting heavy tourist traffic and improved auto sales.
Crop conditions vary widely across the District but, on balance,
they are good.

Excellent crop conditions exist in the western region.

Wheat yields in parts of Montana are expected to be considerably above
normal; hay production in the western Dakotas has been good to excellent.
On the other hand, a flooding of the Red River Valley in early July has
caused large losses to potato, sugar beet, and small grain crops in eastern
Moreover, prospects for bumper corn

North Dakota and northwestern Minnesota.

crops in Minnesota have been trimmed sharply by lack of moisture during July.
by dryness, but continued lack of

Soybeans have not been seriously damaged

rainfall in August would spell trouble for that crop too.
The July survey of Ninth District agricultural banks indicated that
first-quarter trends continued to midyear.

Farm loan demand, especially for

farm operating loans, remained strong in the second quarter.
cited for strong loan demand are familiar:

The factors

High-priced farm inputs, reduced

supplies of merchant-dealer credit, continued storage of some 1974 crops,
and refinancing needs of some farmers.

Banks appeared increasingly able to

meet farmers' credit needs as evidenced by a less than seasonal increase in
loan-deposit ratios.

Weak nonfarm loan demand and strong deposit inflows

-26­

accounted for the increased funds available for farm loans.
Though fund availability at agricultural banks appears to have
improved since early 1975, credit remained costly for farm borrowers in the
second quarter.

Interest rates on farm loans in July were nearly the

same as in April and had declined only marginally from the peak levels
reached last winter.

The constancy of rates is not surprising, however,

since rates on farm loans have generally been less responsive to changing
supply and demand conditions than have rates in other markets.
Consumer spending has strengthened since spring, and the outlook
for fall and winter is for continued expansion.
upswing.

Retail sales are on an

A large national retail chain, based in the Twin Cities, reports

a steady expansion since May, with July volume 16 percent above the com­
parable period in 1974.

Tourist spending has generally matched or exceeded

expectations over the summer months.
country have been filled.

Resorts in the northern Minnesota lake

Tourism in the Black Hills is reported to be the

strongest since 1971, with traffic at Mount Rushmore up 17 percent from a
year ago.

Auto sales have improved in the past two months:

Upper Midwest

auto sales in June and July were reported to be up 5 percent over the com­
parable periods of 1974.

-27TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Retail sales in the Tenth District continue to show improvement,
with durable goods particularly strong.

Impulse buying is sharply down,

as consumers either shop for bargains or seek quality at the top of the line.
Inventories are now reported as balanced, and expectations are for a moderate
expansion in both inventory buying and retail sales.

Automobile dealers also

report an improvement in both sales and inventories.

While the production

of winter wheat appears to have met expectations for a record harvest, corn
conditions in some areas are rapidly deteriorating due to extremely dry weather.
Loan demand at Tenth District commercial banks continues to decline as the
gap between commercial paper rates and the prime rate widens.
Retail sales in the major urban areas of the Tenth District have
continued to improve since May.

Sales managers generally report that they

are "very pleased with the rebound in sales" and that sales are "better than
expected".

Two major department stores note, however, that the Kansas City

area is not doing so well as other Tenth District locations.

Durables in

general and furniture in particular are mentioned as showing marked sales
increases.

All retailers surveyed stressed that people are shopping for

price and concentrating on necessities.

Little "impulse buying" was noted.

One knowledgeable source stated that people seem to be buying in two markets.
The first market is extremely responsive to sale items, though discounts of
20 to 30 percent are now required to draw in the traffic.

The second market

is buying top-of-the-line goods, shopping for quality instead of price.
"There seems to be a lack of buyers in the middle areas", he reported.

All

respondents foresee a slow and steady increase in sales as more and more
people get back to work.
Inventories are generally reported as "balanced", "at the right

-28­

level", and "in the best shape they've been in four or five years".

Plans

call for a modest inventory expansion by retailers for the rest of the year.
One interesting development, however, was stressed by the majority of res­
pondents.

Whereas last year vendors were responding quickly to new in­

ventory orders, deliveries are now lagging.

Two respondents expressed con­

cern that some shortages may develop, that they could not respond to a rapid
increase in sales, and that the situation might not correct itself by the
holiday season, leading to a below-potential sales volume.
Tenth District automobile dealers all reported either "greatly im­
proved" or "steadily improved" car sales in May, June, and July.

While each

dealer stressed a "bread and butter" or "hot" selling model, there was no
general agreement on the size or type of car which was doing especially badly.
Sales expectations for the remainder of the calendar year were basically for
a steady increase in line with a slow economic recovery.

Most auto dealers

reported balanced inventories, though some added that they had plenty of cars
to sell, while others stressed a shortage of their "hot" selling models.

A

major observation was that consumers now seem to be resigned to higher fuel
prices.

"Uncertainty appears to be disappearing and is being replaced by

cynicism.
Production of winter wheat in the Tenth District appears to have met
earlier expectations for a record crop, but a larger than normal proportion
of yellow kernels has decreased the export value of this year's crop.

The

wheat marketing year has gotten off to a slow start, as farmers seem determined
to hold their wheat until the local price reaches $3.50 to $4.00 per bushel.
In general, wheat farmers appear to be in a financial position that will
allow them to delay marketing this year.

Corn conditions in western Missouri,

eastern Kansas, and eastern Nebraska are deteriorating rapidly due to

-29­

extremely dry weather.

Corn conditions throughout the remainder of the Dis­

trict are about normal, but some areas have reported insect problems.
The smallest number of cattle on feed for any July 1 since 1967
was just reported by the United States Department of Agriculture.

Place­

ments continue to exceed year-earlier levels, however and, if this trend con­
tinues as expected, the number of cattle on feed should about equal year­
earlier levels by the end of 1975.

The midyear cattle inventory showed a

1 percent increase in cattle and calves on farms since July 1, 1974.

This

is a smaller than expected increase, and is good news for cattlemen since it
now seems possible that the buildup in cattle numbers may be halted by the
end of this year.

Additional good news for farmers came with the announce­

ment that prices received rose 3 percent during the month and ended July 15,
the fourth consecutive monthly increase after sharp previous declines.
A survey of Tenth District bankers revealed a decline in the demand
for loans, including a slack demand for business loans, as the gap between
commercial paper rates and the prime rate widened.

These results were support­

ed by data for all Tenth District reporting banks showing that the volume of
most types of loans increased less than average, or fell contraseasonally,
during July.
The exceptions to this pattern were loans to farmers, which were
unchanged during July on a seasonally adjusted basis, and consumer instal­
ment loans, which rose slightly more than seasonally during July.

Total de­

posits and large negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs) at Tenth District
reporting banks also fell more than the seasonal average during July.

Bankers

contacted in the survey indicated sharply differing flows of CDs, however,
with some reporting substantial runoffs and others indicating that they had
attracted more CDs.

-30ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Industrial output in the Eleventh District turned up in June after
trending down since last November, and a recent survey of the largest manu­
facturers in the District indicates gains in output are continuing.

New

orders have picked up this summer, and since inventories of most finished
goods are at low levels, this firming in demand is translating into stepped­
up production.

For example, output in the chemical industry, the District's

largest, is on the upswing.

Chemical users, having worked off the high level of

stocks accumulated in the last half of 1974, are beginning to replenish in­
ventories, and production has now turned up after declining sharply since last
fall.
A big influx of orders has also prompted apparel and textile firms
to increase production schedules.

Manufacturers claim inventories at all

levels of the garment industry--retailers, suppliers, and distributors--are
very low.

As a result, one of the District's largest garment makers said his

goods are being shipped as soon as they are produced.
Virtually all the manufacturers surveyed said that raw materials are
readily available, but input prices continue to climb.

Because final demand

remains weak, prices of finished goods have held steady, and in some cases have
fallen.

Profit margins, consequently are being squeezed, and in some cases

production costs are not being covered.

Producers of structural metals, for

example, have been particularly hard hit.

A large manufacturer of reinforcing

steel bars, reported a 20 percent increase in the cost of steel scrap--his
principal input--this summer.

Meanwhile, the market for construction remains

weak and, as a result, most shipments have been priced below production costs.
Once demand firms, however, many manufacturers say they will try
to regain their traditional profit margins.

Therefore, as economic recovery

gathers momentum, prices of manufactured goods are expected to climb substantially.

-31-

Auto sales in the District have turned up sharply.

New car regis­

trations in the four largest metropolitan countries of Texas were 14 per­
cent higher in June than in May.
sales were even better.

A survey of new car dealers suggests July

An upswing in consumer confidence contributed to

the upturn in sales, but dealers believe the announcement of higher prices
for next year's models was also a major factor in spurrring sales.

More­

over, dealers say consumer expectations of higher prices should keep demand
for 1975 models strong.
In anticipation of increased auto sales at the close of the cur­
rent model year, dealers have placed large orders to replenish their in­
ventories.

But, largely because of plant closings, new cars have been, and

will likely remain, in short supply.
cant volume of sales is being lost.

As a result, dealers claim a signifi­
A Fort Worth dealer, for example, says

the maximun order Ford allowed him is well below what demand warrants.

This

lack of inventory, he maintains, is holding down sales at least a third.
District banks have increased their holdings of municipal securities
about 5 percent this year, or over four times the national average for com­
mercial banks.

Net additions to municipal portfolios are expected to con­

tinue, at least through the remainder of 1975, as the New York City situation
is having only a minimal impact on municipal markets in the District.

Al­

though buyers have become more conscious of the creditworthiness of issues,
municipalities in the Southwest are generally on sound financial footing.
In fact, issues by District cities are currently being oversubscribed.
Farm and ranch income in the District states has fallen sharply this
year.

Cash receipts from sales of livestock and crops for the first five

months of 1975 were 19 percent less than for the corresponding period last
year, compared with a 9 percent decline for the nation.
ducing food and fiber have continued to climb.

But costs of pro­

-32-

The resulting financial squeeze was reflected in a midyear survey
of agricultural credit conditions in the District.

Repayments of outstanding

bank loans have been sluggish, and the number of renewals and extensions of
loans has risen substantially.

As a result, bankers are much more selective

in their lending, and many have increased collateral requirements on loans.
Narrow profit margins are making it increasingly difficult for
farmers and ranchers with limited equity to meet more stringent credit require­
ments to finance this year's production.

Consequently, bankers report the

turndown rate on new agricultural loans is up significantly.

Areas where

cotton and cattle are the principal agricultural enterprises have been the
hardest hit, as evidenced by the high number of referrals of loan applicants
to nonbank credit agencies.

Moreover, many of these referrals have been to various

emergency programs of the Farmers Home Administration, reflecting the
severity of the cost-price squeeze facing producers.

-33-

TWELFTH DISTRICT--SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors believe that the recovery will be gradual, and
they are viewing economic developments cautiously.

Consumer demand is

still sluggish, although automobile sales have picked up slightly.

Manu­

facturing output is being maintained at recent levels, with increases in
new orders still being satisfied through inventories.
tion of increasing job opportunities.
by high costs.

There is no indica­

All construction is being hampered

The grain sales to the USSR and light spring plantings are

expected to result in increased food prices at the consumer level over the
next six months.

Business loan demand remains weak, and delinquencies are

on an uptrend.
Consumers have not yet stepped up purchasing to a significant
degree.

Although department store sales are up about 7.5 percent over last

year, this barely covers the inflation premium.

Auto sales, however, have

shown some spark over the past month, reflecting a pickup in consumer confi­
dence.

A large manufacturer of sportswear and apparel is optimistic about

1976 spring and summer lines, although sales currently are "flat".

Tourist

travel has exceeded expectations, with entrants to national and state parks
exceeding last year.
On the whole, District manufacturing activity is steady at below­
peak levels.

New orders have picked up but are still largely being filled

from inventories.

Aircraft manufacturers in both southern California and

the Pacific Northwest seem particularly discouraged about the pace of new
orders, considering the long lead time before actual production is affected.
The largest electronics firm in Oregon reports that orders recently have
exceeded last year's volume by 10 percent, but company planning remains
cautious.

In the same state, machinery manufacturers anticipate declining

-34­

inventories over the next six to nine months.
Demand for aluminum products has been increasing slowly.

Inven­

tories in the hands of users have declined sharply in recent months, although
producers' stocks have remained high.

Similarly, in the steel industry,

orders have firmed but sales have come out of swollen stocks.

The copper

industry in Utah is benefiting from revived automotive demand.
The inventory adjustment appears to be completed in the forest
products industry, but production will be directly tied to sales levels and
the recovery is expected to be very gradual.

Pulp and paper demand has

increased slightly in the past month.
Natural gas supply shortages are becoming serious.

A 10 percent

decline in available gas for each of the next four or five years is anticipated.
Utilities are unable to buy more gas, and new customers are not being sought.
Customers with interruptible service may have to switch to propane fuel which
is also in short supply.
Although real estate activity is bouyant, demand for new housing
construction is generally very weak.

The view is reiterated that:

"We have

almost priced outselves out of single-family housing, with an average home
costing $35,000 to $38,000."
It is an increasing problem to devise methods of amortization.
labor contracts have boosted construction worker wages 11 to 12 percent.

New
Except

for road building, nonresidential construction has not increased, and job
opportunities have remained constant.

In some cases, stretch-outs in en­

vironmental protection-control studies have delayed new plant construction,
and the costs of pollution-related nonearning assets have amounted to 40 per­
cent of construction outlays.

-35-

As a result of the Soviet purchase of large quantities of wheat,
corn, and barley last month, prices of cereal crops have risen, in the case
of wheat from approximately $2.95 a bushel to $4.00 net to the farmers.

The

inventory of fresh potatoes is near an all-time low, and the spring crop
planted for summer harvest is below average.

Although some farm costs have

been going down (e.g., nitrogen fertilizers, which sold at $320 a ton in the
spring, were recently quoted at $146 a ton), there will be strong pressures
for food price increases over the next six months.
Bank loan demand has remained unchanged over the past month, with
business loan demand the softest.

In line with the increase in rates on

certificates of deposit, other rates have been moved up to cover costs.
Profit margins of the banking industry are expected to narrow as the year
progresses, with more losses, delinquencies, bankruptcies, and more work
out in commercial loans.

Savings flows are down.

