CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

February 12,

1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i

First District - Boston . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

Third District - Philadelphia . . . .

. .

. . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Fourth District - Cleveland . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Fifth District - Richmond . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

Sixth District - Atlanta

. . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

Second District - New York

Seventh District - Chicago

. .

Eighth District - St. Louis . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Ninth District - Minneapolis

. . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Tenth District - Kansas City

.. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

Eleventh District - Dallas

Twelfth District - San Francisco

. . .

33

. . .

SUMMARY*

The general thrust of this month's comments is that the economic
situation has deteriorated and further weakening is in store.

Unemployment

seems likely to rise again in February, on the basis of widespread reports of
more layoffs since early January.

Slackening conditions in the labor market,

however, have done little thus far to curb wage demands, according to New York
and Chicago.

On the other hand, the recession appears to be having a depressing

effect on prices, perhaps even more than the indexes suggest.

The overall

impression of the District reports is that the recession has become more
pervasive but there are regional and industry sources of strength in the nation's
economy.

Reduced natural gas supplies, mentioned by Cleveland and Richmond,

have contributed to cutbacks in industrial production and employment.

Housing

remains in the doldrums throughout the nation, retail trade generally continues
to be sluggish except for a pickup in new car sales, the capital goods sector is
showing signs of further weakness, and excessive inventories remain a problem
for many firms.
underway.

A number of Districts report instances of inventory liquidation

At the moment there seems to be little optimism regarding prospects

for an early recovery.

In one of the more bearish reports, for example, Boston

points to growing fear of a "second tier" in the recession; its academic
correspondents are particularly concerned over the state of the economy.
Alternatively, there are some encouraging items.

Philadelphia reports that

more than half the manufacturers in its survey are optimistic for the
outlook six months ahead.

Richmond says there seems to have been a break in

the mood of pessimism which has prevailed over the past few months, with an
increase in the proportion of their survey respondents expecting an improvement

* Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

in business activity in the next six months.

Atlanta mentions a rebound in

tourism in Central and South Florida, and that businessmen seem to have a
renewed air of optimism since the first of the year.
In the consumer sector, heavy sales promotions and price-cutting have
had limited success stimulating retail trade.
sluggish in virtually every District.

Sales are described as weak or

The auto manufacturers' rebate program

has made new car sales an exception, but as Chicago notes, has not brought about
a boom.

Atlanta adds that some dealers worry about what will happen when the

rebate program ends.

Philadelphia says retailers are pessimistic about the

near-term outlook, and Boston reports that retailers are growing more cautious
in their ordering.

New York and Richmond say some progress has been made

reducing excessive retail inventories.
In the capital goods sector, several industries are still operating at
a high level.

Chicago says large order backlogs are maintaining output of

equipment for coal mining, oil well drilling, rail transport, ore boats,
heavy agricultural operations, and chemical processing.
types of capital goods have dropped sharply, however.

Orders for many other
Philadelphia reports

that capital spending plans have been cut back in the retail sector, but are
holding firm in manufacturing.
in capital spending.

New York and Cleveland see signs of weakening

Richmond and Atlanta mention little scaling down or

retrenchment in spending plans.

In New England, firms say most investments

are planned for such purposes as cost reduction, replacement, and compliance;
plans for expansion are nil.

San Francisco commented that an increase in the

investment tax credit would not help capital spending until late 1975.
The agricultural outlook for soybeans and feed grains appears to be
encouraging, according to Dallas, St. Louis, and Richmond.

Despite recent

declines in crop prices, there is still enough incentive to increase production
plans.

The sharp drop in cotton prices is causing a switch from cotton to

soybean production.

Kansas City, Dallas, Minneapolis, and San Francisco all

comment on the difficulties of livestock producers, many of whom have gone
bankrupt.
Among Districts commenting on banking developments, Philadelphia
says prospects of large defaults in loans are concerning bankers.
says that most banks have increased reserves for loan defaults.
reports that delinquencies on farm loans have risen.
any strength in business or consumer loan demand.

Dallas
It also

No District reported

Demand deposits have declined

generally.
Thrift institutions continue to have net savings inflows, according
to Dallas, St. Louis, Atlanta, and Cleveland.
savings inflows in late January.

Chicago notes a dropoff in

- 1 -

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The outlook is unsettled.

Previously, our directors felt comfortable

in attempting to fix the timing of the 1975 economic rebound; now they are
more insecure and uncertainties cause them to dwell on short-term developments.
In December, the New England unemployment rate moved up by .7 percent from the
previous month to 9 percent; a year earlier, 6.5 percent of the labor force
was unemployed.

The Massachusetts unemployment rate was 9.9 percent in

December.
Retail sales in the region are not reassuring the directors.

In

some markets, inventories are very heavy, according to year-end statements.
Those firms which were able to report higher revenues note that they were
reasonably successful in selling their way out of stock.

However, their

fortunes are attributed to capturing a larger share of their specific
markets, declining auto sales, their offering good values (very aggressive
promotions and liquidations by manufacturers are critical here), and,
possibly, trading against spring sales.
sanguine forecasts.

These factors do not contribute to

As the unemployment figures are released and as major

local manufacturers continue to announce extensions of furloughs, cutbacks,
and layoffs, the retailers are growing even more cautious in ordering and
planning.
The directors report that most investment in the region is tied to
things one "must" do:

cost reduction, replacement, compliance.

Expansion

is nil, and there is worry that today's musts could be tomorrow's luxuries.
A major national firm was recently required to face red tape to get a
$1 million loan at an aggressive regional bank.
would have been shown.

Previously, the red carpet

Now, the bank is not sure it wants the business.

- 2 -

There is a growing fear of realizing a "second tier" in the recession.
The directors are attempting to determine whether this recent experience is
a "flushing of the pipelines or a snowball."

Continuation of dreary prospects

may lead to further substantial reductions in growth targets for firms and
banks introducing another drop in economic activity.

Desirable or not, much

business is looking to Washington to lead the economy from the slump:

a

helpless passive attitude is gaining ground.
Our academic correspondants, Professors Samuelson, Solow, Eckstein,
Tobin, and Duesenberry, all agreed on three points:

1. The economy is in a

serious downward spiral, 2. The proposed tax cuts are insufficient to ensure
a recovery, and 3. The Federal Reserve must pursue a more aggressive
expansionary policy.

Several economists also predicted restrictive monetary

policies would unleash a strong political backlash against the System.
All the economists emphasized the severity of the current recession.
Eckstein said that for the first time since the 1930's, we are in a pure
Keynsian spiral of falling incomes and employment.
concluded, that the economy will generate an upturn.
economy as in an "emergency situation".
forecasts are too optimistic.
one signal:

There is no certainty, he
Tobin characterized the

Solow believes that all the current

Samuelson said that the economy is giving only

it needs strong fiscal and monetary stimulus.

The proposed tax cuts were viewed as inadequate.

Tobin pointed out that

fiscal policy will be snarled up in Congress for some time, while the need for
stimulus is immediate.

Like Duesenberry, who argued for $30 billion in tax

cuts, Tobin felt that a $16 billion cut was not enough.

Samuelson felt that

Ford had a minimal program and that the $7 billion tariff would do more for
depression than the tax cuts would do for recovery.

Solow felt that the

budget was inadequately expansionary and that expenditures should be increased.

- 3 -

The long lead time on expenditures would be no problem, he noted, since we
are at least 3 years away from full employment.
On monetary policy, the call was for expansion.

None of the economists

were impressed with the fourth quarter reserve growth as a reason for not
pushing harder to get interest rates down and money supply growth up.

Tobin

argued that if it is true that demand is not out there, then it cannot do any
harm to push reserves out.
during a recovery.

There is plenty of time to sop up any reserves

While he would not be upset by 12 percent growth in M1,

if that is what is required to keep interest rates from creeping up, he is
personally skeptical that the federal deficit will require it. He thinks the
problem has been blown out of all proportion.

He sees corporate borrowing as

refinancing, not as an additional drain on savings.
Samuelson echoed the same theme.
isn't the job.

He argued that getting reserves out

One cannot take the multiplier as given.

If the multiplier is

low because demand is weak, the Fed has to push out even more reserves.

He

noted that Friedman's criticism about Fed actions during the depression was
not that we did not get the reserve out.
enough, given a falling multiplier.
too much demand in 8 months.

The Fed did, but it did not push out

The real question is whether we forsee

If not, he argued, we can not effectively say

that by doing too much now, then the money will be out there to haunt us.
When velocity picks up, we should take the money out.

The worst of all possible

worlds is for the Fed to stick to one policy too long.
Duesenberry thought that financing the deficit might cause a temporary
spurt in money supply growth, but that we should not let this be an excuse for
letting rates creep up.
more and kept there.

He believes open market rates should be down a bit

-4

-

Eckstein argued that it was foolish for the Fed to delay in getting
rates down.

Eckstein agreed with Tobin that the Fed needed to do something

dramatic and immediate.

Eckstein said the Fed should stop decrying the

deficit and should say straight out that the economy is in danger of a
depression and that the Fed will do whatever it can to prevent it. He felt
that at this time, it was not constructive for the Fed to be concerned about
banks' capital adequacy.

Our concern should be to help businesses

re-establish their liquidity.

Both he and Solow thought it was time for

the Fed to begin buying long-term securities--either agency issues or
corporate bonds--as a means of helping business liquidity and reviving
investment.

-5

-

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

The picture that emerges from the views expressed by Second District
directors and other business leaders who were contacted recently is one of
further declines in economic activity.

Consumer demand has been generally

sluggish, although aggressive sales promotions and cutbacks in purchases from
suppliers have enabled some merchants to reduce inventories.
capital spending plans are being scaled down.

Business

Unemployment is rising rapidly,

but most respondents have observed little or no moderation in wage demands.
They did note, however, some indications of a slowing of the rate of price
increases.
Concerning consumer spending, District retail sales appear to have been
running below the nationwide average, with the New York City retail sales
picture showing particular weakness.

An official of a trade association

thus reported that business at the City's department stores was about 4
percent lower in dollar terms this January than in January 1974.

He stated

that traffic at the major stores was down significantly, and that there seems
to be considerably less "impulse" buying.

Similarly, an executive of a high

quality New York City department store with branches in the suburbs reported
that sales by his firm have been running behind last year in real terms and
have been "struggling" along to maintain the same level in dollar terms.

He

noted, however, that business was somewhat better at the firm's suburban
branches.

Some New York City retail merchants did report that sales and

promotions have been fairly successful in attracting business.

These sales

have covered a much wider range of merchandise than usual, including goods that
normally would not be placed on sale until spring, and have involved
significantly greater price concessions than usual, with a resulting decline
in profit margins.

At the same time, the respondents reported that merchants

-6

­

have significantly cut their own purchases from their suppliers and that
these cutbacks have helped to reduce retail inventories.

Similarly, the

Buffalo branch directors observed that merchants in Western New York have
met with success in moving goods and in reducing inventories to manageable
levels.

This has been achieved, however, only through sharp markdowns with

correspondingly adverse effects on profitability.
Reduced demand, according to a number of respondents, appears to be
putting some downward pressure on prices.

Among others, the president of a

large nationwide retail organization stated that prices of basic raw materials
and of some intermediate goods have softened considerably and that, while
posted prices of most finished consumer goods were holding firm, consumers
were benefitting from the sales promotion programs mentioned above.

The

chairman of a large New York City bank stated that there was growing evidence
that prices were now rising much less rapidly, and that in view of sales
promotions and discounting the official price indices were probably overstating
the rate of inflation.

A number of top officials of industrial firms

mentioned price reductions in their industries, including textiles, wood
products, and some metal products.

It was also noted, however, that prices of

other products, including auto parts, paper and certain chemicals, were remaining
firm.
Concerning capital spending, the respondents in general agreed that the
outlook had weakened significantly in recent months.

Among others, the New

York City banker mentioned above looked for further cutbacks, especially in
consumer goods industries.

Another director felt that while many businesses

are committed to capital programs for 1975 and 1976, they are hesitating to make
commitments beyond 1976 at this time.

The Buffalo directors in general agreed

that 1975 capital spending plans were sharply cut in the latter part of 1974.

- 7 -

In their views, firms experiencing drastically reduced sales have no
alternative but to further cut back from their planned capital spending
during 1975 in order to cope with worsening liquidity problems.
Unemployment in the Second District has continued to rise rapidly.
New York City, northern New Jersey, and Buffalo have been especially hard hit,
with unemployment rates well above the national average.

In the view of most

respondents, however, the rise in unemployment has thus far exerted little
moderating influence on wage demands.

This view was summed up by the Buffalo

branch directors who felt that while rising unemployment may be having a
moderating effect on upward wage pressures in nonunionized small to medium
sized firms, there was no evidence of a less aggressive posture by the large
unions representing workers in major industries.

Indeed, it was noted that

some union leaders are "preparing for battle" and likely to accuse management
of using the current economic slump as the basis for harsh negotiations
affording labor less than acceptable contract settlements.

-8

-

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District continues its slowdown.
Manufacturers report declines in new orders and unfilled orders in February,
but over half are optimistic for the outlook 6 months ahead.

The labor force,

too, is feeling the effects of a declining regional economy.

And, with the

size of the labor force continuing to grow, an even higher level of unemployment
in the region can be expected in the months ahead.

Area retail sales also

were severely damaged in January, and appear to be equally hard hit in
February.

Capital spending plans in the retail sector have been cutback as

a result, but in manufacturing, most executives don't plan to alter current
spending plans for the next 6 months.

The outlook for prices remains bleak

this month, as manufacturers post additional price hikes with expectations
that this trend will continue for the next 6 months.

And, area bankers are

feeling the pinch, as loan levels and deposits drop off.
Manufacturers in the Third District responding to this month's business
outlook survey report that business activity is continuing to slow down in the
regional economy.

Almost half of the respondents report a general decline in

business activity in February.
repeated.

And, in their own firms, this condition is

Two out of five businessmen report declines in new orders, and two

out of three are posting decreases in unfilled orders.
manufacturers are more bullish on the future outlook.

However, these
Well over half of the

executives polled expect the general level of business activity to pick up by
August.

And, an equal number expect this general increase in the region to

translate into an increase in both new orders and shipments for their own
firms.

Manufacturers remain mixed in their outlook for any increase in capital

investment plans 6 months out, with nearly half of the respondents content to

- 9 ­

let their spending plans remain the same.
This general slowdown in the manufacturing sector is also have an
effect on the labor force in the Third District.

While 60 percent of the

executives are maintaining a stable workforce and workweek, almost a third of
the respondents report a decrease in the average number of employees and the
average length of the workweek.

On balance, slightly more manufacturers

expect to increase their employment levels by August than expect to decrease
them, but over half anticipate no change in these key employment indicators.
With a new crop of graduates moving into the labor force in late spring, the
regional economy will likely experience higher unemployment in the months
ahead.
Our retailers too, are experiencing the effects of the declining
regional economy, although the number of transactions had fallen below the
level of a year ago January, retail executives have reported that the dollar
volume of sales has been keeping pace with previous years.

However, as of

February, department store sales as measured in dollars as well as in the
number of transactions, fell significantly below last year's level.

And, the

large discount stores, such as Sears and Penneys, were especially hard hit as
they were caught with large inventories on hand.

One major retailer in the

area reports a policy decision to decrease employment levels in its stores
through attrition, with several others hinting at similar plans.

And, all

retailers report that capital expenditure plans have been severely cut back.
As for spring sales and the outlook for the next several months, retailers
expect ever softening sales as prices continue to rise and the general level of
the economy continues to decline.
Prices in the manufacturing sector, too, increased in February.

Over

one third of the executives polled are facing higher prices on raw materials

- 10 ­

this month than they experienced last month.

And 50 percent expect to be

paying even higher prices by August.
Loans at most banks are below last year's level.
Philadelphia banks report a slight softening in demand.

And, the larger
Although most banks

are generally moving to a less restrictive loan policy than they have followed
in the last several months, they are moving cautiously.

The prospects of

large defaults coupled with difficulty in collections in a declining economy
are weighing heavily in their decision.

Demand deposit growth is generally

disappointing and only savings instruments guaranteeing 7 percent interest or
better are attracting new time deposits.

- 11 -

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Economic conditions in the District deteriorated significantly last
month, and further weakness is expected.
are widespread.

Layoffs and shortened workweeks

It appears many industries are liquidating inventories,

although some steel and machine tool firms say they need to rebuild stocks.
Signs of weakness are spreading in the capital goods sector, and demand for
steel is softening.

S&Ls continue to have savings inflows, but mortgage

loan demand is weak and housing is still declining.
Early returns from our monthly survey of District manufacturers
indicate a further sharp deterioration in business during January.

Many

companies reported declines in new orders, shipments, and backlogs; and
inventory liquidation, underway last month, apparently continued.

The

proportion of firms paying higher prices eased for the fourth consecutive
month.

One clothing manufacturer said sales and new orders are so low, and

inventories so high, that it is not purchasing and therefore cannot take
advantage of lower prices quoted by its suppliers.
Employment and hours worked continued to drop in January, and
unemployment seems likely to rise further in February.

Several large firms

announced temporary or indefinite layoffs beginning in late January or
February.

In the Pittsburgh area, a 40 percent reduction in the amount of

natural gas available for industrial use (effective January 1) has caused
some layoffs--concentrated in the stone, clay and glass industries.
firms are shortening workweeks.

Other

In the Akron area, for example, many tire

company employees who usually work a 6-day week of 6-hour days have gone to
a 5-day week and some to 4-day and even 3-day weeks.

- 12 -

An economist for a major tire company reports that further weakened
sales have lifted inventories of tires to a 9-month supply compared with
6 months recently.

Production has finally been cut below sales and additional

layoffs are likely, although the worst seems to be over.

Demand for chemical

products has dropped sharply since November, resulting in a rapid buildup of
stocks.

Production has been cut in line with reduced sales and output

appears to be leveling off.

One firm intends to reduce planned 1975 capital

spending by stretching out some programs.

The firm wants to avoid any

further depression of its debt-equity ratio.
Signs of weakening in the capital goods sector are spreading.

A

major heavy-duty truck manufacturer in Cleveland recently closed its plant
for a week, and reopened with operations reduced by one-third.
suppliers and some machinery firms are laying off workers.

Truck

A major

machine tool company in Cleveland said cancelled machine tool orders exceeded
new orders in January for the third consecutive month.

The firm's economist

noted that backlogs through mid-1976 and the need for inventory rebuilding
preclude any decline in employment.

This economist, a highly regarded

analyst of capital spending, added that he expects the rate of decline in
real capital spending to continue during the first half and to increase in the
second half.
Another major machine tool producer reported that new orders have
weakened recently but are still running close to the firm's shipping rate.
Although cancellations have increased, back orders stand at 15 to 18
months.

The firm has not changed its capital spending plans.

Its inventories

have improved but are still unbalanced, partly because of continued shortages
of some materials, notably castings.
a 48-hour week.

This firm is still hiring and working

- 13 -

A major electronic and printing press producer reports orders for
presses fell sharply in January following a strong volume of bookings
throughout the second half of 1974.

The decline was attributed to

uncertainties over the investment tax credit.

Demand for the firm's electronics

products, such as radio and TV broadcasting equipment and computer components,
is still strong, with January bookings 10 percent above December 1974 levels.
Capital spending plans for 1975 have not been curtailed because of the
recession, although the firm may stretch out as much as $1 million of its
$16 million increase planned for this year.

Stocks are being reduced

gradually and are in better balance than they were at the end of the third
quarter.

No drastic cutbacks in stocks are anticipated because order backlog

is 15-20 percent higher than last year.
The treasurer of a multinational firm that produces office equipment
reported orders have fallen sharply recently, from both domestic and foreign
sources.

The firm has laid off about 1,000 of its 16,000 workers since

December 1 because of declining sales and large inventories.

Inventories are

considered excessive, but production is thought to be near the bottom of a
"U"-shaped pattern.
Demand for steel is weakening, according to three major steel firms.
Customers are cancelling or deferring delivery on old orders, and pushing back
delivery on new orders.

However, there is still substantial strength in the

steel industry stemming largely from oil, coal mining, railroad, and farm
equipment producers.

One steel firm heavily dependent on the automotive and

appliance industries has begun laying off workers and reducing the workweek.
Steel output in Cleveland has declined recently because a blast furnace at one
mill cracked last month.

It will probably be March before repairs are completed.

The firm is receiving poor quality metallurgical coal resulting in production

- 14 ­

inefficiencies.

Another large steel firm reports bottlenecks in production

because of natural gas shortages and because they have operated at full
capacity for 2 years without sufficient maintenance.
Demand for mortgage loans is seasonally weak, according to some banks
and S&Ls in Cleveland.

Officers attribute weak loan demand in part to a

lack of consumer confidence but also apparently to little easing in mortgage
terms.

One major bank requires 40 percent down on a 20-year loan, with an

interest rate of 9 1/4 percent.
encouraged.

Loans with less than 40 percent down are not

In contrast, some S&Ls are actively soliciting mortgage loans,

following 3 successive months of net deposit growth.

A $150 million deposit

institution that offers a variable rate mortgage is actively seeking loans
but has found fewer takers than it wants.
plummet.

Housing starts continue to

- 15 -

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

The January survey of Fifth District businesses reveals further
deterioration of business conditions.

Reports from across the District

indicate continued economic weakness exacerbated by spot shortages of
critical energy supplies.

Unemployment has reached or is approaching record

levels in many areas and pockets of severe unemployment are becoming more
common.

The responses of manufacturing concerns show continued weakness in

new orders and further declines in shipments and backlogs of orders.

Reports

of plant closings and layoffs continue across a broad range of manufacturers.
Survey responses indicate a further accumulation of finished goods inventories
and growing concern over present levels.

Commercial and industrial loans at

District weekly reporting banks declined sharply in January; real estate loans
are exhibiting a gentle but persistent rise while consumer loans remain
sluggish.

In the agricultural sector, changes in relative prices during 1974

appear to be altering the prospective crop mix for the coming planting
season, with major shifts from cotton to soybeans and feed grains.
Manufacturers' responses to our latest survey reveal the continuation
of several presistent trends.

Over 70 percent indicate further declines in

backlogs of orders and almost as many report reductions in the volume of new
orders.

Meanwhile, over 50 percent report a decline in the number of

employees.

The volume of shipments continues weak and although the number of

employees and hours worked per week are down, inventories of finished goods
remain firm.

Over 60 percent of the manufacturing respondents view current

inventory levels as excessive, compared to about 50 percent a month earlier.
Almost half of the manufacturers surveyed consider current plant and equipment
capacity excessive, but fewer than 10 percent feel current expansion plans
should be cut back.

- 16 -

From around the District reports of plant closings and layoffs
continue across a broad range of industries.

Recent announcements involve

such industries as printing, chemicals, shipbuilding, electrical equipment,
and rubber.

Meanwhile, actual and potential disruptions of natural gas

supplies are contributing to uncertainties in parts of the District.
Our survey of District retailers yields much the same picture.

Sales

declined in January following an increase in December, while sales of big
ticket items continue weak.

Responses indicate a reduction in retail

inventories for the first time in 7 months, although 50 percent of the retailers
still view current levels as excessive.

An exception to this situation seems

to have developed with regard to sales of new automobiles.

The sales policies

initiated by the manufacturers have given a significant boost to sales in
this sector.
Although no trend is discernible at this time, there is some indication
of a slowing of price increases.

Of the manufacturers surveyed, 35 percent

report paying higher prices, down substantially from recent months.
same time, over 30 percent received lower prices during January.

At the

Retailers

report paying and receiving higher prices generally, but such reports are not
nearly so common as in recent months, indicating a significant improvement over
the last half of 1974.

In addition, there seems to have been a break in the

mood of pessimism which has prevailed over the past few months.

The diffusion

of responses reveals some cautious optimism, as more respondents than in recent
surveys see an improvement in business activity over the next 6 months.
Lending activity at Fifth District banks appears to have stabilized in
January, while interest in investments increased.

The level of seasonally

adjusted loans at District member banks was almost unchanged from the December
1974 level.

Seasonally adjusted bank credit at District member banks showed

a net increase after declining in December.

The unadjusted data for weekly

- 17 ­

reporting banks show that commercial and industrial loans have declined at
a fairly rapid pace since the beginning of the year.

Bankers' acceptances,

however, have resisted the general decline, increasing about 100 percent over
Real estate loans at weekly reporting banks continue a gentle but

the month.

persistent rise while consumer loans remain sluggish.

Member bank borrowings

were at the lowest level since January 1973 following the seventh consecutive
month of decline.

Savings at District banks seem to have slacked off in

January following increases in December.
By and large, last year turned out to be a fairly good crop year but
not an exceptional one.
levels a year earlier.

Output of some of the major crops was below the record
But crop prices were generally higher, and value of

production of all District crops totaled $3.5 billion--23 percent above 1973.
Farm real estate values per acre continued to advance during the year ended
November 1, 1974, with increases in District states ranging from 14 to 32
percent.

The rate of increase in each state, especially in Virginia and West

Virginia, slowed substantially after March 1, however.

District cotton

producers, reacting to the sharp drop in market prices last year, have
indicated that they will plant only about half as much acreage in cotton in
1975 as they did a year ago.

Growers' plans to increase soybean plantings 8

percent and feed grain acreage 2 percent will more than offset the severe
cut back in cotton, however.

- 18 -

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Economic prospects in the Sixth District economy appear to be turning
cautiously optimistic.

Layoffs are still being reported but not of the

magnitude of the past few months.

Local area businessmen and directors'

opinions are mixed concerning the impact of automobile price rebates and post
holiday retail sales.
previously expected.

Generally, sales seem to be holding up better than
Besides auto rebates, several other instances of price

cutting were reported again this month.

Industrial and commercial investment

plans, despite some retrenchment, remain reasonably strong in the face of
last year's weak economy and little improvement yet this year.
Unemployment in the District continues on the rise, as it does
nationally, but the extent of the rise varies throughout the region.

Florida

and Georgia have been hardest hit, and unemployment rates in these states are
higher than the nation's.
unemployment rate.

Both states are typically well below the national

Alabama and Mississippi, though showing some increases in

unemployment, seem to be holding their own.

For example, Alabama steel

producers are turning their backs on new customers; producers indicate that
their books are full through 1975.

Union Carbide Corporation announced a large

expansion ($9 million) at its steel mill in Gadsden, Alabama.

Bessemer

freight car building plant, the world's largest and most diversified facility
of its type, is booked solid with orders through this year.

Reports of job

layoffs are fewer and more scattered than in the previous 2 or 3 months.
South Central Bell will lay off 250 employees in Alabama and will trim capital
spending by $82 million.

A large Florida truck-trailer company has laid off

one-half its work force.

Three hundred workers will be furloughed by the

Tennessee Valley Authority.

A Louisiana paper mill which makes liner board

- 19 ­

used by many national companies has closed down, idling 335 workers.

A

large plywood manufacturer has also recently shut down its facilities.

North

Georgia's carpet industry has recently predicted that 1975 will be a better
year than previous bleak forecasts have indicated.

At a recent carpet industry

meeting, an industry representative reported that January 1975 sales surpassed
those of a year ago.

Alabama's textile industry is also expecting a good

year.
Regional auto dealers are reporting improvement in sales as a result
of the rebate programs.

Florida directors indicated that sales are up from

previous months but still below year-ago levels.
however, by the availability of credit.
heavy.

Sales are restrained,

Showroom traffic has been very

However, heavy-duty truck sales have fallen to the lowest point in

many years in Central Florida.
to rebates.

New Orleans directors report mixed responses

A New Orleans area director noted that the rebates have materially

enhanced showroom traffic but not new car sales.

A Mobile, Alabama director

reports that the rebate has boosted sales significantly and that dealers are
very enthusiastic.

Three Baton Rouge, Louisiana car dealers indicated that

the rebates were responsible for 50- to 100-percent sales increases.

But it

was interesting to note that each of the three dealers stated that they are
now worried about what will happen to auto sales when the rebate program ends.
A survey of Alabama auto dealers indicates that rebates have caused great
increases in showroom traffic and substantial increases in sales, in some cases
over 100 percent at 23 major dealers around the state.

It was also reported that

several large Alabama industries with ties to the auto industry were giving
$100 rebates to employees who purchased new cars.
Retail sales seem to have held up fairly well in January.

Directors'

responses to questions regarding the extent preholiday sales campaigns

- 20 ­

siphoned off January sales were mixed.
January sales were received.

At least two reports of strong

One indicated that retail stocks were the

lowest in years, creating a problem until spring delivery of merchandise.
A Central Florida retailer, however, believes that December sales promotions
did eat into January sales.

Louisiana directors reported that retailers were

satisfied with January sales levels.
not drain January sales.

Apparently, December promotions did

A report from the Alexandria, Louisiana area,

however, indicates that retail sales are sluggish and not responding to
intense price promotions.
Last month we reported a surge in holiday tourist traffic in Florida.
In early January, tourist activity fell off drastically but has rebounded
again, at least in Central and South Florida.

One director reports that

businessmen in central Florida seem to have a renewed air of optimism since
the first of the year.
Besides the car rebates, several instances of price cutting were noted.
A South Florida area retailer indicates that at present inflation is dead in
soft goods.
prices.

He notes that there is weakness in both apparel and textile goods

An Alabama apparel retailer indicates that while leisure wear is

selling well, men's clothing is one area where inventories remain abnormally
high.

He notes that they are now in a whole new ball game for clothing

manufacturers; they have adjusted their thinking, and it appears now that
prices for fall 1975 will be reduced from fall 1974 prices.

There is

considerable price cutting on Florida's housing, condominium, and rental-unit
markets.

Direct cuts have appeared in resale markets, while discounts, "free

gifts," no leases, no deposits, and low early-months' rent are being offered
on new home and rental housing.

One Florida director reports that 55 townhouses

previously priced in the $55,000-range were reduced to $36,000; within a
week they were all sold.

- 21 -

Savings inflows continue at savings and loans throughout the
District.

These institutions, particularly in Florida and the Atlanta area,

are now beginning to seek new mortgage commitments.

Rates have been reported

in the 8 3/4- to 9-percent range by some savings and loans.

- 22 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The general business decline in the Seventh District continues with
no reversal in sight.

Virtually all industries, with producers of heavy capital

goods still an exception, are laying off workers, cutting production schedules,
and reducing inventories.

Pessimism among consumers, businessmen, and lenders

is deep and almost universal.

A general realization exists that this decline

is far more pervasive than earlier postwar downturns.

Mortgage funds are now

more available, but there is no indication, as yet, of a revival in residental
construction.
Large order backlogs are maintaining output of equipment for coal mining,
oil well drilling, rail transport, Great Lakes shipping (mainly large ore
boats), steel mills, agriculture (at least heavy equipment), and chemical
processing.

On the other hand, output of some equipment has been reduced

sharply, including lighter farm and construction equipment and heavy trucks.
These sectors had been strong until the fourth quarter.

Orders for many types

of equipment components (e.g., mechanical controls, small motors, axles, and
transmissions), which had presented bottlenecks through much of 1973 and 1974,
have dropped very sharply in recent months.
Shortages of certain types of bearings and hydraulic and electrical
components continue, and steel plates and structurals are still on allocation,
but such reports are much less frequent.

Prices of some industrial supplies,

including specialty steels and fuel have softened--especially in the brokered
markets.

Overall price inflation apparently continues, however.

A large

producer of farm equipment says the average prices it pays for supplies and
components rose significantly in December and January, although at a slower
pace.

Average prices paid by this firm in early February were one-third

higher than a year earlier.

Net new orders for steel have declined

- 23 ­

substantially, with cancellations playing a larger role.

Demand for

packaging materials has dropped sharply, partly as a result of inventory
reductions.
Although oil and gas exploration continues at a pace limited only by
capacity, oil firms say that they are scaling down future plans.

The threat

of an excess profits tax is said to be a factor, although demand for oil
products has been weaker than expected.

Prices of gasoline and some other

petroleum products have been under downward pressure as a result of sizable
inventories.
Electric and telephone utilities report demand to be below expectations.
New installations of telephone and message volume have declined, a new
phenomenon since World War II.

Most telephone companies have laid off workers.

One company has relied on attrition, but says layoffs are likely.
The job market continues to deteriorate.

New claims for unemployment

compensation have been running about double last year's increased level
throughout the District.

Unfilled requisitions at the Federal Reserve Bank

are at the lowest level in memory of some old timers.

Newspapers carry

frequent stories of white collar workers, including executive and technical
types, who are unemployed for the first time in their working lives with no
early prospects for employment.
said to have been exhausted.

Chrysler's SUB fund for nonunion workers is

In the Chicago area, the truck drivers union has

ordered a maximum 50-hour week and a 10-hour day to spread available work,
involving a seldom-used contract clause.

Relatively few jobs are open and then

mainly for such specialties as chemical engineers, draftsmen, accountants,
commission salesmen, and telephone solicitors.

Despite weak job markets,

low-paid, menial, and dirty jobs are hard to fill.

Moreover, most labor groups

negotiating new contracts are militant in demanding increases in compensation
of 10-12 percent or more.

- 24 -

Reports indicate a dropoff in savings inflows to S&Ls in late
January.

Nevertheless, most major associations have resumed lending to

non-customers, with rates cut to 9 percent.
housing in the District.
household formation.

There seems to be no surplus of

Net new construction probably is well below

Rent hikes on "better units" in the Chicago area are

expected to average 10-15 percent on leases renewed this year.
Consumers are buying very cautiously despite price reductions and heavy
promotions.

Retailers appear to be closing marginal outlets more frequently,

even in modern shopping centers.
a boom in new car sales.

Rebates on some car models have not brought

Aside from the recession, car buyers are said to

be deterred by price increases (about $1,000 per car), by the presence of the
new features required to promote safety and control pollution, and by
uncertainties as to the functioning of catalytic converters and the
availability of lead-free gas.

- 25 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Eighth District businessmen generally report a slackening in
economic activity in recent weeks.

Growth of retail sales has apparently

slowed further, although some improvement in auto sales has been reported.
Manufacturing output and total employment have declined and construction
activity remains at a very low level.

Some acceleration in the growth of

deposits at savings and loan institutions was reported.

Farmers are currently

planning acreage increases for most crops this spring.
Large retailers reported poor sales in January, and excessive
inventories have triggered considerable price cutting and promotional activity.
Although automobile dealers report some recent improvement in car sales as a
result of the rebate programs, such sales are still well below levels of a
year ago.

With the large inventory of cars, increased sales will have to

continue for some time to have a major impact on manufacturing.
Manufacturing activity is in a slump throughout most of the District.
More layoffs have been announced since last month in the automobile, textile,
appliance, boxboard and paper products industries.

Many firms have curtailed

operations by shortening the work week and eliminating overtime.

However,

in a few cases, including the television and automobile industries, some
previously laid off workers have been recalled.
A number of manufacturing firms continue to report fairly high levels
of business activity.

These include capital goods, steel, and chemicals.

A manufacturer of towboat, barge, and dredging equipment reports backlogs of
2 years at the present time.

One steel manufacturer reported backlogs have

dwindled in recent months but unfilled orders are still higher than a year ago.

- 26 -

Some chemicals, including fertilizers, remain in short supply.
Nonmanufacturing employment, which declined in the District in the
first half of last year, has picked up slightly since July.

Construction

employment has generally remained at a relatively low level, but increases
have occurred in other activities including health care and government.
The increase in deposits at savings and loan institutions reported
last month apparently continued in January.

Savings flows into commercial

banks have leveled off, however, and demand deposits have declined sharply
in recent weeks.

Loan demand at banks continues weak as both interest rates

and loan volume have declined.
While construction activity continues in a slump, the increase in
mortgage money has been filtering into the used home market at somewhat lower
interest rates.

One building representative in the St. Louis area predicts

a worse year in 1975 than in 1974 for construction of single family dwellings;
however, other reporters expect some slow improvement in home building
throughout 1975, leading to an upturn in demand for appliances and other items.
Although most crop prices have declined recently, they are still
believed to be sufficiently high to provide incentive for increased production
plans next year.

Some cotton producers, after a dismal season in 1974, are

planning to substitute soybean for cotton acreage.

Part of the 1974 cotton

crop may remain in the fields due to a combination of poor quality, low prices,
and wet field conditions.

Although some farmers who experienced poor crops

and financial losses last year may find financing more difficult this year,
banks currently anticipate being able to meet their customers' demands for
credit at competitive rates.

- 27 -

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Reports continue to indicate a slowing in District economic activity.
Even though the District has so far avoided large layoffs, labor market
conditions have softened, and unemployment was expected to rise.

Economic

developments have also made District consumers hesitant to spend, and in
January, many retailers had to cut prices to stimulate sales.

Rebates have

helped to spur District auto sales, and several directors felt tax rebates
would help promote consumer spending.

In general, business activity has been

somewhat better in the District's rural areas than in the Minneapolis/St. Paul
metropolitan area.
a year ago.

The District's farm economy, however, is not as strong as

Bank directors cited several reasons for the recent declines in

grain and soybean prices.
Although the District has escaped large layoffs, labor market
conditions have undergone some softening.

After the burst of layoffs reported

in January's Redbook, no significant layoffs have occurred in the Minneapolis/
St. Paul metropolitan area.

However, help wanted advertising has fallen in

the Twin Cities, and hiring has slowed.

The policy of Twin Cities area

businessmen was described as running a "tight ship" with a willingness to let
work forces decline gradually.

Also some shrinkage in middle management

employment has occurred at some large firms which had laid off shop workers
earlier.
Outside of the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area, several directors
reported only seasonal unemployment increases.

However, a Western Montana

director stated that a third of his state's workers in the forest products
industry were out of work.

Layoffs have also occurred in the forest products

industry in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, but these employment declines

- 28 ­

are being offset by strength in that area's mining industry.

In general,

bank directors were looking for further weakening in District labor market
conditions and additional rises in unemployment.
District retail sales in January reflected the weakening in District
business activity.

One director associated with the retail trade industry

termed consumer spending in January as "soft."

Another report indicated

that Minneapolis/St. Paul area retailers have had to engage in price cutting
and sales promotions in order to attract business.

Promotions have helped

to reduce inventories but have hurt retailers' profits.

Retail spending has

held up somewhat better outside of the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan
area.

In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, for example, tourist spending was

up in January, and retail spending was quite good.

Several other directors

from rural areas also indicated that consumer spending had held up quite well
in their areas.

However, a Western Montana director described January retail

spending in his area as "sad."

With regard to the future, several directors

indicated that a tax rebate would help to stimulate retail spending.
Auto rebates have helped to offset recent declines in District
automobile sales.

One major car manufacturer's sales in the Minneapolis/

St. Paul metropolitan area during the last 2 weeks of January were up 85
percent from those reported in the previous 2 weeks.

In addition, several

directors stated that the rebates have stimulated auto sales in their areas.
One interesting observation by two directors was that the rebates have helped
to promote the sales of autos not eligible for rebates.

Dealers in the

Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area hope that the rebates will bring their
car inventories down to desired levels by the end of February.

On the

negative side there is a feeling that many car buyers are customers who would
have bought in any case and are merely accelerating their purchases to take
advantage of the cash rebate.

- 29 -

Bankers responding to our latest agricultural credit conditions
survey reported that the District's farm economy was not as strong as a
year ago.

Bankers reported that some customers may be getting "into

difficulty," but there were no reports of widespread bankruptcies.

Many

bankers stressed, though, that another year like 1974 could be disastrous.
Although recent declines in grain and soybean prices have helped, livestock
producers are still in a cost-price squeeze.

Also, the early January blizzard

caused heavy livestock losses in Minnesota and Eastern South Dakota.

For

many farmers, however, sales of 1974 crops will help bolster farm receipts
in early 1975.

Many bankers anticipate strong loan demand in 1975 to help

cover farm operating costs.

But increased deposit flow, primarily from crop

sales, should provide the funds needed to meet loan demand, at least through
the first quarter.

Conditions will likely be tighter in the spring as

seasonal borrowing needs pick up.
Grain and soybean prices have declined markedly, and bank directors cited
several reasons for the falling prices.

First, the cancellation of Russian

and Chinese orders have lessened export demand for grain.
feeders have cut back on their demand for feed grains.

Second, cattle

A Montana director,

for example, indicated that many livestock producers are doing without feed
grains.

Third, recent price declines were attributed to larger January 1, 1975

carryovers than anticipated by market participants.

Finally, users of grain

products have reduced their buying in order to cut down accumulated
inventories.

These price developments have brought some relief to the

District's livestock producing industry but imply some income reduction for
those farmers still holding 1974 crops.

- 30 -

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

A number of Tenth District retailers report disappointing
Christmas and January sales and express rather muted prospects for any
significant improvement in the immediate months ahead.

The auto market,

however, has responded to the rebate program with dealers reporting
sharply increased floor traffic and sales.

For District farmers,

both total cash receipts and realized net income were down for the
year 1974.

In addition, the bankruptcy of American Beef Packers has

caused some financial ripples in the District.

Reflecting the general

weakness in the economy, a number of large District banks report a decline
in total loans during recent weeks, with weakness in consumer, farm, and
business categories.

During this same period, deposits also moved

sharply downward.
In a follow-up to our pre-Christmas survey of department store sales
expectations, a number of the District's large retailers reported that sales
had generally fallen short, with durables particularly weak.

This pattern

has continued into January, and sales forecasts for the months ahead have
been trimmed back.

At the same time, auto dealers report very good

response to the current rebate program.

Floor traffic is up sharply, and

sales have responded, particularly for the rebated models.

Many dealers

report that sales of non-rebated models, including full size autos, have
also picked up noticeably.

Dealers express the view that the likelihood

of higher fuel prices should sustain interest in the smaller cars, but
would still like to see the rebate program continued.

- 31 -

Although farm prices trended downward in 1974 (the December average
was 4 percent below the year-earlier figure), the average for the entire
year was 6 percent above 1973's average.

These higher average price

levels generated an increase in farm income of about 7 percent for the
nation in 1974.

Crop receipts were up nearly 25 percent, but livestock

receipts--reflecting the sharp drop in prices--fell 8.5 percent.

In the

District, total cash receipts declined about 2 percent in 1974 because of
the relative importance of livestock as a source of income.

A 15 percent

drop in livestock sales more than offset a 20 percent gain in crop
receipts.

Due to lower government payments and sharply higher production

costs, realized net income for both the Nation and the District also was
down rather significantly in 1974.
The bankruptcy of American Beef Packers (ABP) has caused some
financial ripples in the District.

Several cattle feeders have not been

able to meet their financial obligations with credit institutions because
ABP's outstanding bank drafts have been frozen until the company's
difficulties are resolved.

One slaughter plant has been allowed to resume

operations on a custom basis, and it is hoped that once the firm is
reorganized all outstanding commitments will be honored in full.
A survey of large Tenth District banks reveals a decline in total
loans during recent weeks substantially below the expected seasonal rate,
with weaknesses reported in business, farm, and consumer loans.

The

decline in business loan demand is attributed to an overall sluggish
economy and to a reduced demand for inventory loans as firms attempt to
avoid undesired inventory accumulations.

Although total farm loans are

down throughout the District, Nebraska banks report a strong demand for
grain, fertilizer, and feed loans.

The impact of automobile rebates on

- 32 ­

consumer instalment credit is negligible, but many banks feel the
impact is too early to properly assess.
relatively inactive.

Real estate portfolios remain

On the supply side, some banks now feel they are in

a position to accomodate high-quality loan requests--especially from
established customers.
Deposits moved sharply downward over the last few weeks.

Corporate

demand deposits have declined considerably, in part reflecting a runoff
of deposits built up at year-end for window-dressing purposes.

Some banks

attributed the decline to the payment of current tax liabilities.

In

addition, interbank balances have fallen due also to an unwinding of
year-end window-dressing.

Time deposits increased sharply in response to

growth in large nonnegotiable CD's.

Oklahoma banks, which issued a sizable

volume of CD's to local governmental depositors, are apparently encouraging
their customers to take the nonnegotiable issues.

The Oklahoma banks

indicated that, since their nonnegotiable CD's have 365-day maturities
instead of 360-day maturities for negotiable CD's, they can reduce their
effective interest costs by issuing the nonnegotiable CD's.

- 33 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The volume of loans outstanding at Eleventh District banks has
fallen sharply since the first of the year.

Business loans have

experienced the steepest decline, but real estate loans, loans to
nonbank financial institutions, and consumer loans have all been reduced
substantially.

District bankers report the decline in business lending

is primarily due to reduced loan demand.
being more selective, also.

But apparently loan officers are

For example, marginal loan requests, which

would have been accepted a year ago, are now being turned down.
Inventory loans have fallen sharply as many firms have successfully
drawn down materials stocks in line with lower sales.
receivable financing has also declined with sales.

Demand for accounts

Even loans for

petroleum and gas operations, which had increased nearly a third in the
past year, have dropped.

However, rather than reflecting reduced oil field

activity, lower loan demand by oil companies has been a result of higher
profits, allowing these firms to finance a larger portion of their
explorations internally.
Business demand for term financing, on the other hand, is up
substantially.

Many companies that financed capital expansions partially

with short-term loans last year are now trying to refinance these outlays
on a long-term basis.

In addition, bankers report heavy demand from

durable goods manufacturers for term loans needed to finance replacement
equipment.

However, most requests to refinance existing loans are being

rejected becuase bankers are reluctant to commit funds to long-term
obligations.

- 34 -

Demand for real estate loans remains weak.

In fact, as described

by one banker, demand for interim construction financing is "virtually
nonexistent."

Meanwhile, an increased flow of funds to thrift

institutions has resulted in reduced borrowing by nonbank financial
institutions.

Requests for consumer loans have also declined substantially

as households are deferring purchases of many big ticket items.
Loan renewals at District banks have risen sharply.

Renewals by

commercial real estate companies have been particularly large.

Many of

these firms are "totally illiquid," according to one banker, since they
have been unable to resell large holdings of nonincome producing land.

In

manufacturing, loan renewals are most common in construction-related
industries and among firms engaged in supplying producers of consumer durables.
In an attempt to hedge against shortages and rising prices last year, many
of these companies stockpiled inventories.

But because sales fell sharply,

they have been unable to liquidate inventories and pay out existing
obligations.

Heavy renewals of loans to individuals for purchase of stock

have also been reported.
A survey of large commercial banks in the District reveals that most
lenders have recently increased reserves for covering loan defaults.
Higher profits earned last year provided the chief source of funds to
increase loss reserves.

And bankers admit that the economic outlook for

1975 practically ensures higher loan losses.
A downturn in business activity in the District has caused a rapid
deterioration in the labor market.

Growth in total employment has come to

a virtual standstill, while the labor force continues to expand.

The

result has been a sharp rise in unemployment--25 percent in 2 months.

And

the unemployment rate stands at 6.2 percent, up from 4.7 percent last fall.

- 35 -

Layoffs in manufacturing, particularly in durable goods industries,
account for much of the increase in unemployment.

And barometers of

future labor market strength indicate this downward trend will continue.
In Texas, the average workweek in manufacturing has fallen to 40.2 hours,
after remaining at 40.6 hours for 6 months.

Moreover, initial claims for

unemployment insurance have doubled since last fall.
Grain and soybean production is expected to rise substantially this
year in the Eleventh District states.

An increase in acreage planted will

help boost winter wheat production nearly 50 percent over last year.
Because of low cotton prices, farms will reduce total cotton acreage by
25 percent, and most of this land will be put into the production of soybeans
and grain sorghum.

As a result, total soybean acreage will increase 28

percent, while grain sorghum acreage will be up 18 percent.

The amount of

land planted in rice will be essentially unchanged.
Cattle producers continue to face a bleak profit picture.

Ranchers,

reluctant to cull their herds at depressed market prices, are finding it
unprofitable to winter a large number of cattle.

The number of cattle on

feed in District feedlots continues to fall, down 40 percent from a year ago.
Consequently, most feedlots are operating well below their break-even level
of production, and several of the largest feedlots have gone into bankruptcy.
While bankers generally report no serious financial difficulties due
to the write-off of farm loans, they indicate the number of delinquent loans
has risen.

Renewals of loans to livestock producers are common, and

referrals to the Farmers Home Administration have increased.

Bankers are

reviewing agricultural loan requests closely with the view that livestock
loans will continue to be risky in 1975.

And with grain markets weakening,

bankers are very concerned that crop farmers may experience a severe cost­
price squeeze by harvest season.

- 36 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

In the opinion of our directors, there was a sharp deterioration
in the economic climate in January, after employment and income in this
region had held up relatively well through the end of 1974.
directors still expect a pick-up toward the end of this year.
weakest sectors are housing, lumber and aerospace.

Many of the
The

The agricultural

sector is still strong, and retail sales are holding up except for autos.
The directors feel that we are in for a period of belt-tightening
and emphasis is being placed on controlling costs and productivity
improvement programs.
but sharp.

The concensus is that the recession will be short

Material shortages have practically disappeared and there is

now fear of rapidly developing excess inventories.

The rate of inflation

is expected to decline to 6 percent by year-end because of excess supplies

and low utilization rates.
In response to a question regarding the outlook for employment in
their own industries, no director anticipated increases.

In Utah, a very

strong end 1974 showing was marred by the recent announcement of layoffs at
Kennecott Copper Corporation.

About 1,200 employees are involved and it has

been estimated that each layoff would create a further 2 1/2 percent
unemployed in secondary industry.

The Boeing Company anticipates a decline

of 1,500 employees, 2.5 percent of its work force, in the first half of 1975
as a result of delays and reductions in the level of commercial aircraft
orders.
The agricultural sector, although generally strong, is beginning to

develop cracks.

High costs have depressed the cattle-feeding industry to

- 37 ­

the point where feed lots are being shut down and bankruptcies are being
reported.

Producers claim that along with the high feed costs they are

suffering from political pressure and consumer activism.

On the other

hand, grains and most other crops continue to earn a good return and
farmers are continuing efforts to expand acreage.

One exception is cotton

where growers are feeling the pinch of lower prices.
Our directors do not foresee any growth in nonresidential building
activity over the next 6 months.

They believe that passage of the investment

tax credit would not translate to increased capital expenditures until
year-end.

The Seattle area, however, expects increased activity in the

second half of 1975 due to such special factors as the Alaskan pipeline
and the Trident Missle Base Development program.
demand for small industrial buildings.

There appears to be some

This is being handled by a new type

of financing in which developers are selling industrial condominiums.

In

the current financial climate, this enables the smaller businessman to put
his financial package together.
Residential housing construction is still viewed as the disaster area
of the current recession and its impact on the lumber industry in the
Pacific Northwest is severe.

Nevertheless, one director reports that his

lumber firm anticipates "full production again within the next 6 months and
heavy reemployment within the wood products industry as a whole."
Retail sales declines so far appear to be concentrated on durable
goods.

In Southern California retail sales of nondurables held up well until

just after Christmas, but have slowed considerably in January.

The rebates

being offered on automobiles are helping the small car lines, but are not
stimulating sales of medium-priced cars.
to sell well.

Luxury automobile lines continue

- 38 -

Among District states, the impact of the current recession is
varied.

With its prosperous agricultural sector, Idaho is faring better

than the national average, and Utah is benefiting from strong demand for
coal and fertilizer products.

The strongest areas of California are those

with an energy or agricultural base.

The slowdown in general business

activity is most apparent in the Pacific Northwest and Southern California,
areas dependent on lumber, electronics and aerospace.

