CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 14,

1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY .

..........................................................

i

First District -- Boston.......................................

1

Second District -- New York .......................................

4

Third District -- Philadelphia ....................................

7

Fourth District -- Cleveland.....................................

10

Fifth District -- Richmond........................................

14

Sixth District -- Atlanta........................................

18

Seventh District -- Chicago........................................

21

Eighth District -- St. Louis.....................................

25

Ninth District -- Minneapolis.....................................

27

Tenth District -- Kansas City.....................................

30

Eleventh District -- Dallas........................................

33

Twelfth District -- San Francisco...............................

. 37

-

i

-

SUMMARY*

This month's Redbook reports provide several indications of improve­
ments in activity, but many sectors are still declining.

A widespread

belief exists that the recession is "bottoming out," and that a turn for
The words "optimism" and "optimistic" appear

the better is near at hand.
frequently.

But an early return to full prosperity is considered unlikely,

and unemployment is expected to remain high.
in virtually all regions.

Retail sales remain sluggish

Inventory liquidations are continuing, especially

at the manufacturing level.

The rate of inflation continues to moderate.

Makers of many types of capital goods are cutting output, and others are
working off backlogs.

Although residential activity is improving moderately

in some regions, new construction remains at a very depressed level.

A

number of reports indicated that loan demand at commercial banks has been
soft, but this may reflect, in part, highly selective lending policies.
Agricultural prospects are generally favorable, except for flooding rains
in the South and excess moisture in Iowa.
Most districts report that the rate of decline in activity has at
least slowed down.

Improvements are reported for appliances and auto tires

(Cleveland), textiles and apparel (Richmond, Atlanta, and Dallas), chemicals
(St. Louis), and aircraft (San Francisco).
are cutting output rather than prices.

New York says many manufacturers

Demand for autos and most consumer

durables remains very weak, inventory liquidations continue, and the capital
expenditures boom is ebbing.
Virtually all districts commented on the continued poor performance
of retail sales.

Auto deliveries fell back after the rebate programs

*Prepared at Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

- ii

expired.

­

New York and Philadelphia indicated that cold, rainy weather had

hurt sales of general merchandise recently, adding to the effects of un­
employment and adverse consumer psychology.

A number of districts attempted

to assess the impact of the personal tax rebates, but with inconclusive
results.

Chicago commented on lagging sales of mobile homes, RVs, boats,

and lawn and garden equipment.
strong tourism.

Atlanta was impressed with "unbelievably"

A number of districts found that retailers had reduced

inventories to desired levels, but some additional cutting was in prospect
if sales did not improve.
Manufacturers' inventories remain generally excessive, except for
textiles and apparel, and substantial further overall liquidation apparently
is planned.

San Francisco commented on very heavy inventories of petroleum

and copper.

Several districts indicated that steel mills are building

inventories, while their customers are liquidating, but the overall effect
is a substantial slide in mill shipments, output, and employment.

No sig­

nificant revival in steel shipments is likely until late in the year, when
auto and appliance producers are expected to lead the recovery.
Various districts reported that price inflation had slowed signifi­
cantly, with some wholesale and retail prices relatively stable and others
declining--see New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago.
Cleveland and Chicago say that demand for equipment for coal mining,
energy exploration, pollution control, steel production, and water and
sewerage is very strong, but most other capital goods producers have reduced
output, more or less substantially.

Electric utilities and railroads are

moderating capital outlays because of financial stringencies.
for farm and construction equipment is mixed.

The picture

Heavy truck sales are dismal.

-

iii

-

Districts commenting on the increase in the investment tax credit found
it relatively ineffective.

Foreign demand for U. S. equipment is strong,

partly because of favorable exchange rates.
The construction outlook remains gloomy, although Atlanta and
St. Louis report some improvement in the residential sector.

Large inflows

of savings to S&Ls continue, but both homes buyers and lenders remain cau­
tious.

San Francisco says new construction is at a "standstill."

Districts

commenting on the home purchase tax credit see little impact, partly because
of the complexities of the IRS guidelines.

Dallas suggests the tax credit

is simply a "windfall" to those who would have purchased homes anyway.
Usury rates are mentioned as a problem in Illinois and Minnesota.

Atlanta

reports several bankruptcies of apartment complexes and mortgage companies
in Florida.
A number of districts (Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and
San Francisco) note that mortgage lenders expect interest rates to rise
later in the year.

Two districts discussed the "crowding out" effect of

heavy Treasury financial needs.

Philadelphia says few bankers believe de­

mand for credit is being influenced by the prospective federal deficit.
Dallas, however, emphasizes "crowding out" as a potent factor hindering ef­
forts of business firms to raise funds in the capital markets, which have
become "inaccessible."

Commercial banks and other lenders have become

highly selective in granting new credits to all classes of borrowers, ac­
cording to several districts.

- 1 -

FIRST DISTRICT--BOSTON

The attitudes of the New England directors are hopeful; they
anticipate a recovery of activity presently.

However, it is stressed

that much improvement is required before the economy will perform
acceptably.

In view of recent years' experience, businessmen are

attempting to gauge likely policy in 1976 and 1977 before framing
current investment strategies.

Unemployment in New England rose to 11.1

percent in March; for the previous month the rate was 10.4 percent, and
a year before it was 6.5 percent.
Savings bankers are in no hurry to cut mortgage rates despite
record deposit growth.

They suspect the money is merely "parked" since

the gains have been most heavy in passbook and NOW accounts.
officers expect rising interest rates during the fall.

Loan

Similarly,

commercial bankers are expecting interest rates to rise later in the
year; any cuts in loan rates will be modest and short-lived.

Applications

for business loans are strengthening and bankers are endeavoring to
acquire direct consumer loans.
Retail sales are still sluggish despite the continuation of
aggressive promotions.

Retailers have managed a considerable amount of

inventory liquidation and are looking to the tax cut as a source of
hope.

However, a director reports that his strategy is unchanged: remain

liquid, plan modestly, and be ready to move aggresively.
Businessmen dealing in capital goods markets are noticing a contin­
uation of weaker orders.

Delays of delivery time are still occurring.

However, directors claim they are becoming more optimistic.

In some

instances, they cite September or October for bringing significant

- 2­

improvements in production.

More generally, they believe that if the

bottom has not been attained, it is at hand.
Real estate development has been under a squeeze in Boston.

A

director reports that city residential rehabilitation projects are
endangered since operating costs are overtaking expected revenue at a
rapid pace.

Even middle- and upper-class residential areas are devel­

oping tenants' unions.
The high rates of unemployment have caused some social problems.
Young entrants to the labor force and college graduates are not being
placed in jobs.

A director closely involved sees substantial changes

in the attitutdes of such people.

Furthermore, the middle class has

begun joining the food stamp program in numbers, which the director
considers significant.
Announced layoffs and furloughs have moderated considerably in
recent weeks.

Consequently, it is expected that New England unem­

ployment rates may increase, but it is anticipated that the top is near.
Professors Tobin, Eckstein, Samuelson, and Solow were available
for comment.
as yet.

None of them believe that a recovery is "in the bag"

They also concur that monetary policy should take a stimu­

lative attitude until the economy is definitely regaining health.
Tobin does not feel the economy is resting on a knife edge
of depression and inflation.

He would like to see a dramatically lower

federal funds rate coupled with money growth of 10 percent for a few
months.

He fears that though things look rather hopeful on first

blush, the economy has no holding power--the financial condition of
business especially is unfavorable and we risk stagnation if the rebound
is not nurtured.

He sees nonmonetary forces fueling a 6 percent

- 3­
inflation rate should 4 percent growth be attained; 7.5 percent money
growth would risk another slump.

We need not lock the throttle at

higher rates of money expansion, we need to assist the recovery.
Eckstein notes that the economy is still fundamentally weak, and
his forecasts are "a gamble that the tax cut will work" and that monetary
policy is stimulative.

He is sympathetic with the use of the federal

funds rate as a target and he is relieved to see that it has eased
somewhat.

He notes that a 5 percent funds rate accompanies 8.3 percent

money growth in his model--this is close enough to 7.5 percent to be
well within our margins of forecasting and control errors.

Five

percent money growth would produce a depression and would be plausible
only if inflation falls to the 1 to 2 percent level.
Samuelson senses that the trough is near.

He sees no rebound in

housing or autos for some time, but it is a good bet that growth will
exceed 4 to 5 percent by year-end.

He feels that average money growth would

be better near 7.5 percent, rather than 5 percent.

Transient needs

require faster growth until the recovery is definitely under way.

We

are still half a business cycle away from acceptable performance.
Solow believes the turn is near and he believes that monetary
ease should be maintained.

In terms of the funds rate, he feels that

5 to 5.25 percent is appropriate at least until the summer.

In his

opinion, fears that high real growth at this time will fuel inflation are
"rational but wrong."

Prices depend on the general level of activity,

and the economy is very slack.

Excessive growth is not likely and monetary

policy should be prepared to assist capital investment during the recovery.
All agree that the tax cut is not excessive, therefore there
is no reason to believe that investment need be crowded out by
higher consumption outlays.

There is room for investment expansion,

and monetary policy need not inhibit it.

-4-

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Second District directors and other business leaders who were
contacted recently in general were restrained in their assessment of the
retail sales picture, although some retailers were reported to expect
business to pick up in the not-too-distant future.
regarding the outlook for consumer prices.

Views were mixed

Some businessmen indicated

an inclination to raise prices by cutting production if necessary, while
some others expected reduced demand and excess capacity to exert downward
pressure on prices.

The respondents generally agreed that good progress

was being made toward reducing inventories to desired levels.
The Buffalo Branch directors in general felt that the demand for
automobiles and other consumer durable goods would remain depressed
through the rest of the year and perhaps into 1976.

These poor prospects

were attributed to the continued lack of consumer confidence, high
prices, unemployment, and, in the case of appliances, to the questionable
outlook for an upturn in homebuilding during the balance of the year.
Several of the respondents were also restrained in their assessment of the
current retail sales picture.

A survey of New York City's major depart­

ment stores conducted by a local newspaper revealed that these stores in
April had suffered the biggest year-to-year decline in sales in five
years, reflecting in part cool and rainy weather conditions, as well as
high unemployment in the city.

On the brighter side, retailers were

reported to be generally optimistic and to believe that business in the
city must pick up soon.

In this context another respondent expressed the

-5­

belief that consumers were reaching the end of "stretching" out their
inventories of automobiles, appliances, and other goods, a development
he felt was a good sign for the economy generally.
Regarding the outlook for prices, a senior official of a large
New York City bank felt that most manufacturers and processors wished to
maintain their current prices, even if this means cutting production in
the face of reduced demand.

The president of a large textile concern

indicated that his company intends to increase its prices when it has the
opportunity.

Several other respondents expressed similar intentions.

On the other hand, the Buffalo Branch directors and several other
businessmen looked for continuing downward pressure on retail prices
throughout most of 1975.

In their view reduced demand and unutilized

capacity should lead to heightened competition which in turn should be
manifested in lower prices.
The respondents on balance agreed that although many businessmen
do not yet feel comfortable with the current level of their inventories,
a good deal of progress has been made in reducing such inventories to
acceptable levels.

Indeed, a number of respondents reported that in the

case of their own firms or industries, desired levels had already been
attained or soon would be reached.

Thus, among others, the president of

a large chain of department stores reported that his firm's inventories
were now in line with estimated sales.

A senior official of another re­

tail concern reported his firm's inventories to be down 15 to 20 percent
from a year ago.

An upstate New York businessman stated that some re­

tailers in his area report low inventory levels.

Another director, com­

menting about the automobile parts industry, noted that inventories of
finished goods in that industry have now reached nearly acceptable levels,

-6­

and that stocks of raw materials would probably be worked down to desired
levels within the next two months.

-7-

THIRD DISTRICT--PHILADELPHIA

Over the last three months, the decline in Third District economic
activity has been slowing.

Area manufacturers report no change in the

level of their new orders and prices, but inventories have declined mark­
edly.

These businessmen are optimistic, however, about an upturn in

business activity within the next six months.

They anticipate a signifi­

cant upswing in new orders and hope to trim inventories even more.

The

employment picture in manufacturing for late fall continues to be optimistic,
but there is still widespread concern that prices will continue to rise.
Retailers are generally optimistic, too, but don't expect much of a pickup
until near year-end.

Area bankers report flat loan volumes, and few see

much of a change before the fourth quarter.
Third District manufacturers, responding to this month's business
outlook survey, report a continued leveling in regional business activity
with some indication that the steady economic decline that the region has
been experiencing is "bottoming out."

Responses to the questionnaire in­

dicate that new orders this month were nearly level (an improvement over
last month) while shipments were up slightly.

Over 50 percent of these

executives experienced inventory declines during the month.

This is the

third month in a row that substantial inventory cutbacks have occurred.
The longer-term outlook is the same this month as in April with
three-fourths of the respondents expecting an accelerated pace of business
activity by November.

They also predict that the pace of inventory liqui­

dation will be slowing down.

The proportion of executives expecting their

inventories to drop below current levels by late fall has declined sub­

-8­

stantially from last month.

Caution, however, dominates spending plans

for new plant and equipment.

While three-fourths of this month's respon­

dents see an increase in business activity six months out, 60 percent
foresee no change in capital expenditures by November.
Employment levels mirror the flatness in business activity in May.
Most Third District manufacturers report an unchanged work force and average
workweek this month.

By November over 40 percent expect to increase the

size of their work force.

With a growing labor force, however, there are

no strong signs of any quick relief from high rates of unemployment.
Retailers in the area report that weak and sluggish sales are contin­
uing

They cite the cold and rainy weather that has followed on the heels

of an early Easter as helping to keep the damper on spending.

Further, no

big "shot in the arm" to sales is expected from the tax rebates.

Retail

executives feel either that the rebate dollars have already been spent in
anticipation of their receipt or that the money will be used to pay off
debits.

All in all, most retailers expect no significant upturn in sales

until very late in the year, if one occurs at all.

As one executive put

it, "We're expecting business to stop declining, but we wonder how long
we'll be on the floor."
On the inflation front, both retailers and manufacturers report con­
tinued moderation in prices.

This month, between 80 and 90 percent of

area manufacturers polled report no change in the prices of their inputs
and outputs, but about half expect these prices to be higher by November.
In the retail sector, most executives report moderation in the prices
they charge.

On the cost side, they indicate little pressure for higher

prices from suppliers, but one said that he was encountering reluctance

-9­

on the part of hard goods suppliers to lower their prices.

With retail

sales generally sluggish, he doesn't expect this reluctance to continue.
Area bankers report loan volumes down from the beginning of the
year, but holding steady.

Most report that they're looking to expand

"quality" loans, but demand is flat.

One banker expressed the view that

potential borrowers were adopting a "wait-and-see-attitude"--looking for
some clear signal that the upturn had begun.

None of the bankers contacted

expects a resurgence in the economy before year-end 1975 at the earliest.
In this district there is broad agreement that the current spread between
the prime rate and short-term money market rates will remain constant, at
least until there's some measurable shift in loan demand.

So far, few

bankers see any clear signs that the demand for credit is being influenced
by the fear of being "crowded out" of the money market.

But one banker

did express concern that mortgage rates might soon start to rise, thereby
aborting any housing recovery in its early stages.

- 10 -

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Comments from our directors and from other business executives
suggest that economic activity is still declining.

They indicated

that although there are scattered signs of recovery in some indus­
tries, inventory liquidation will be heavy again this quarter.
Conditions in the industrial sector are mixed with some firms con­
tinuing to produce at high rates, others beginning to recover, and
some continuing to experience weak or declining demand.

The decline

in residential construction appears to have ended and a moderate
recovery is under way.

S&Ls, however, are being cautious in their

mortgage lending.
New car sales in Cleveland rebounded last month from a sharply
depressed level in March.

(Some purchases in March were postponed

because consumers believed the Ohio sales tax on motor vehicles
might be suspended for a time.)

Nonautomotive retail sales have

held steady, according to a director with a national retail concern.
He does not expect tax rebates to create a significant surge in
consumer demand.

Another director in the consumer entertainment

business said motion picture revenues are very good and per capita
expenditures in amusement parks are up 28 percent from 1974.

All

of the increase reflects discretionary spending rather than higher
gate fees.
Purchasing agents in Cleveland and our own monthly survey of
manufacturers indicate the rate of decline in new orders, production,

- 11 ­

and employment slowed during April.

However, inventory liquidation

proceeded at a faster rate than in the first quarter.

Firms antici­

pate a continued high rate of inventory reduction in May.
evidence of further abatement in inflation.

There is

The percent of purchasing

agents paying lower prices exceeded the percent paying higher prices
for the second consecutive month.
Market conditions for producers of capital goods and consumer
goods are mixed.

Demand

for some types of capital goods continues to

be very strong and a few previously depressed industries are beginning
to recover, but conditions in some industries appear to be growing
worse.

Generally, firms producing materials, equipment, and machinery

for coal mining, air pollution control, oil country goods, drilling
rigs, rail cars, pipelines, and gas storage tanks are enjoying strong
demand.

District firms also report good sales of heavy duty power

transmission components, but they caution that there may be more
deferments, cancellations, and declining orders from major electric
utilities due to uncertainties in the industry.
Signs of improvement among auto producers and suppliers are
spreading, as some laid-off workers continue to be recalled.

Auto­

motive tire sales have started to improve, and industry sources say
a massive adjustment in tire stocks has occurred in recent months.
A director in the rubber and plastics business said inventories at
his company and among its retailers are approaching normal levels;
production is expected to increase soon.

Chemical shipments have

begun to recover according to one major firm.

A large paper company

and an appliance producer recalled some laid-off employees and
lengthened the workweek.

An industrial machinery firm reports that

-

12 ­

orders are starting to turn up, though slowly.

The nation's leading

machine tool producer recently received its first orders for machine
tools from China, and it has been receiving large orders from Mideast
and Eastern European countries.
On the less encouraging side, two major machine tool builders in
Cleveland report no pickup in new orders, and they are continuing to
work down their backlogs.
lations in April.

One firm experienced a new wave of cancel­

A top executive in the heavy-duty truck industry

reports that the industry is in its worst sales slump in many years.
In Cleveland, a manufacturer of large trucks previously cut output
from 60 units a day to 40 units.

Now it is producing 24 units a day,

following a recent three-week shutdown.
were laid off early in May.

Six hundred additional workers

Truck and bus tire shipments are very

weak, and further layoffs will likely occur in this segment of the tire
industry.

In central Ohio, a large firm is eliminating its tecreational

vehicle line and permanently reducing its work force by 1,500.

Bankers

in the area are extremely concerned.
Large and small steel companies continue to lay off workers,
temporarily suspend some operations, and reduce their workweeks.
Heavy liquidation of steel inventories by steel users is in process.
Steel mills, however, are still rebuilding their own inventories.
Economists from several steel firms say production should begin to
recover in the fourth quarter, with demand from auto and appliance pro­
ducers expected to lead the recovery.

A large steel firm in Youngstown

will furlough 2,000 workers for five weeks beginning June 8 while new
equipment is being installed.

- 13 -

A number of our directors strongly emphasized the need for policies
to stimulate capital spending.

In their view, the recent liberalization

of the investment tax credit is of only limited help.

The directors

believe that tax rules limiting depreciation to original cost rather than
replacement cost, and long depreciation schedules, are inhibiting growth
of the nation's plant capacity and will lead to new shortages.

Several

directors in energy-related businesses said they were certain that there
would be severe energy shortages in the 1980s.
Among other comments from our directors, a university president
said jobs are very scarce this year for all except the few best graduates.
A director from a large bank in Cincinnati commented on the large increase
in job applications at his bank.
In the construction sector, nonresidential building remains depressed,
but housing is beginning to edge up.

Mortgage lending activity by dis­

trict S&Ls increased in April, following a very sluggish first quarter.
Many S&L officials believe interest rates will rise sharply by year-end
and, therefore, are not aggressively seeking mortgage loans.
inflows showed some signs of slowing in April.

Net savings

- 14 -

FIFTH DISTRICT--RICHMOND

The April survey of Fifth District businesses reveals a number of
signs of some improvement in business conditions, particularly in the
manufacturing sector.

Responses from manufacturing concerns suggest

somewhat stronger current activity and, in particular, a significant
improvement in expectations, with a majority of those surveyed anti­
cipating continued improvement over the next six months.

Manufacturers'

responses suggest some recovery in shipments and new orders, as well
as some further decline in inventory levels.

The survey of district

retailers reveals little change from recent months other than a marked
turn toward optimism on the part of respondents.

In the banking sector,

loan demand for inventory and receivables financing and capital expansion
programs has not yet materialized, as commercial and industrial loan
volume at weekly reporting banks has remained steady since the beginning
of April.
The latest survey of manufacturers indicates improvement across a
broad range of activity.

Only 15 percent of the respondents report a

decline in the level of shipments during April, and a diffusion of
responses reveals the first increase in this indicator in eight months.
Virtually the same picture shows through with regard to the volume of new
orders.

Materials inventories apparently continued to decline, and for

the first time in recent months the diffusion of responses suggests a
decline in finished goods inventories as well.

Nevertheless, over half

the manufacturers surveyed continue to view current inventory levels as
excessive and almost half hold the same view with respect to current

- 15 ­

plant and equipment capacity.

Perhaps a further indication of actual

or anticipated gains in business activity is revealed by a relative
firming of prices, both paid and received, during April.

Some reports

indicate that with inventory levels becoming more manageable, firms
The most dramatic result

are beginning to review current price lists.

of the latest survey concerns the outlook for the next six months; fewer
than 1 percent of the manufacturing respondents expect further worsening
of conditions, locally or nationally, over that period.
Retailers responding to our April survey gave little indication of
any change during the month.

Total sales were essentially flat, while

sales of big ticket items relative to total sales remained weak.

Inven­

tories showed no change, and current levels remain above desired levels.
As in most recent months, responses continue to suggest a mild tendency
toward higher prices.

Further, each of the respondents is satisfied with

the current number and size of outlets.

As was the case with manufacturers,

expectations showed a dramatic improvement during the month.

No retailer

responding forsees any worsening of conditions over the next six months,
and each expects improvement in his market area as well as in his indivi­
dual firm.
But in general, business remains slow and there is little firm evi­
dence that any significant recovery has begun.

Nonetheless, improvements

in various indicators are contributing to a growing mood of optimism.
With inventory levels becoming manageable, some firms are apparently
preparing to resume production at more nearly normal levels.

Unemploy­

ment seems to have stabilized and in some cases to have declined as
plants have recalled laid-off workers.

Significant improvement in this

area may be some time in coming, however.

Despite the growing optimism,

- 16 ­

caution prevades some industries and substantial adjustments may be yet
to come as marginal operations are eliminated and plans are revised to
meet new market conditions.

Industries such as textiles, which have

been especially hard hit, are poised for the recovery, and a good showing
in housing construction could lead to a swift return to relatively high
levels of production.
Any improvement that may have occurred in Fifth District businesses
has not yet been strong enough to show up in increased demand for bank
credit.

Bank loan customers in some important Fifth District industries,

however, have indicated to reporting banks that their business situations
are improving.

The demand for residential mortgages at district banks

and S&Ls is substantially below the level normally experienced at this
time of year.

S&Ls in some areas have responded to improved liquidity

by becoming quite aggressive in the mortgage market, and as a result are
doing more business than most banks.

The tax credit on new home pur­

chases may have stimulated some interest in home buying, but most lenders
feel it has had only a limited impact on market conditions.

It is seen

as having limited effect because (1) few homes qualify, (2) builders
and consumers are confused by its complexity, and (3) existing homes
must be sold before many consumers can take advantage of the credit.
Our recent survey indicates that farm loan demand is unusually
strong at banks, PCAs, and the FMHA.

Demand is strongest for operating

loans, weakest for farm mortgage loans.

This is at least partially due

to the fact that farm suppliers have largely withdrawn from the credit
business and now require payment for their goods on delivery.

Availa­

bility of bank loan funds this spring, compared with last fall, generally
shows improvement, markedly so in some cases.

At banks which had some

- 17 ­

bad lending experiences in other fields last year, and at small rural
banks, availability of funds is generally down.

One large district bank

reports that some of its small correspondents are buying federal funds
in order to meet this demand for agricultural production credit.
On balance, the majority of our bankers do not appear to be reluctant
to expand their farm loan volume this spring.

But they are apparently

taking a hard look at the credit worthiness of their borrowers.

Volume

of loan referrals to nonbank credit agencies seems to be about the same
as last year.

There appears to be some increase in the volume of parti­

cipation loans with FMHA, however.

- 18 -

SIXTH DISTRICT--ATLANTA

According to reports, some district industries continue to slide
but an increasing number appear to be expanding production and employ­
ment.

Housing remains weak, but some improvement has been noted.

sales have fallen off since the rebates have ended.

Auto

The agricultural

picture has suffered from flooding conditions in Alabama, Mississippi,
and Louisiana.

Credit demands of farmers have also eased substantially,

partly as a result of a sharp reduction in cotton acreage.

A wave of

new commercial and industrial projects appears under way, according to
latest reports.
Scattered layoffs continue to retard the expected recovery in the
district.

The Reynolds alloy plant in Alabama has laid off more workers.

Normally, 5,500 workers are employed; now, only 1,100 are working there.
Other recent layoffs have been centered in Tennessee industries.

A

General Electric plant (manufacturing air conditioners), the Oak Ridge
Y-12 plant, and a large bicycle manufacturing plant have all reduced
their work forces.
But more and more district industries seem to be cranking up pro­
duction and employment.

A large Alabama shipbuilding company will need

1,500 skilled workers because of a large backlog of contracts.

Dupont

plants in Chattanooga and Nashville, Tennessee, are calling back large
portions of the workers laid off last winter.

The callbacks are the

result of the improvement in demand in fibers produced at these plants.
A Wilson sporting goods plant, also located in Tennessee, earlier
reported to be closing down, has received new orders and is now operating

- 19 ­

full time.

The president of a textile company reports that they are on
He notes that for them, the recession started to

the upswing again.

bottom out in March.

Inventories at mills and at the retail level are

low, and retailers are beginning to place orders.

Reports from north

Georgia's large carpet industry also indicate that there are signs of
revival.

Local mills are cranking up second and third shifts again.

According to these reports, the turning point came in mid-February when
workers started being recalled.

Even southern lumber mills, probably

hardest hit by the housing slump, are beginning to reopen, according to
industry spokesman.
Some other industries have continued to operate at near capacity
through the recession.

The phosphate industry is still booming in

Florida, as the demand for phosphate, chemicals, and fertilizer gets
larger.

Tourism remains unbelievably strong in Florida, Alabama,

Louisiana, and Tennessee tourist sites.

Birmingham's U.S. Steel plant

continues to operate at full production; despite a 22 percent sales de­
cline, the plant is now rebuilding depleted inventories.
Reports from Alabama indicate that the housing tax credit program
has helped home sales.

Other cities which have recently recorded pick­

ups in home buying are Atlanta, Jacksonville and Winter Haven, Florida,
and New Orleans.
reports.

The Miami housing market remains bleak, according to

One director indicates that the housing tax credit has done

nothing for home sales in his area.

Several bankruptcies of apartment

complexes and mortgage companies in the Florida area have occurred in
recent months.

Savings inflows continue to be large at most of the

district savings and loans.

- 20 -

In all six district states, auto sales are off since the rebate
program ended.

Used cars are selling well and also small foreign cars.

Winter Haven, Florida, and Montgomery, Alabama, were the only cities of
those reporting which had sales increases.

Mobile home sales have also

picked up in the Winter Haven area.
Farm prospects took a sharp blow in Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana, where farmers, already suffering from earlier rain-delayed
plantings, were hit by floods and rains that drenched their land in April.
The cattle market is still depressed, but recently cattle prices have
increased a few cents a pound.

Cotton acreage is expected to be about

one-third lower this year than last year throughout the district.
The acreage will be shifted to crops such as soybeans and corn, which
require less operating capital than does cotton.

Reports from district

bankers indicate that, in general, this decline in cotton acreage will
reduce farm loan requests.
After falling for several months, the number of new commercial and
industrial projects seems to be on the upswing once again.

Citizens

Mortgage Corporation of Birmingham, Alabama, has arranged $3.5 million
in financing for the construction of two five-story office buildings in
downtown Birmingham.

Plans for two new hospitals have been announced for

Montgomery, Alabama, and a civic convention center is also being built.
A large $70 million commercial and entertainment complex has been
announced for Miami.

A $100 million shopping mall-multipurpose complex

is planned for Jackson, Mississippi.

New nuclear generating units are

planned south of Miami and in Louisiana.

Louisiana is receiving a large

number of new industrial plants, as well as announcements of expansions.
Largest of these is a $35 million plant in Donaldsonville to make ammonia.

- 21 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Economic prospects in the Seventh District continue to be highly
uncertain.

The best that can be said is that the rate of decline in gen­

eral activity has slowed.

Residential construction has not revived signi­

ficantly, despite heavy savings inflows to S&Ls.

Capital equipment output,

in total, appears to be in the opening stages of a long and, probably,
steep decline.

Desired inventory reductions at the manufacturing level,

overall, are far from complete.

Consumers' outlays on virtually all hard

goods remain at very depressed levels.

Prospects for a substantial increase

in crop harvests are generally good, although rains have delayed some
plantings.

Competitive forces are dampening price increases in the manu­

facturing sector.

Many prices have declined recently, most notably prices

of processed foods, at both the wholesale and retail levels.

Meat prices,

however, have increased sharply.
Because of the Seventh District's concentration on durable goods manu­
facturing, this region probably has been hit harder by the recession than
the nation generally--just as the upsurge in activity was more pronounced
here.

Order backlogs of most firms have declined sharply.

Order cancella­

tions have been heavy, partly reflecting the reductions in lead times that
have removed the inventive for anticipatory ordering.

Many firms have in­

stituted stringent cost-cutting programs, and have deferred or stretched
out capital spending programs.
Perhaps the greatest disappointment of recent weeks has been the lack
of significant improvement in residential and commercial building, which
remains at extremely depressed levels.

Most S&Ls have used the heavy

- 22 ­

Forward mortgage

savings inflows to repay debt and rebuild liquidity.

commitments are virtually unobtainable in Illinois, where the usury rate
is scheduled to drop from 9.5 to 8 percent at midyear.

Throughout the

district, sales of new or existing homes have remained very slow.

Chicago

area homebuilding permits have been at the lowest level since World War II.
Some builders have announced reductions in house prices of 10 percent
or more, despite rising costs, to attract customers.

Recent bids on new

construction projects often have been below estimates, and many more bids
are being received on proposed projects.

There is evidence of a pickup in

repair and remodeling work, perhaps in lieu of new construction.

Early

indications that building trades unions would moderate their demands signi­
ficantly, have given way to new militancy in the face of very heavy unem­
ployment.

Chicago area painters have just gone on strike after rejecting

a 6.6 percent pay boost.
The tax credit on home purchases has not been of much help, partly be­
cause of the complicated rules.

Similarly, the increase in the investment

tax credit is not a powerful incentive because most industries have idle
facilities.

Moreover, three percentage points added to the tax credit is

only a partial offset to increases of 20 to 30 percent or more in prices
of equipment in the past 12 to 15 months.
Large retailers are curtailing expansion plans, partly reflecting
reduced residential building.

Steel producers are moving ahead with basic

expansion programs, despite a sharply reduced level of new orders and re­
newed concern over imports.

Demand for most types of equipment for mining,

heavy construction, and water and sewer projects remains excellent.

Sales

of the largest farm tractors and combines also remain very strong.

However,

- 23 ­

demand for lighter construction and farm equipment, and for most types of
industrial equipment is off sharply.

Sales of large trucks remain very

poor and railroads are said to be canceling orders for equipment.

Foreign

demand for various equipment is very good, especially from the Communist bloc,
OPEC nations, and Germany.

Favorable exchange rates encourage sales abroad.

Most consumers continue to spend very cautiously.

Some producers of

laundry equipment and TV sets have announced callbacks of laid-off workers,
but any revival of sales has been modest.

Demand has remained very weak

for mobile homes, RVs, air conditioners, pleasure boats, lawn and garden
machines, and, of course, autos (except for imports and specialty and
luxury models).
year.

Consumers have slowed purchases of processed foods this

Relatively large inventories of these foods at the wholesale level

are associated with price reductions averaging about 10 percent at Chicago
area food chains.
Spring plantings are on schedule, or ahead of schedule, in Illinois
and Indiana.

Rains have delayed plantings in Iowa, however, and continuance

of wet conditions past mid-May could reduce prospective yields there.
Farmers are buying equipment more cautiously.

Prices of farmland in the

district rose 2 percent, on average, in the first quarter, according to
bankers' reports, the smallest quarterly rise in three years.
A final note:

There is no lack of statements of general views that

the recession has bottomed out, and that the second half will see signi­
ficant real gains in activity.

These encouraging generalizations usually

are buttressed by references to tax reductions, dampened inflation, easing
of supplies, inventory liquidations, slower rates of decline in new orders,

- 25 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT--ST. LOUIS

The optimism expressed last month by Eighth District businessmen has
been reinforced by some further signs of business recovery in recent weeks.
Several manufacturing firms reported an upturn in sales.
for the homebuilding industry were also reported.
into thrift institutions at a relatively high rate.

Some plus signs

Funds continue to flow
After declining

through the first quarter of the year, mortgage interest rates have remained
stable in recent weeks.
industries, however.

Signs of economic recovery were not found in all

The local steel industry, for example, is apparently

just beginning to feel the brunt of the recession as liquidation of inven­
tories by steel processors is under way.

Also, retail sales continue slug­

gish in the district.
Major retailers in the district report that consumers remain very
cautious about their purchases.
depressed.

Sales of durable items are reported as

Domestic car sales were reported to be off substantially from

the February and March levels.

However, sales of used and imported cars

as well as trucks are fairly good.
Car dealers are pessimistic about a sizable upturn in car sales in
the near future, pointing to uncertainty stemming largely from possible
government actions affecting automobiles or fuel supplies.
Some types of manufacturing activity are beginning to pick up as a
result of a slight upturn in sales.

Representatives of the chemical,

clothing, and construction-related industries reported some upturn in
activity in recent weeks.

Representatives of these industries, however,

felt that a good part of the current upturn in sales represents a re­

- 26 ­

plenishing of inventories which had been pared to a minimum.
recently, orders were mostly on a hand-to-mouth basis.

Until

On the other

hand, a steel industry representative reported that steel users are re­
ducing inventories and a turnaround in production is not expected until
later in the year. Representatives of several industries reported that
some workers have been recalled in recent weeks, although employment levels
in most of these firms are still below earlier levels.

The unemployment

rate generally continued to increase through the first quarter in the
Eighth District.

Whether this trend has continued in April, in view of

reports of rehires, is difficult to assess; however, the reports indicate
at least a leveling off in the rate.
Homebuilding in the district is well below year-ago levels.

In the

St. Louis area, however, it was reported that housing permits for April
were about the same as for April 1974 after a sharp decline of 40 to 50
percent from the year-ago level in the first quarter of this year.

Mort­

gage funds continue to flow into thrift institutions at a rapid pace.
Mortgage rates are holding at about the levels of the past two months,
although some concern was expressed at the prospect of rates rising again
in the near future.
In general, loan demand in the district continues sluggish.

Consumer

instalment and real estate loans have declined somewhat in recent weeks,
while business loans remained virtually unchanged.

At the same time, in­

terest rates have generally remained stable after declining earlier in the
year.

Demand for farm loans, primarily of the operating type, is strong.

Interest rates charged farmers have not changed substantially from last
year, although rates on most agricultural loans did not rise as high as
rates on other loans.

-

24 ­

large savings inflows, and lessened consumer pessimism indicated by
surveys.

But very little solid evidence of improvements in particular

types of activity can be adduced, and some manufacturing sectors have
only begun to slide off.

- 27 -

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Although the district continues to fare better than many parts of
the nation, directors' comments indicate that the recession has dampened
business activity and that the prospects are for only modest improvement
this spring and summer.

District consumers have curbed their spending,

and no large gains in retail sales are expected in the near future.
the district, as in the nation, automobile sales have been slow.

In

The

increase in the investment tax credit is not expected to boost district
capital spending, but it may have prevented some cuts in plant and equip­
ment outlays.

One encouraging development is that some improvement has

recently occurred in the outlook for district residential construction.
Also, credit conditions have eased at district agricultural banks.
District consumers have been hesitant to spend so far this year, and
little improvement is expected for this spring and summer.

The softening

in retail sales has been most pronounced in the Minneapolis/St. Paul
metropolitan area, which is now only slightly better off than the nation.
On the other hand, several directors from outside the Minneapolis/St. Paul
area indicate that consumer spending has held up quite well in their areas.
A director associated with the retail trade industry believes that the de­
cline in retail spending has bottomed out, but he does not look for any
strong recovery in the near future.

Another director reports that food

product sales have recently improved and that business in that industry
is expected to continue to strengthen this spring and summer.
District automobile sales are generally described by directors as
being slow.

Minneapolis/St. Paul area dealers, however, report that a

- 28 ­

moderate pickup occurred in late April.

The most encouraging results,

as expected, appear to be concentrated on the models which combine fuel
economy and a low price, while the weakest sales area is still concen­
trated on standard car models.

Top-of-the-line cars continue to sell

very well in the Twin Cities area.

Outside of the Minneapolis/St. Paul

area, most directors term automobile sales as slow; however, a Montana
director indicates that automobile sales have been excellent in his area.
Directors in general indicate that the two-year increase in the
investment tax credit is not expected to raise district capital spending
this year.

One director expresses the view that the recent increase in

the investment tax credit is nice but that it was not considered a signi­
ficant factor when his firm's capital spending plans were assessed.

On

the other hand, three directors express the opinion that the investment
tax credit may have been helpful in preventing some cuts in plant and
equipment spending.

One director, however, reports that a firm in his

area had increased its capital spending in response to the rise in the
investment tax credit.

If the economic outlook is favorabe for 1976,

according to another director, some businessmen may be prompted to take
advantage of the investment tax credit next year.
Some improvement in residential construction is anticipated by bank
directors.

In the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area, there has been

moderate improvement in the outlook for residential construction.

The

activity is concentrated in the $25,000-$55,000 price range where FHA and
VA loans can be made.

Because of Minnesota's 8 percent usury ceiling few

conventional loans are being made.

Several directors from outside the

Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area also indicate that their area's
residential building outlook is encouraging.

Much of the apparent

- 29 ­

improvement in the housing construction outlook can be traced to recent
increases in savings inflows to district thrift institutions.

In a number

of cases, Minneapolis/St. Paul area thrift institutions describe April
savings inflows as "fantastic."

However, there is some concern that these

funds may not be invested in Minnesota because of the state's 8 percent
usury ceiling.
The April survey of Ninth District agricultural banks indicates that
credit conditions eased somewhat between January and April.

Both supply

and demand factors have contributed to the easier credit situation.

The

recession in the nonfarm sector of the economy and the cutbacks in farm
spending on capital inputs have resulted in a slowdown in loan growth
at rural banks, thereby helping to alleviate credit shortages at rural
banks.

On the supply side, declining interest rates on nonfarm loans

have probably increased the aggregate amount of funds available for farm
lending.

However, despite this recent easing, credit at district agri­

cultural banks remains tight relative to a year ago.

Interest rates are

still above the rates of last year, and loan-to-deposit ratios, while
below the high levels of April 1974, are still high relative to historical
second-quarter rates.

- 30 -

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Retail sales in the Tenth District have shown some improvement in
recent weeks.

Inventories are still being worked down, but seem to be

close to desired levels.

Moderately increasing retail sales are ex­

pected for the rest of this year.

New car sales continue to be weak.

An increase in prices received by farmers, after five months of decline,
is likely to put upward pressure on food prices in the next few months.
Loan demand at Tenth District commercial banks continues generally soft,
although business loan demand has shown moderate improvement.
Retail sales in major metropolitan areas of the Tenth District have
shown some improvement in recent weeks.

Consumers are still shopping

carefully for bargains, and much of the improvement is attributed to
special sales and other promotional activity by sellers.

Durable goods

sales are not yet showing much general gain, although there are some
reports of strengthening sales of furniture.
Most retailers see the impact of the tax rebate as primarily a
confidence-booster for consumers.

They do not expect much direct impact

because of the relatively small size of the individual rebates.

However,

the majority of respondents apparently believe that the psychological
effect of the tax cut package will have a positive influence of their sales.
Although some department stores are still working down their in­
ventories, most respondents believe their stocks to be about in balance
with current sales.

With inventories now near desired levels, several

retailers reported plans for "slow" or "gradual" increases in stocks
during the rest of the year.

Such plans seem to be in keeping with

- 31 ­

expectations of increasing sales--variously described as "a slow but
steady increase"; "a normal rate of expansion" following a real turn­
around by the third quarter; "very optimistic for fall"; and "a moderate
expansion expected," but not overly optimistic.
Tenth District automobile dealers are apparently sharing in the
weak performance of the industry nationally.

Most reported their

business stimulated by the rebate program, beyond those particular models
on which rebates were paid, as a result of increased showroom traffic.
Weaker sales after the rebate period ended also extended over a wider
segment of the market.

Inventory situations vary by dealership and by

make of car--some are adding to inventories, a few are still over­
stocked in particular models, others are in a satisfactory position but
are keeping a close eye on their stocks.

Uncertainty and lack of con­

fidence on the part of consumers is a theme in most of the discussions;
not knowing what to expect in the way of gasoline prices and availability,
government anti-pollution and safety requirements, the possible return
of rebate programs, etc. Potential buyers are clearly acting in a way
that underlines the "postpone-ability" of new automobile purchases.

At

the same time, used car sales are strong and prices relatively high.
Auto dealers expect no direct help from the tax rebate program.
Customers at the majority of dealerships appear very interested in fuel
economy as well as in the price of the car.

However, there is no clear­

cut evidence of movement to, or away from, a particular size of car.
A substantial increase in cattle and hog prices during the month
ended April 15 reversed the five-month skid in prices received by farmers.
Although farm prices as a whole rose 4 percent last month, they were
still 8 percent below the year-earlier average.

Nevertheless, this

turnaround in prices--while gratifying to livestock producers--will

- 32 ­

likely keep pressure on food prices.
Recent strength in slaughter steer prices could signal a revival
of the cattle feeding business.

The number of cattle on feed as of

April 1 was the lowest for that date since 1963, but March placements
in the seven major feeding states were 20 percent above the previous
year.

Carryover stocks of wheat and feed grains at the end of the

marketing year will be quite low by historic standards, but no shortages
are foreseen.

Although the export market for wheat and corn has softened,

dosmestic prices should remain firm in view of the tight old-crop supply
situation.

Production prospects for 1975 indicate a record 2 billion

bushel wheat crop is possible, and with a normal growing season feed
grain production will likely achieve a new high.

Thus, grain prices

could weaken below current levels during the second half of the year.
Loan demand at Tenth District banks was generally soft over the
last month.

Agricultural, consumer, and, especially, bank card credit

loans continued soft in all areas of the district.

However, business

loan demand showed moderate improvement, and some respondents in Kansas
City and in Denver believe they detected an increase in interest in real
estate and housing loan demand.

One area of the Tenth District that

seems especially hard pressed is Albuquerque, where loan demand for most
categories of loans is reported to be down considerably.
Demand deposits have increased moderately, while time and savings
deposits have fallen slightly.

CDs in some areas of the district were

running off, although Oklahoma City and Kansas City, where rates on some
maturities were higher than in the rest of the district, reported CDs
as being stable.

Most CD rates tended to be just below the prime rate

charged by the banks.

Some respondents also expected the CD rate to

decline an additional one-half percent.

- 33 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Deficit financing by the Treasury is adversely impacting on bor­
rowing by district firms.

This conclusion was reached in a survey of

corporate financial officers who, for the most part, described debt mar­
kets as in such poor condition that new offerings are not even being
considered.

Consequently, some expansion projects are being postponed,

and a few companies are resorting to private placement of securities.
Some firms also warned of continued shortages of capital during the an­
ticipated economic recovery.
Several firms that have recently sold bonds had to restructure their
issues to improve marketability.

A manufacturer of building materials,

for example, shortened the maturity of a recent issue from 20 to eight
years and marketed only 80 percent of the planned issue.

And another

large corporation recently announced a $250 million offering at 9.25
percent--substantially greater than the yield it had planned just a
few months ago.
Only one firm surveyed had canceled a proposed debt issue.

That

firm, a major oil company, planned to use the funds to complete a refinery.
Now funds for the project are being borrowed on a short-term basis--both
through the commercial paper market and bank financing.

But a represen­

tative of the firm said that unless bond markets improve, the company
will have to postpone future expansion projects.
Corporate treasurers expect businesses to respond to further crowd­
ing out by putting more pressure on banks to increase existing lines of
credit and to open new commitments.

However, there are reports that

- 34 ­

banks are exercising greater selectivity in their lending policies.

An

official for one utility claimed that banks are becoming increasingly
reluctant to raise lines of credit to public utilities.

And an elec­

tronics manufacturing company, which tried unsuccessfully to increase
revolving loan commitments at banks around the country, gave a similar
report.
Bankers admit to increased loan selectivity, saying they are deter­
mined to protect liquidity positions and are not actively seeking new
loan commitments.

They expressed concern that if the inability of corp­

orations to go into capital markets is prolonged, commercial banks will
not be able to meet short- and intermediate-term credit needs.

They ex­

pect the utilities, in particular, to be hard pressed to operate on bank
In addition,

credit if capital markets remain inaccessible much longer.

several bankers said smaller- and medium-sized companies would ultimately
bear the brunt of a credit squeeze.

Their reasoning was that when major

corporations are crowded out of capital markets, they will turn to bankers
who will accommodate the larger borrowers first.

Inevitably, less credit

would be availabe for smaller companies.
The latest employment statistics suggest the district labor market
is stabilizing.

In Texas the number of jobholders has been edging up­

ward while the unemployment rate has dipped below 6 percent.

Moreover,

indicators of future labor market strength suggest this trend is likely
to continue.

Initial claims for unemployment insurance have dropped

roughly a fifth from the peak reached earlier this year.

And the average

workweek in manufacturing has climbed to 40.1 hours, up from 39.7 hours
in February.

- 35 -

Employment in the construction industry in the district, however,
continues to fall.

But the drop has not eased wage demands.

In the

north Texas area, for example, work on approximately 1,300 projects was
stopped recently when 26,000 trade union members went on strike.

Cur­

rently, the union is holding out for a 40 percent hike in the hourly wage
rate over the next three years.
The government program to grant a maximum $2,000 tax credit to new
home buyers has been termed "largely disappointing" by area homebuilders
and mortgage lenders.

Respondents to a survey said even though the program

has produced some pickup in homebuilding, it has failed to give the in­
dustry a substantial boost.
fectiveness.

Builders offered several reasons for the inef­

Not all of the potential home buyers are aware of the program.

And ambiguities still exist about which homes qualify for the program.
Moreover, builders said houses that have been on the market for more than
a few months cannot realistically be sold under the program.

Because

houses must be sold at the lowest asking price (normally the original
price), builders cannot recapture interest expenses that have accrued
on those homes that have been on the market for some time.

Builders

generally view the program as little more than a windfall for people al­
ready planning to buy; people who were not serious prospects before the
program have not been persuaded to buy.

The largest homebuilder in the

Dallas area summed up his colleagues' views of the program with "if a
couple cannot afford the first monthly payment this summer, a tax break
next April will not change their minds."
The early fall and back-to-school apparel shows held in Dallas in
April were described by market observers as strong.

But individual

- 36 ­

apparel manufacturers were somewhat less enthusiastic.

Buying senti­

ment by retailers, nevertheless, has improved greatly in recent weeks.
Nevertheless, apparel production in Texas--which accounts for nearly
a tenth of manufacturing employment--is still running about 70 percent
of productive capacity.

- 37 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT--SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors indicate that there are still few tangible signs of
economic recovery in this district.

However, there is cautious optimism

that the trough has been reached and a slow pickup in activity will occur
over the next six months.

Wary consumers are likely to save tax rebates.

Petroleum inventories are at an all-time high and copper stockpiles are
growing.

New housing construction remains at a standstill while mortgage

rates rise as a result of increased refinancing demand.

In agriculture,

crop prospects are generally good, but declining food prices and rising
costs of fertilizer and machinery are likely to lower net farm income this
year.

The banking industry is still pursuing a selective loan policy.
Over the next six months our directors foresee only a modest pickup

in consumer spending.
in some form.

Most anticipate that the tax rebate will be saved

Toward the end of the six-month period, however, given a

continuation of the decreasing inflation rate, the increase in disposable
income should bolster consumer confidence and trigger a restoration of real
consumer expenditures.

According to a survey by one of the very large banks

in this district, "about 30 percent of households have been forced by the
recession to curtail their living standards.
back spending because of fear.
ably.

Another 15 percent have pulled

The remainder have not been affected notice­

The outlook is for the 'fearful' 15 percent to return to the market

in the next few months--but the 30 percent will move back slowly over the
year ahead."

- 38 -

Although aircraft demand has firmed in the Pacific Northwest, most
industries continue to have problems of oversupply.

Petroleum inventories

are higher than at any time in history, and copper stockpiles are growing.
The threat of a British Columbia work stoppage has caused a slight pickup
in timber wood and newsprint production, but the underlying trend is still
down.

Japanese manufacturers have indicated that they foresee no change

in their economy for the next six months and, consequently, they would not
be stepping up their purchase of logs from the West Coast until year-end
at least.
Demand for new housing remains very weak.

One director cites the lack

of historical balance between the current average income in the $13,000
range with the $36,000 average price of a newly constructed home.

Mortgage

rates are expected to firm at about 9 percent over the next six months in
spite of large savings inflows because of federal deficit financing.

One

large California bank, however, reports that the recent surge in demand
for mortgage funds at commercial banks has stemmed from refinancing needs,
a negative reaction to the introduction of variable mortgage rates by some
S&Ls, and a belief that future rates will increase to the extent that these
factors are temporary, mortgage rates will not be pushed up significantly
over the next six months.
Gross farm income receipts to growers and processors this year are
expected to be only slightly lower than 1974 levels due to lower prices,
but an anticipated increase of 10 to 12 percent in the costs of production,
including fertilizer and machinery, will reduce net income receipts sub­
stantially.

Weather conditions have been favorable for the most part and

crop prospects are good.

However, both domestic and foreign demand,

especially for wheat, is off drastically.

The price of wheat was $3.68 per

- 39 ­

bushel in Portland on May 1, 1975, compared with a record high of $6.35
per bushel on February 26, 1974.

Cattle prices are still depressed, but

at the retail level prices have increased, giving hope to the cattleman
that higher prices will pass on down to him.

Generally, the livestock

industry anticipates that 1975 will be a readjustment period with market
fluctuations due to short-term shortages and surpluses.
In banking, first-quarter figures were far ahead of last year; the
cost of money is down and there is a favorable spread to loan rates.
ever, most banks are maintaining a selective posture on loans.

How­

Savings

inflows continue strong and one bank has reduced interest on savings accounts
by one-half percent.

