CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

July 9,

1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY...............................

..................

First District -- Boston..............

..................

Second District -- New York............

..................

Third District --

..................

Fourth District --

Philadelphia ........
Cleveland...........

..................

Fifth District -- Richmond.............

..................

Sixth District --

Atlanta.............

..................

Seventh District -- Chicago...........

..................

Eighth District -- St. Louis..........

..................

Ninth District -- Minneapolis.........

..................

Tenth District --

Kansas City.........

..................

Eleventh District -- Dallas............

..................

Twelfth District -- San Francisco.....

1

..................

SUMMARY*

The decline in economic activity is over, but recovery will
likely be protracted, according to this month's Redbook reports.

Con­

sumer spending continues to firm in most districts, on the strength of
sales of nondurable goods.

While retailers have managed to work off

inventories to comfortable levels, some inventory liquidation continues
in the manufacturing sector--particularly for producers' equipment.
Labor markets have stabilized, and some workers that were laid off
earlier in the year are expected to be recalled by the end of summer.
Residential construction faces a long recovery even though mortgage
lending is up in a few areas.

Deposit flows continue strong at commer­

cial banks, but loan demand remains weak.

Bumper crops are expected

in most areas of the nation, and farmers face a decline in grain and
soybean prices this fall.
Most districts indicate that consumer spending continues to
improve, primarily on the strength of nondurable goods sales.

Although

somewhat stronger, purchases of durable goods remain generally weak.
San Francisco states consumers are still cautious and are unwilling to
assume debt for big-ticket items.

New car sales are up modestly but

remain well below the year-earlier level.

Foreign cars, on the other

hand, are selling briskly, according to Atlanta.

Spending for tourism

and recreation is up substantially across the country.
Retailers have managed to pare inventories to low levels and
appear reluctant to rebuild stocks.

In fact, New York and Dallas

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

report some retailers may now be understocked, and Chicago reports
increased sales would require retailers to restock.

Manufacturers'

inventories of consumer goods have for the most part been worked down
to acceptable levels.

But other manufacturers are continuing to run

Metals inventories remain excessive in New York and

off stocks.

Atlanta, and manufacturers of producers' equipment are still liquidating
inventories in Cleveland and Chicago.
Prospects for industrial output are mixed.

Capital goods pro­

duction continues to fall with no near-term recovery in sight.

The

outlook for production on consumer goods, on the other hand, is more
favorable.

Because inventories are generally low at both retail and

manufacturing levels, increased consumer spending should quickly result
in stepped-up production.
Although unemployment remains high, job markets appear more
stable than in recent months.

Kansas City's survey of purchasing

agents, for example, reveals little change in manufacturing employment
recently.

Several districts report demand in some job categories

appears to be firming.

In Boston, companies are showing renewed

interest in hiring personnel with business and technical skills.

And

Richmond reports over a third of the manufacturers surveyed have
recently begun to rehire.

In addition, the start up of production

lines this summer will require worker recalls in both Chicago and
Kansas City.
While there are scattered reports of increased construction
activity, home building remains weak throughout the country and will
be slow to recover.

High costs are the major deterrant to home buyers,

according to Boston, New York, Chicago, and San Francisco.

Chicago

and Dallas mention residential construction is being constrained in
some cities by a lack of building sites, as land developers have been
unable to obtain financing for these ventures.
report improved sales of new homes.

But New York and Atlanta

In the Southeast, residential

construction is on the upswing, largely because of government funding
of military housing.

And St. Louis and Minneapolis mortgage loan

demand has turned up sharply.
Deposit flows continue strong at commercial banks, but demand
remains weak in most loan categories.

According to Dallas and Phila­

delphia, loan demand is expected to remain sluggish throughout the
summer.

However, there are scattered reports that bank lending may

be picking up.

For example, St. Louis notes a rise in loan demand,

and Kansas City states that lending for inventory accumulation has
risen.

San Francisco reports a growing demand for loans by utilities,

transportation and energy companies, and the food industry.
Bumper crops are expected in most areas of the country,
although adverse weather has affected production in some states in
the Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis Districts.

According

to Dallas, farmers fear increased production will lead to lower prices
this fall.

In the Kansas City District, farmers seem to be holding

their wheat in anticipation of higher prices but will have to sell
part of the crop before year-end to pay production expenses.

A

recovery in livestock prices has led to an increase in the number of
cattle placed on feed.

- 1 -

FIRST DISTRICT--BOSTON

The directors remain optimistic inasmuch as they sense a firm
halt to the economic slide coupled with the emergence of a modest recovery.
Their attitude has shifted from a defensive posture to a guardedly aggres­
sive outlook.

Before, they talked of salvaging the situation; now they

discuss strategies for business advancement.

However, with an eye to

recent experience, they are proceeding conservatively; and, although
they are hopeful about the future, they stress that the recession has
eroded conditions in New England substantially.
ment in

The May rate of unemploy­

New England was 11.6 percent, an increase of .2 percentage points

from April.

Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island report unemploy­

ment rates of 9.8, 12.6, and 16.2 percent, respectively.
In various areas of the region, construction contractors have
found jobs; however, they remain concerned since they are committed for
less than one year typically.
remains bleak.

In residential construction, the outlook

Interest rates, attitudes, and incomes are sufficiently

depressing to forestall activity at this time.

Banking directors, in

an attempt to remain flexible, would warmly entertain short-term construction
lending, but the directors are finding the opportunities to be sparse.
A director close to the Boston job market reports that firms
are showing renewed interest in hiring personnel.

However, only indi­

viduals with business or technical skills are required.

While selected

professionals face improved employment conditions, the rank and file
suffer an extremely soft job market showing no signs of improvement
presently.
Matching the employment situation, high-priced real estate
is showing renewed life while inventories of medium-to-low-priced

-2

­

housing remain substantial.
Retailing in Boston continues well.

One director who had

planned June to be 5 percent over last year achieved sales increases
of 10 percent.

May and June have been two good months for soft goods;

and, although weather is given a good deal of credit, "the presence
of more money in the pocket is evident."
goods lines remain weak but improving.

The retailer notes that hard
He partially attributes the

success of soft goods to a reduced consumption of durables.

The director

is not increasing fall buying or reviewing his plan of 5 percent.

He

is not betting on a rapid recovery.
This director also reports that manufacturers' inventories
are very low in his lines.

However, the manufacturers are content to

remain leaner and tighter, for they too are cautious.

Prices are firm;

no boom is encouraging markups, and rashes of panic sales have waned.
A surge in retail sales would elicit a direct response in production
activity.
Carbon black sales have changed little recently.
result of sluggish conditions, a price war has broken out.

As a
Owing

to high capital costs, some suppliers are attempting to improve market
share enough to increase capacity utilization and profits.

Sales of

silicon pigments, used widely in the economy, are beginning to close
upon records set in 1974.

Super alloy metal sales, on the other hand,

are continuing to weaken to the concern of our reporting director.
Banking directors report healthy deposit performance.

Both

demand and time deposits are increasing sufficiently fast to warrant
a reduced reliance on borrowed funds and large certificates of deposit.

-3-

Business loan portfolios remain weak, and consumer credit shows little
life as well.

Interest rates are moving according to expectations.

Short-term rates are expected to change little from current levels
over the summer, but in the fall they are budgeted to rise.

The prime

rate may break 8 percent by December.
Of our academic correspondents, only Professor Samuelson
was available for comment this month.

He continues to believe that

that economy has probably begun a recovery, but he stresses that there
is "not a momentous V bottom" in his outlook.

Small increases in short­

term interest rates are appropriate as the economy regains its course.
In his assessment, recovery will not be aborted if we allow interest
rates to develop their own momentum to a degree; however, should they
reach 10 percent, we may want to be more expansionary.

Samuelson has

noted that most models now tell us that the path of prices is largely
independent of real growth.

He feels that there is a "germ of truth"

to this, and accordingly he would like to see money growth of 7.5 percent
if we must observe the 5-7.5 percent target.

Since the target covers

a 12-month horizon, he sees no reason to engage quick corrections for
the recent overshoot.
avoid disappointment.

The recovery requires attention if we are to

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Second District retail sales developments have turned mixed
since the vast improvement witnessed in May.

While some retailers

report continued strong sales, a number of them have apparently
experienced some slippage in sales.

For the most part, District

retailers are comfortable with the current level of their inventories.
Excessive stocks persist in a number of lines at the manufacturing
Most industry observers remain gloomy about the

level, however.

outlook for residential construction, in spite of the pickup in sales
of new homes.

Regarding the price outlook, a number of respondents

were fairly optimistic that price increases will be restrained in
the near term, but many expressed fears of a resurgence of inflationary
pressures over the longer run.
Recently we asked our directors and a number of other busi­
ness leaders about their opinions on the danger of a near-term resur­
gence of inflation in view of the apparent bottoming-out of the reces­
sion.

Most respondents felt that, for the near term, high levels of

unused human and capital resources will help to restrain price increases.
There was a strong undercurrent of apprehension about the longer run
price outlook, however, with particular concern voiced over excessively
stimulative fiscal policies.

For example, the president of a large

chemical firm felt that, while a near-term resurgence of inflation
was a possibility, his real concern was over the longer term.
sentiments were expressed by the Buffalo branch directors.

Similar

Among

other respondents, the president of a large department store chain
stated he expected some firming of prices by year-end, while another

-5­

observer felt that wholesale prices for many industrial goods were
bound to rise in order to cover rising costs.

The chairman of a

multi-national oil company expressed the fear that excessively
expansionary fiscal measures to stimulate the economy might reignite
inflationary pressures.

Similarly, a senior official of a large New

York City securities firm stated that his greatest concern was fear
of renewed inflationary pressures under the impact of massive budget
deficits and union demands for large wage increases.
The District retail sales picture has turned mixed in the
wake of the almost uniformly buoyant sales in May.

Most of the

respondents commenting on developments in the upstate New York region
reported that retail sales in June had run 3 to 7 percent below sales
in the comparable period a year ago, although some reported sales
continuing above year-earlier levels.

Similarly, sales at most New

York City department stores, after improving strongly in May,
apparently fell back in June, in some cases to levels below those
of 1974.

On the other hand, the chairman of the New York outlet of

a nationwide department store chain characterized the sales picture
as very good, not only at the New York store but nationally.

The

president of another large department store chain observed a continu­
ation of the improved sales at his firm that had begun in May.

He

expressed the view that this continued improvement heralded the long­
awaited upturn in consumer spending.
Regarding inventories, a number of respondents felt that
the liquidation of stocks at the retail level had about run its course.
Indeed, one retailer expressed the belief that most retailers had been

- 6 ­

understocked since February.

There were, however, reports of continued

inventory excesses at the manufacturing level.

For example, one

director noted that steel inventories still remained at a high level,
as well as those of textile fibers.

The president of a nonferrous

metal firm reported that there were still significant inventories
of metals and metal products.

The Buffalo branch directors felt that

while inventories in general have been reduced to acceptable levels,
spotty excesses still prevailed in some lines, including certain agri­
cultural products, furniture, and new automobiles.
The respondents in general were less than sanguine regarding
the residential construction picture.

Several noted the recent improve­

ment in sales of newly built homes but qualified their remarks by
pointing out that such sales were still below those of the comparable
period last year.

A director felt that a gradual improvement in

housing demand would continue but that it would take a long time before
housing starts reach two million units annually again.

An Upstate

banker expressed the belief that the residential construction industry
was still a long way from being in good health.

And a senior official

of a large thrift institution felt that an upturn in housing was not
yet in sight because of the high cost of construction.

-7-

THIRD DISTRICT--PHILADELPHIA

Business conditions in the Third District showed little
change, on average, during the past month.

Area manufacturers report

that their new orders held steady and inventories were reduced further,
but employment was off slightly and price movements could be squeezing
profits.

These businessmen continue to be optimistic, however, about

business conditions over the next two quarters.

They expect new orders

to be up, inventories to be trimmed still more, and workforces to be
expanded.

Nevertheless, capital spending plans remain conservative,

and higher prices are anticipated.

Area retailers report higher sales

volumes but see no well-defined trends yet.

Bankers in the region are

experiencing steady inflowsof savings deposits but still face flat
loan demand.
Third District manufacturers, responding to this month's
business outlook survey, report steady overall business conditions,
with 80 percent of those surveyed indicating no change in general
business activity over last month.

Furthermore, there is some indica­

tion that the economic slide has been arrested.

During June, only

10 percent of the respondents experienced declining business activity
compared to almost 60 percent last January.

While new orders were

significantly higher in May, two-thirds of the executives surveyed
report no change during June.

Moreover, inventory liquidation is

continuing with half of the manufacturers reporting lower stocks of
goods on hand.

Respondents listing cutbacks in their workforces

still outnumber those reporting increases, but the length of the work­
week is holding steady, with almost 90 percent indicating no change
in the last month.

- 8 -

The economic outlook through the end of the year remains
optimistic, with more than 80 percent of those polled expecting an
improvement in business activity.

Over two-thirds of these executives

anticipate an increase in new orders, and a bit more pruning of inven­
tories is expected.

In addition, nearly half of these manufacturers

expect to add employees, and some lengthening in the average workweek
is foreseen.

Despite the optimistic outlook, however, spending plans

for plant and equipment are still guarded.
manufacturers polled plan no change in

Almost two-thirds of the

capital expenditures by the

beginning of the Bicentennial year.
Area manufacturersreport that they are currently paying higher
prices for their supplies but, on average, receiving lower prices for
their finished products.

However, the bulk of these executives expect

the next six months to bring higher prices for both their supplies and
their finished products.

In fact, none of the manufacturers surveyed

reported paying lower prices this month, and none expect to be paying
lower ones by next January.
Merchants in the area report that retail sales are running
slightly ahead of their projections.

While none of the retailers

contacted would ascribe very much of this to Federal tax rebates, one
felt that most of the improvement stemmed from some amelioration in
consumer attitudes toward spending.

One retailer noted that his store's

sales forecasts were being revised in a somewhat more optimistic vein
through September, but another felt that no definite trends were evident
yet and that sales could go either way.

All of the merchants contacted

report better delivery times for hard goods,

especially furniture.

It

- 9 ­

is felt that backlogs have been worked down, and with shorter delivery
times, retailers expect to continue their current conservative posture
on inventories.
Retail executives report significant moderation in the prices
they pay and a stabilizing trend in the prices they charge.

One expects

to be paying substantially higher prices for man-made fibers but does
not see this hitting the consumer at the retail level for another 6-8
months.

These merchants look for prices to be climbing at a 4-6 percent

clip by year-end and do not expect the rate to exceed 6 percent in 1976.
They look for the economy to recover gradually and the unemployment rate
to come down only slowly.
Bankers in the District report steady inflows of savings but
are mixed in their experiences with demand deposits.
from "a good influx" to "somewhat disappointing."

The reports range

There is general

agreement that loan demand is still flat, and area bankers expect level
or slightly lower loan demand for the balance of the summer.

Most report

that they are seeking short-term arrangements with new customers and they
are generally trying to shorten maturities in their asset structure.

One

banker indicated relaxed constraints on availability of funds at his bank
but no easing in the price or quality constraints for loans.

There is

little expectation that the prime rate will go any lower, and all of the
bankers contacted felt that interest rates were near bottom.

The rise in

short-term rates in late June received mixed interpretations.

While some

bankers saw it as a definite tightening move by the Fed, others did not
know what to make of it.
Area bankers expect the economy to recover gradually with
interest rates moving upward at a modest pace.

In addition, there is little

- 10 ­

anticipation of strong inflationary pressures during recovery.

The

financial executives contacted expect inflation to stay in the 5-6
percent range through most of 1976.

But there was some concern that

the Fed would be under political pressure next year to try to bring
down the unemployment rate more rapidly with the result that inflation
might be rekindled further down the road.

- 11 -

FOURTH DISTRICT--CLEVELAND

The pace of economic activity in some sectors of the District
is continuing to improve, particularly retail sales of nondurable goods,
housing, and several manufacturing industries.

Employment and produc­

tion are still sluggish in a number of areas of the industrial sector,
however.

Some manufacturing firms have been liquidating inventories

at a rapid pace and plan to continue their inventory reduction programs
in the near future.

Capital spending, in real terms, is not expected

to recover until next year.
A major retail chain in the District reported unit sales of
nondurable goods picked up strongly during the past two months.
ing of hard goods sales is expected later in the year.

Strengthen­

The firm's buyers

note prices for fall and winter merchandise have declined.

Price mark­

downs on apparel and whitegoods will be less extensive than in recent
months because inventories have been cut to desired levels.
The latest report of Cleveland purchasing agents suggests that
production and new orders continued to decline in June at about the same
pace as in May.

Inventory liquidation accelerated last month, and employ­

ment and prices continued to decline.

Those developments are consistent

with early returns from our June survey of District manufacturers, except
that our survey shows an increase in new orders last month, the first
gain since last August.
A large producer of consumer packaging materials said orders
have improved in recent months.

The firm's inventories rose through

April, and it plans to liquidate excess stocks until year-end.

An

appliance industry supplier views its inventories of finished and

- 12 ­

semi-finished goods as slightly above desired levels.

A major chemical

firm reports its stocks of chemical products in balance with sales, but
plastics inventories are still high.
A tire industry source said tire shipments to wholesalers and
retailers have recovered strongly.

No further inventory liquidation

or price-cutting at the retail level is expected because dealer inven­
tories are low.

(Shortly after reporting this item to us, the tire

firm announced a price increase averaging 5 percent on its tires and
tire products.)

Tire producers plan to reduce inventories for the

remainder of the year by allowing tire production to increase at a
slower rate than sales.
In the capital goods sector, economists from several machinery
companies said they do not foresee a recovery in real capital spending
until early 1976.

One economist said cancellations of machine tool

orders appear to have run their course.
firm

New orders received by his

were level in June, following some improvement in May.

Another

large machinery company has laid off workers at three plastics machinery
plants in Ohio.

New orders for certain types of gears have softened

recently, according to a director in the capital goods business.

On

the positive side, a major steel firm reported it will spend $20 million
for new plant and equipment in one of the District's most obsolete steel
producing areas.

A director in the office equipment business said sales

turned up sharply last month.
A supplier to the truck industry said he foresaw no prospect
for recovery this year in the depressed market for heavy-duty trucks.
Inventories are very high.

Sales of off-road heavy trucks used in oil­

- 13 ­

drilling areas have picked up slightly, and the firm expects more
sales if
is

oil prices are deregulated.

The medium-sized truck market

improving; light trucks are recovering significantly, partly

reflecting strength in

demand for vehicles used on the farm and for

recreation.
Steel industry sources said the decline in
leveled off during the past few months.
put is

However,

not expected until the fourth quarter.

new orders has

recovery in

steel out­

An economist with a major

steel company commented on the nationwide increase in May's new orders
for durable goods,
orders.

which is

largely attributable to a rise in

Steel orders received in

May,

steel

seasonally adjusted, may be

overstated because delivery is usually during the low shipping month of
July.

Thus, May's increase in

tion of inadequacies in

durable goods orders may be more a reflec­

the seasonal adjustment process than changes in

underlying market condition.

Steel producers have been offering price

concessions to stimulate demand.

Steel service centers, which have far

more inventory than needed to handle current orders have also cut some
prices.

Inventories at steel mills are near desired levels, but ware­

houses and steel users are expected to continue cutting inventories
into the fourth quarter.
Executives from several oil companies based in the District
reported the nation's gasoline inventories are tight.
that spot shortages could develop in
on the East coast.

They commented

the months ahead, particularly

Right now, oil refineries are maximizing gasoline

production and are raising prices to recover some past cost increases.
The major conern about the availability of petroleum products is
the fall

and winter.

If

during

the expected shortages of natural gas occur,

- 14 ­

cutbacks of natural gas to industrial users will force some companies
to convert to fuel oil.

This could cause serious disruptions of petroleum

product supplies. (As an indication of impending natural gas shortages,
a gas company recently announced that it will cut off all natural gas
to industries in Central Kentucky effective November 1.)
In the housing market, residential construction contracts
continued to recover in May.

The economist at the Federal Home Loan

Bank of Cincinnati said preliminary data from their sample of savings
and loans indicate near-record deposit inflows during June.

Loan

commitments have been rising, but a few savings and loans are still
cautious in their lending policies because of low liquidity and the
possibility of savings outflows later this year.
Several banks in the Fourth District have reported weak growth
of total demand deposits, which is a normal seasonal development in this
District.

Rapid increases in individual demand deposits have been offset

by declines in public deposits.

- 15 -

FIFTH DISTRICT--RICHMOND

Judging from our June survey of District business conditions
and from other available information, there appears little doubt that
recovery is getting under way in the Fifth District.

Survey responses

of manufacturers indicate increases in shipments, new orders, employ­
ment, and hours worked per week, with backlogs of orders unchanged
and inventories continuing to decline.

Both manufacturers and retailers

continue to express cautious optimism about the outlook for the remainder
of the year although responses suggest lingering doubt about the vigor
of the recovery.

Overly conservative inventory policies and the high

cost of financing are seen as possible impediments to a full recovery
any time soon.

The Fifth District banking situation continues to

reflect a relatively low level of real economic activity and a cautious
posture on the part of business borrowers as well as banks.

Loans

outstanding in most categories at weekly reporting banks declined in
June, while investments increased and the liability mix moved in favor
of time deposits.
The June survey of Fifth District business conditions indi­
cates continued improvement in most areas of business activity.

More

than 40 percent of the manufacturing respondents reported increases
in shipments and in the volume of new orders.

Backlogs of orders

were essentially unchanged after declining for over a year.

Almost

43 percent of the manufacturing respondents feel current inventory
levels remain excessive, although their responses suggest a further
substantial decline in stocks of both materials and finished goods
in June.

On the employment front, 38 percent of the respondents report

- 16 ­

an increase in the number of employees while only 12 percent report
a decrease.

This tends to bear out an increasing number of informal

reports of rising employment and declining unemployment across the
District and represents a significant change from recent months.
Hours worked per week also increased in June according to our survey,
but some industries are still on short time.
Responses of manufacturers also suggest continuing upward
pressures on prices.

Twenty-eight percent of the respondents reported

paying and receiving higher prices, with the same percentage indicating
increases in average hourly compensation of employees.

Current plant

and equipment capacity remains above desired levels, but there is no
indication of any desire to alter current expansion plans.

Over half

the manufacturers surveyed now expect production in their own firms
to improve over the next six months.

A majority also foresee improve­

ment in business conditions locally and nationally over that time
period.
Reports from the textile industry indicate that business
is beginning to pick up as retailers have achieved manageable inventory
levels and are resuming purchasing activity.

Some textile manufacturers

are becoming more aggressive in the production and marketing of new
lines of merchandise.

Others, however, express some concern over the

reluctance of retailers to commit themselves to larger inventory
positions.

They believe that a continuation of policies for maintain­

ing lean retail inventories may lead to some loss of sales at the
retail level and retard recovery in the manufacturing sector.

In any

case, it seems likely that some hesitate to make the first move in
stepping up production without a commitment by retailers.

- 17 -

Meanwhile, our survey of District retailers shows sales
strengthening in June for the second consecutive month, although the
sale of big-ticket items relative to total sales remains weak.
Inventories at the retail level declined somewhat, and those retailers
surveyed feel current inventory levels are about right.

Prices, for

the most part, were unchanged during June, and increases in employee
compensation were less widespread than in recent months.

Respondents

to the retail survey were unanimous in expecting conditions to improve
over the next six months.
The consensus among District bankers is that the economy has
bottomed out but that recovery will take place only very slowly.
Commercial and industrial loans at weekly reporting banks in June were
nearly 6 percent below last year's level; but lending officers believe
that the decline has about ended, and some expect improvement in the
months ahead.

One bank specified textile industry term loan demand as

an area of improvement.

Several banks report that utilization rates

on loan commitments are at the lowest levels of the last several
years but that requests for new and increased lines of credit are
fairly strong.

Some problem construction loans still exist and are

being worked out.

Bankers express a hope that increased recreational

activity will facilitate residential sales at projects that have
suffered in resort areas.
Total demand deposits at weekly reporting banks were 1.8
percent higher than a year earlier, while savings deposits were 15.5
percent higher with strong inflows continuing.

CD's outstanding

declined 2.3 percent from May, and net Federal funds purchases of

- 18 -

District member banks during the first three weeks of June reached
their lowest level since April 1973.

Borrowings at the discount

window increased somewhat in June, especially at month's end, but
are still at an extremely low level by historical standards.
Farmland values rose at a significantly slower pace during
the year ended March 1, 1975, than in other recent years.

Districtwide,

average farm real estate values per acre advance 11 percent, but the
increase compared with gains of 26 percent in 1974 and 16 percent in
1973.
Farmers' cash income from farm marketings continues to run
well below a year ago, although the 11-percent District decline from
the January-April period is much smaller than that nationally.
this situation may well change.

But

Eastern North Carolina's tobacco,

corn, and soybean crops have been hard hit by drought conditions.

- 19 -

SIXTH DISTRICT--ATLANTA

"Improving" seems to be the key word in most sectors of the
Sixth District economy.
bumper crops expected.

The agricultural outlook is bright with
Car sales are showing some moderate strength

in parts of the District.

Inventories now seem to be at desired

levels for most businesses, except primary metals manufacturing.
Construction of single-family homes is improving; new defense contracts
will also aid construction activity.

Several District businesses are

negotiating sizable contracts with Middle East oil companies.

Tourist

activity throughout the region continues to be strong.
Bumper crops are expected in many parts of the District.

In

Alabama, farmers are making good progress in planting and cultivating.
Most crops, especially tomatoes, are very good.

Florida's tomato crop

is also very good this year, and prices are at high levels.

However,

in Louisiana, heavy rains and backwater flooding this spring have
caused considerable damage to timber and pasturelands.
run as high as $50 million.

Loss estimates

Tennessee crops are generally excellent,

but there is concern over the current lack of moisture in this area.
The high level of production costs continues to affect District farming.
One report from an eastern Tennessee county indicates that the number
of farm auctions has risen to between three and five per week.
New car sales, while improving, fail to show any substantial
rebound.

Reports from Alabama, Florida, and Louisiana, however,

indicate that used cars are selling very well.
also brisk.

Foreign car sales are

The Jacksonville Port Authority reports foreign car

- 20 ­

imports continuing at a rapid rate.
spotty in Tennessee.

New car sales are reported as

However, in Nashville, a Cadillac dealer sold

25 cars in 7 days; he reports that May was his third best month since
he has been in business.

Used cars are reportedly selling at a

fantastic rate in the Nashville, Tennessee, area.
Tennessee informants report that retail sales of both
high-priced and low-priced items are doing well.
be in the middle-priced items.
orders up and are now rehiring.

The slack seems to

Several Tennessee manufacturers report
However, farm machinery, glass, and

industrial lighting manufacturers continue to cut back their work
forces because orders remain at low levels and inventories are still
excessive.

Most retail stores appear to have inventories back to

normal levels but remain conservative in restocking because of uncer­
One director voiced

tainties over the strength in retail sales.

apprehension over the impact on retail sales of the expiration of
unemployment compensation benefits later this fall.
Directors were asked to make a special survey of inventory
conditions of local businesses.

For the most part, businesses now

say that inventories are at desired levels and no further reductions
are anticipated.

Some believe that inventories are too low.

steel manufacturers' inventories are cited as being too high.

However,
No

expectations of renewed materials shortages in the near future were
voiced by the directors.
Deposit inflows at savings and loan institutions continue
to accelerate in most parts of the District.
mortgage commitments are now on the rise.

More importantly,

Most parts of Alabama

report substantial gains in building permits, and real estate dealers

- 21 ­

report continued increases in sales of current housing inventories.
For the first time in over a year, there appears to be a definite
upturn in single-family housing activity on the lower western coast
of Florida.

Several Government defense contracts will also give a

boost to construction activity.

Government funds of over $66 million

are expected to be approved for housing construction projects at
Georgia's Fort Stewart complex.

Louisiana's Fort Polk is to receive

over $100 million for permanent housing; the funds have already been
approved by the U.S. Armed Services Committee.

As strange as it seems,

Florida's housing industry may receive a boost from Middle East oil
countries.

Deltona's "component homes" plant in South Florida is now

closed down, and this has added to the region's unemployment.

This

company is now working on a new home line for overseas shipment to the
Middle East.

If the project materializes, the plant will soon reopen.

An Alabama company has also recently completed a $42 million contract
with Saudi Arabia to build 1,000 modern prefabricated townhouses.
Foreign oil money will also give a boost to the economies
of Birmingham and Mobile, Alabama.

A Birmingham-based firm is in

final contract stages with the Arabian Sheikdom of Abu Dhabi for a
$52 million water pipeline project.

The 33,000-ton pipe order will

be shipped through the Mobile, Alabama, port.

Martin-Marietta

Corporation of Orlando, Florida, has received a $30 million Air Force
contract.

Three Alabama Army bases are to receive nearly $60 million

in Government funds in fiscal 1976.

Several construction projects at

medical complexes in New Orleans and Atlanta should give a boost to
these cities' economies.

However, in Atlanta, construction laborers

- 22 ­

went on strike July 1, stopping construction on $150 million worth of
downtown hotel projects.
Tourist trade remains very strong in Florida, Georgia,
Louisiana, and Tennessee.
year for tourism.

Reports from Tennessee indicate a record

Tourist traffic is particularly strong in Nashville.

The new Nashville Hyatt Regency is already booking conventions through
1981.

Tourist traffic in Georgia, according to travel statistics, is

up nearly 20 percent from a year ago; and, as mentioned in earlier
reports, tourist activity on the western coast and central parts of
Florida remains up 50 to 80 percent from last year.

- 23 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

A widespread consensus in the Seventh District accepts the
view that the bottom of the general recession has been passed but that
full recovery will not be achieved for a long time--perhaps not until
1977.

Business conditions in the District appear less favorable than

in the nation.

Some capital goods producers are beginning only now

to reduce output, and no near-term revival is in sight.

Demand for

consumer durables and building materials remains depressed, although
there are scattered signs of improvement.

Inventory reductions are

still under way in most manufacturing firms.
and parts are readily available.

Virtually all materials

Many producers of equipment for

consumers and business, nevertheless, will attempt to raise prices
substantially as soon as market conditions and public policies permit.
Job markets remain very weak.

Construction activity, in total, is

unlikely to strengthen this year.

Crop prospects are excellent, with

a record corn harvest and, at least, a near record soybean crop expected.
Demand for such items as draglines, huge electric mining
shovels, overhead cranes, steel mill equipment, chemical processing
equipment, and pollution control facilities remains excellent.

Some

producers of this equipment are pushing their own expansion programs,
with one maker of heavy mining equipment planning to double capacity
in the next three years.

However, most other capital goods producers,

who account for a much larger volume of activity, are cutting output.
Demand for heavy trucks is almost nonexistent, despite rebates and
attractive new features.

Sales of most types of equipment for agriculture,

construction, metalworking, and materials handling are down very sharply.

- 24 -

A revival in most types of capital spending is expected to
lag the general economy by two, three, four, or more quarters.

Many

users of equipment had been buying in excess of current needs during
the boom, and the recession resulted in rapid melting of backlogs and
heavy inventories of finished goods at the factory, distributor, and
user levels.

In addition, the rapid change in psychology from excessive

exuberance to pessimism will have lingering effects.

Finally, there

is concern that rising interest rates will deter some sales.

Equipment

producers have reduced hours, pushed early vacations, shifted workers
among divisions, and have allowed attrition to reduce payrolls.
Substantial layoffs may prove necessary, however.
Inventories of most consumer goods, both hard and soft, are
said to be moderate at the retail level, while manufacturers' inven­
tories of materials and components to produce consumer goods are
described as "low."

A significant rise in consumer purchases, there­

fore, would require restocking.

Producer equipment manufacturers,

however, are still liquidating inventories of purchased supplies and
materials, and they would like to reduce finished goods on hand.
Virtually all items are available on very short notice, often with
price concessions.

Because of reduced profits caused by lower volume

and rising costs, overall, many manufacturers are waiting for an
opportune time to raise prices of finished goods substantially.
Steel demand is equal to about two-thirds of capacity.

There

has been some pickup in orders for lighter steel products used in
consumer goods, but demand for plates and other heavier products is
down sharply.

Steel mills are proceeding with deferred maintenance

- 25 ­

at a leisurely pace, in contrast to the rush atmosphere of some recent
years.

A District steel producer, with a strong market position, has
Work

embarked on a $1 billion program to boost capacity 25 percent.
has been started on a huge new blast furnace approved last fall.
Completion is scheduled for the fall of 1978.

Retail sales in June apparently did not continue the improvement
noted in May.

Sales of autos, recreational equipment, appliances, and

televisions remain slow, more so in the District than in the nation.
Increases in output in some of these lines reflect mainly the need to
balance inventories.

Also, start-up production of new model cars,

television sets, and other items in the summer will require worker
recalls.
Auto companies plan a $6 billion, five-year program to
manufacture a "new generation" of smaller, lighter cars.
design work has been ordered.

Some tooling

Orders for dies, molds, fixtures,

machine tools, and welding and assembly machines will come later.
Residential construction activity in the District remains
at a very low level, with apartments especially weak.

Mortgage money

is available, usually at 9 percent with 30 percent down, but many
buyers are repelled by high prices and rising costs of home ownership.
Lenders are worried about increased difficulties in foreclosure pro­
ceedings.

Some builders in the Chicago area are eliminating extra

baths, dining rooms, and other "frills," and are making garages and
air conditioning optional to keep prices in the $30,000 to $35,000
range.
houses."

Skeptics refer to these units as "1945," or, even as, "junk
Developers complain that financing is hard to get, even at

- 26 ­

10 percent.

Many builders want heavy subsidies to help sales.

Despite these problems, residential building is expected to show
slow improvement, but prospects for new office buildings and shopping
centers are dim.

- 27 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT--ST. LOUIS

A modest upturn in business activity in recent weeks was
reported by a number of District businessmen.

Several retailers and

manufacturers indicated improved sales compared with earlier in the
year, although sales of most products remain considerably off from
year-earlier levels.

Savings deposits continue to increase rapidly

at thrift institutions, and some increased loan demand was reported.
Representatives of the agricultural sector reported that crops are
doing well in most of the District, and higher prices for livestock
are improving the profit prospects for livestock producers.
Area retailers reported that sales turned up in recent weeks
although no great surge in sales has occurred.

Apparently, department

store sales bottomed out in May in the St. Louis area.

It was observed,

however, that the trough was associated with the ending of a major strike
in the area.

Retail inventories have generally been brought down to

desired levels.

Retailers continue to report sluggish sales for big­

ticket items with sales gains occurring largely amoung software lines.
Automobile sales, however, were higher in recent weeks than earlier in
the year with sales of imported cars increasing faster than sales of
domestic cars.
Manufacturing activity has improved in several industries,
but it continues rather sluggish in others.

Manufacturers of consumer

goods, such as watches, bicycles, clothing, and appliances, reported
some modest turnaround in demand from earlier in the year.

A producer

of metal connector plates used in construction noted an upturn in demand
in the past couple of months and had returned to a two-shift workday.

- 28 -

A welding equipment manufacturer also noted a decided upturn in sales
in the past few weeks.

On the other hand, sales of residential con­

struction items were reported to be flat with some excess in inventories
yet to be worked off.

A steel industry representative reported a bottom­

ing out of steel production in recent weeks.
Sales for most manufacturing industries continue to be off
substantially from year-earlier levels, but most inventories have been
worked off and are now under control.

Large inventories of steel held

by steel consumers such as automobile and appliance companies are reportedly
being reduced, but the excess will soon be worked off and steel production
is expected to rise in the third quarter of this year.
Building activity has improved slightly since the first

quar­

ter of the year, but it remains generally weak.
Savings and loan associations, as well as banks,

continue to

report sizable gains in deposits.

Large amounts of funds are being

placed in passbook-type accounts.

Mortgage loan demand has turned up

somewhat in recent weeks, and some institutions have recently increased
the rates charged on such loans.

Total loans at large commercial banks

in the District have turned up in all the major centers except in St.
Louis.
in

However, one of the larger St. Louis banks reported an increase

loan demand during the past two weeks.
Crop and livestock producers were reported to be faring quite

well in most of the District.

Large acreages of corn, soybeans, and

rice were planted; and the crops are generally doing well.
acreage was reduced more than planned in

Cotton

some parts of the District

due to wet weather, but weather conditions improved sufficiently to
plant soybeans on most of the acres on which cotton could not be planted.

- 29 -

Higher beef, hog, and poultry prices, in combination with lower
feed prices, have substantially improved the profit picture for
livestock producers.

The relatively small marketings of cattle in

recent weeks partly reflect the abundance of pasture grass which
permits farmers to obtain low-cost weight gains on cattle.

- 30 -

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

At midyear, the economic decline in the Ninth District
appears to be ending.

Consumer spending has picked up recently, and

tourist spending has been strong throughout the District this summer.
Automobile and truck sales, on the other hand, continue below year­
earlier levels.

District construction activity picked up modestly in

the second quarter.

Despite localized damage from recent rains, early

July's overall District crop conditions can be termed good to excellent.
District farm income, however, could suffer if large harvests depress
prices.
After a poor first quarter, District consumer spending has
started to revive.

Several large District retailers reported that

sales began to pick up in late spring, and one large firm termed recent
business as "excellent."

However, others indicated that their sales

had been just matching or falling below year-earlier levels.

Several

retailers felt that favorable weather had helped to boost their sales,
and opinions were mixed concerning the tax rebates.

One large firm

stated that the tax rebates and earlier tax refunds combined with the
favorable weather had helped sales along, but concern was expressed
that these factors had merely shifted some July-August spending to the
May-June period.

Other firms stated that the rebates had no effect,

and one retailer reported that his company's rebate check-cashing
promotion was a failure.

A survey by a local market research firm

indicated that 63 percent of Minnesota residents either saved rebate
money or used it to pay old bills.

With regard to the current situation,

- 31 ­

regional retailers were satisfied with their inventories; the consensus
was that business should gradually continue to strengthen during the
last half of 1975.
In contrast to some pickup in general merchandise sales,
District automobile and truck sales continued to be down from a year
ago.

However, some sentiment was expressed that business had started

to improve, and regional sales offices indicated District auto inventories
were in good shape.
The tourist business was thriving throughout the District, from
the Upper Peninsula of Michigan to Montana.

In the Upper Peninsula,

Northwestern Wisconsin, and Minnesota, reservations were up from a year
ago; and resort owners were looking for a very good tourist season.

In

the western part of the District, visits to Mount Rushmore National
Memorial in South Dakota in early June were up 27 percent from a year
ago, and travel to Yellowstone National Park was greater than it was
last year.

No single explanation for the improvement was given, but

many expressed the opinion that tourists have had more interest in
seeing America this year.

Reports from North Dakota and the Upper

Peninsula indicated that many Canadians were expressing interest in
vacationing in those areas.
Conditions have improved slightly in the District's construction
industry.

Although still below a year earlier, District housing unit

authorizations strengthened in May and April.

Also, outstanding

mortgage loan commitments in May moved sharply upward in District
savings and loan associations, and savings inflows to District thrift
institutions had been quite strong through the first two quarters of

- 32 ­

In addition, a large thrift institution in the Minneapolis-St. Paul

this year.

area recently reported that loan demand for mortgages was strong.

District

nonresidential building had also shown some signs of improvement.

How­

ever, recent District construction activity had been weaker than that of
the nation.
District prospects for the small grain, corn, and soybean crops
were reported to be surprisingly good, considering the late planting
season and persistent June rainstorms.

In most cases, the crops were

somewhat behind what is considered normal, although some corn in South­
eastern Minnesota was already four feet tall by the beginning of July.
But the recent heavy rains have created a number of problems.
were flooded and washed out in Minnesota and North Dakota.

Many fields

Wet weather

also ruined the first cutting of alfalfa hay and hampered both the
cultivation of corn and soybeans as well as the spraying of small grains.
What is needed now to hasten crop development and bring out maximum
yield potential is a period of dry, sunny weather.

- 33 -

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

A survey of a number of Tenth District purchasing managers
indicates that while some further liquidation of purchased inventories
is still under way the inventory situation has basically stabilized.
Except for some modest seasonal advances in production, sales, and
employment, purchasing managers report essential stability in those
areas as well.

However, 2,200 GM employees laid off in January will

be rehired by the Kansas City assembly plant by mid-August.
Although the Tenth District wheat harvest is running somewhat
behind normal, recent improvement in the weather picture has permitted
the harvest pace to accelerate, with reports received on yield and
quality quite favorable.

With prices strengthening, the District

livestock picture has brightened considerably in recent weeks.

Tenth

District bankers surveyed continue to report weakness in total loan
demand, although some improvement was noted in business loans in
recent weeks.

Contraseasonal declines in both demand and time deposits

were reported at many Tenth District banks in June.
Contrary to reports in the Wall Street Journal

of purchasing

managers relating a surge in new orders and production, a quickened
pace of inventory liquidation, and encouraging employment trends, a
survey of a number of Tenth District purchasing managers does not
discern those developments occurring to any appreciable extent within
the District.

The term "stability" best describes the situation as

related by the respondents to our inquiries.

Although some further

liquidation of purchased inventories is still under way, there were
scattered reports of modest accumulation, mostly seasonal in nature.

- 34 -

But most purchasing managers report plans to hold inventories at
present levels.

Production and sales have been holding steady recently

and little or no change in employment was reported, nor were any
sizable increases or layoffs being contemplated for the very near
term.

However, General Motors has announced that 2,200 workers laid

off in January will be recalled to work at their Kansas City assembly
plant by mid-August.
The District's wheat harvest is running about 10 days behind
normal this year due to the late development of the crop as well as
poor harvest weather in some areas.

However, hot and dry conditions

have dominated the District's weather picture for the last several
days, allowing the harvest to progress at a rapid pace.
reports on yield and quality are quite favorable.

Most of the

In fact, the crop

has been a pleasant surprise in those areas suffering wind and hail
damage earlier in the year.

Like last year, the farmers seem to be

holding their wheat in anticipation of higher prices at a later date.
However, there is a general feeling that a significant amount will be
sold before the end of the year to pay production expenses.
The livestock picture has brightened considerably in recent
weeks.

Prices have approached, and in some cases exceeded, the highs

achieved in 1973 following sharp declines in beef and pork slaughter.
Although feedlot placements have recently begun to rise and will
probably continue rising the rest of the year, fed-beef supplies are
expected to remain relatively tight.

The seasonal increase in market­

ing from grass later this summer will probably push prices down, but
the slippage may be less than earlier anticipated due to the very
sharp reduction that is in store for pork output.

Based on the most

- 35 ­

recent hog report, slaughter during the second half of the year could
fall 20 percent or more below the year-earlier figure.

Therefore,

hog prices promise to be strong for the next several months, and
this will tend to buoy cattle prices throughout 1975.

Reflecting

these developments, the index of prices received by farmers rose 2
percent during the month ended June 15, the third consecutive monthly
rise.

While the future direction of this index will depend heavily

on the weather, it seems clear that retail food prices will continue
to increase through the summer.
Bankers surveyed in the Tenth District continue to report
weakness in total loan demand.

Declines are still occurring in

consumer loan volume and in loans for residential and commercial
construction.

Agricultural loan demand also is said to be very weak,

reflecting in part earlier declines in feeder cattle prices and place­
ments at feedlots.

As noted previously, however, the livestock picture

has improved recently.

One bright spot in the loan picture is that

business loans are reported to be picking up in recent weeks.

Some

of these loans were said to be for purposes of inventory accumulation.
Tulsa area banks also noted a large increase in loans to oil and gas
drilling interests, with one respondent indicating the loans were
extended to finance drilling in Alaska.

The prime rate charged by

all respondents was either at or above the national level.
Deposit outflows have occurred recently at many Tenth District
banks.

Both demand and time deposits appear to have dropped contra­

seasonally during June.

Many bankers reported that a sizable decline

had taken place in their large CD's over the past several weeks.

- 36 -

However, a few respondents indicated that because of their belief
that interest rates would rise they had made a recent decision to
become more aggressive in the CD market and to acquire 6-month to
1-year CD's.

- 37 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The volume of loans outstanding at Eleventh District banks
has remained essentially unchanged in the first half of 1975.

A sur­

vey of large banks reveals lending has fallen well short of projections
made at the beginning of the year.

And weak loan demand has led most

banks to lower loan projections for the remainder of 1975.

Bankers

admit, however, to a significant role in holding down loan volume,
primarily by being increasingly selective in

granting credit.

In

particular, they have applied more stringent cash flow and liquidity
criteria to loan applicants.

Most respondents are turning down some

loans they would have made a year ago--particularly term loans.
Demand for commercial and industrial loans is particularly
weak.

Bankers said part of the depressed demand for these loans reflects

the use of the commercial paper market by some customers.

But most

District firms have simply reduced their borrowing in line with depressed
business conditions.

Inventory loans, for example, are off, as most

firms have completed trimming stocks and have not yet begun to reorder
in significant volume.
Sluggish loan demand has resulted in major banks being
"beseiged" with requests to participate in their loans.

With their

loan volume depressed, however, these banks are turning down most
requests.

Petroleum-related lending, on the other hand, remains strong.

Producers of oil field equipment are reportedly building inventories
to fill a backlog of unfilled orders and to meet heavy demand expected
in the second half of the year.

But several bankers have been warning

these firms to begin trimming inventories in the light of indications
that the boom in investment by petroleum companies may be easing.

- 38 -

All phases of real estate lending are lackluster.

Bankers
Even

reported only a modest pick-up in interim construction loans.

in Houston, which, until recently, seemed isolated from the nation­
interim construction lending has fallen sharply.

wide slump in building,

Loans made for purchases of raw land by developers continue
to pose problems for real estate loan officers, and banks have grown
extremely cautious in making these loans.

One banker claims "the

problem with these loans is illiquidity and not insolvency."

A

Fort Worth banker, however, reports a recent rash of foreclosures on
this type of venture.

Builders in Fort Worth and Houston say very

little land has been developed in the past year.

A severe shortage

of residential lots has arisen, further dampening home building.
Consumer loans at District banks have edged downward since
Virtually all the decline has been in instal­

the first of the year.

ment lending, primarily automobile loans.

Credit card volume, meanwhile,

has generally been flat.
Seasonally adjusted department store sales in the Eleventh
District have risen over 10 percent since mid-April.

Purchases of

durable goods have shown marked improvement, particularly such big­
ticket items as furniture, appliances, and color television sets.
A survey of the largest department stores in the District
reveals that inventories are very low.

None of the stores contacted

considered their inventories too high, but about a third of the respon­
dents said they were understocked.
lost.

Consequently, some sales were being

Nevertheless, retailers are determined to keep stocks low.

They

said that recent increases in sales do not necessarily signal an upturn
in consumer spending.

The gain could well be temporary, largely the

result of the tax rebates.

So inventory orders by retailers in

the

- 39 ­

third quarter are still planned to be conservative.

An El Paso retailer,

for example, said most of his recent buying had been limited to "filling
holes" in his inventory.
Crop and livestock conditions in District states are above
average.

The winter wheat harvest is progressing well and yields have

been generally good.
isfactorily.

Cotton, sorghum, and rice crops are growing sat­

Pastures and ranges are in

good condition, with abundant

grazing available.
Marked improvement in the fed cattle market has resulted in a
19-percent rise in the number of cattle placed on feed in May.

But

despite increased placements, the number of cattle on feed in Texas on
June 1 was 42 percent less than a year earlier.

Texas ranchers have

sizably reduced their cattle herds, as the number of cattle and calves
slaughtered in the first five months of this year was 43 percent more
than in the same period in 1974,

despite a 22-percent drop in fed

cattle marketings.
Although growing conditions are favorable, farmers are con­
cerned about prices for both crops and cattle this fall.

Cash receipts

from farm and ranch marketingsin the District states in the first four
months of this year had dropped 27 percent from the same period last year.
The decline in sales reflected lower farm prices for both livestock and
crop marketings.

- 40 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT--SAN FRANCISCO

All but two of our directors are of the opinion that the
recession has bottomed out.
will be spotty.

The general consensus is that the recovery

Gains in personal income and a turnaround in industrial

production are expected to occur first.

However, new housing construc­

tion, automobile sales, and unemployment will respond at a much slower
rate.

Since these are popular indicators, some directors think that

their trends will have an adverse effect on consumer confidence.

Con­

cerns about future energy costs, government debt financing, and high
mortgage rates add to the existing caution on the part of consumers and
businesses to commit themselves to large expenditures.

In spite of this,

however, a halt to the general decline has been observed and new orders
are beginning to involve larger quantities.
Throughout the District, consumers are continuing to behave
cautiously and are not yet willing to assume debt in order to purchase
big-ticket items, especially automobiles.
lent in Utah.

This attitude is most preva­

In the Pacific Northwest, business at the retail level

appears more buoyant.

Contact with apparel manufacturers and a large

appliance distributor in that area reveals that new orders are picking up.
Tourism and recreation expenditures are showing gains over last year, and
soft goods sales are increasing as a result of strong promotional efforts.
Aircraft manufacturers continue to experience a softening in
the rate of new orders.

Our banking directors report there has been

a recent strengthening in loan demand from the utility, transportation,
shipping, and energy industries, but utilization of bank lines by general
manufacturing, food distribution, and forest products remains soft.

Within

- 41 ­

the food industry, however, both agricultural and food processing
loan demand have been strong.

In some areas financing requirements of

auto dealers have increased as they have been forced to carry unusually
large inventories due to slow sales.
A director connected with a large nonferrous metals firm
reports that "order intake in

our industry has improved in the past

three weeks at a modest rate and we expect the order rate to continue
to improve."

Another director from the lumber industry reports steady

sales for the past three months, at levels 15-20 percent below the fourth
quarter of 1974.

Orders for the recent period have been small in size

and for short delivery.

Although this trend is continuing, his company

is now receiving inquiries for third quarter delivery or mail shipments
in larger quantities.

He states further that corrugated containers have

maintained a slight improvement over April lows but that the lumber and
plywood market which showed signs of recovery in May has slipped back
to April levels in both prices and volume.

His company forecasts a

rather slow recovery in that field over the next 9-12 months.
The recovery in new residential construction is expected to
be very slow.

Over the next six months, if the unemployment rate and

mortgage rates remain high, demand for new housing is expected to be
moderate.
In agriculture, the farmer has been caught in a cost-price
squeeze of significant proportions.
off.

Farm prices and demand are generally

Labor, machinery, fertilizer, and feed costs are much higher than

last year.

There has been some firming of beef cattle prices in recent

weeks, but the situation is generally one of oversupply.

- 42 -

A director connected with the food industry in
"It

Idaho comments,

appears that most agricultural crops, particularly the cereal grains,

shall be in a surplus situation caused by high yields and lack of export
opportunities.

For the first time in several years we are noticing

inventory buildups in implement yards, and new tractors are readily
available."

In contrast, the dairy business is up, and productivity

is increasing.

