CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 11, 1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY............................................................

i

First District --

1

Boston...........................................

Second District -- New York.......................................

4

Third District --

7

Philadelphia....................................

Fourth District --

Cleveland......................................

11

Fifth District --

Richmond.........................................

15

Sixth District --

Atlanta.........................................

19

Seventh District --

Chicago.......................................

23

Eighth District -- St. Louis......................................

26

Ninth District -- Minneapolis.....................................

29

Tenth District --

32

Kansas City......................................

Eleventh District -- Dallas.......................................

35

Twelfth District -- San Francisco...................................

39

SUMMARY

Business conditions showed signs of improvement in most parts
of the country, according to this month's Redbook reports.

The rise in

unemployment appeared to have slowed, but joblessness was not expected
to decline soon.

Retail sales revived noticeably in most districts, led

by seasonal merchandise and some consumer durables.

Retailers generally

appeared to have achieved comfortable inventory positions.

Manufacturing

activity continued to be weak, but there were scattered signs of improvement.
The inventory situation improved for producers, but stocks were still
above desired levels.
remained sluggish.

Automobile sales and residential construction

Financial institutions continued to gain funds, and

loan demand remained almost uniformly weak.

Agricultural conditions

were generally good across the nation.
New hirings and worker recalls were cited as evidence of labor
market strength.

However, new layoffs and labor force increases were

expected to keep unemployment rates high.

Workers were being recalled

by several industries in the St. Louis and Atlanta districts, and Richmond
reported a significant increase in manufacturing employment and hours
worked.

Despite the high level of construction unemployment in Chicago-­

about 30 percent--building trade unions won wage increases of 5 to 8
percent; in Dallas, increases of 10 to 11 percent were won.
Most districts reported a marked improvement in recent retail
sales, and retailers apparently felt they had largely re-established
sound inventory positions.

A revival in consumer confidence, warmer

Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

weather, vigorous sales promotions, and price cutting were all cited as
important stimulants.
to the tax rebates.

Almost none of the retail sales gain was attributed
Warmer weather was credited with improving soft

goods sales in Chicago, Boston, and Philadelphia.

Large appliances and

furniture sold well in New York, Chicago, and San Francisco.

Automobile

sales remained sluggish across the country, except in the Atlanta region,
where truck sales were particularly strong.
St. Louis,

District reports on manufacturing activity were mixed.

Dallas, and Atlanta, for example, reported some improvement in the sales
of textiles and apparel.

A Philadelphia survey indicated that new

orders were up for the first time since last September, and Richmond
reported a firming up in manufacturing shipments and new orders.

In the

Cleveland district, the decline in manufacturing activity decelerated in
May.

Respondents to a Minneapolis survey, however, revised their 1975

sales expectations downward.
Most durable goods sales were adversely affected by cutbacks
in capital spending.

Capital goods producers in the Chicago area reported

cancellations and rescheduling of orders, while a few encouraging signs
in the capital spending sector were noted by Cleveland.

Boston, Chicago,

Cleveland, and Dallas commented that sales of oil field equipment were
down because recent tax increases had dampened oil companies' enthusiasm
for drilling.
Most respondents said manufacturers had made progress in
cutting inventories, but stocks in many cases still exceeded desired
levels.

The Philadelphia and Richmond surveys, for example, found an

improved inventory situation, but further liquidation was expected.

Recent gains in residential construction activity in most
districts were modest at best.

For instance, new housing starts were up

slightly in Philadelphia, and new home sales improved somewhat in Chicago.
But the stock of unsold houses remained large in the Atlanta district.
Residential construction was also slow around St. Louis, although commercial
construction was proceeding more rapidly.
New York attributed lagging construction activity to current
economic uncertainties and to continuing high construction costs.
Dallas and St. Louis said that mortgage lenders had been reluctant to
lower rates, thereby inhibiting a turnabout in residential construction.
Savings inflows at S&Ls continued to be strong, and time and
savings deposits were generally up at commercial banks.
policies remained cautious.

However, lending

Overall loan demand at both banks and S&Ls

was still sluggish; in the Richmond district, for instance, commercial
and industrial loan volume fell steadily in May.

Consumer loan demand

also remained weak, in large part because of lagging auto sales.
Spring planting proceeded rapidly in the nation's corn belt in
May.

Kansas City expressed concern that a bumper winter wheat harvest

might depress farm prices and incomes.

Crop conditions were good except

in the Deep South where cotton planting was far behind normal and in the
areas of the West where cool weather had retarded growth.

- 1 -

FIRST DISTRICT--BOSTON

While noting that the situation is "not good, but no worse,"
the New England directors are expressing more optimism this month.
is anticipating a strong growth of activity until 1976, however.

None
Some

are prepared to revise their former forecasts for 1975 to anticipate a
slow recovery.

For March, the regional unemployment rate was 11.4

percent; Massachusetts records unemployment at 12.2 percent for that
month, while Connecticut and Rhode Island register 9.6 percent and 16.3
percent, respectively.
Retailing has improved in the last three weeks.

Signs are

turning for hard goods, but soft goods have performed particularly well.
One director states that last year his sales were up 14 percent and that
this year has improved still another 17 percent.
but feels there must be more to the story.
evidence of rebate checks.
relaxed and cheerful.

He credits good weather,

He has not seen any direct

In recent weeks, customers have seemed more

Although he is cautiously optimistic and mentions

that retailers in general are more hopeful than a month ago, he has
resisted corporate pressure to increase his plan for buying; and he
claims that manufacturers are "nowhere near out of the woods" regarding
their inventory problems.
A director reports that carbon black sales in the United States
are improving.

Having seen a very sharp increase in tire shipments

(50 percent above production) for April, he is hopeful that a trend is
emerging.

Silica pigment sales have continued recent gradual improvement

as well; due to the broad market of this product, this also is a hopeful
sign.

- 2-

Sales of oil field equipment have shown marked weaknesses
recently.

A director reports that Senate Bill 692 has had a "devastating,"

chilling effect on the oil drilling market.

Tubular steel is now in

plentiful supply, a significant reversal of condition.

Super alloy

metals sales are strengthening for jet engines but weakening for the
chemical processing industry.
A director states that some electric utilities in the region
are showing renewed interest in expansion plans and long-range planning.
It is expected that the rate of increase in project costs will continue
to decline.

Furthermore, an electricity capacity shortage seems imminent

for the 1980s.
Directors report that bank loan portfolios have been expanding
more slowly than desired in both consumer and business categories.
Promotions continue for consumer loans, and business loans without long­
term commitments are sought.

It is expected that loan rates may ease

slightly for the summer, then rise in the fall, reaching levels modestly
higher than those prevailing now by year-end.
Professors Otto Eckstein, Robert Solow, and Paul Samuelson
were available for comment.
to cultivate a recovery.

All see hopeful signs and the opportunity

However, each is concerned that a sufficiently

cautious monetary policy can seriously fetter growth prospects.
Professor Eckstein has been fairly happy with the recent
performance of the economy.

He sees clear evidence of a recovery emerging.

However, the high level of mortgage rates are disturbing in his view.
Although the corporate market seems to be able to handle existing credit
conditions as well as can be expected, "the mortgage market needs a
nudge."

A principal issue to Eckstein is the path of the federal funds

-3­

rate.

He feels "that it would be a massive error of policy to let the

funds rate rise above 6 percent at any time in 1975."

Until the economy

is in substantially better shape, there should be no rise in this target.
This may be consistent with temporary money growth of 8 percent, but it
is in line with economic needs.
Professor Solow is troubled by the prospects of recovery.
Unless money growth is 8 percent or more, the economy will grow slowly
and the recovery will be unbalanced as capital spending and housing fail
to participate.

"Monetary policy must pull its weight.

There are no

signs of the first year exceeding speed limits; 6-6.5 percent is not
extraordinary growth in recovery, and this has been an extraordinarily
deep recession."

There is a continuing worry attached to the tax cut

carrying its weight beyond the second quarter; a simple one-shot boost
for consumption is "all the more reason why there is no harm in encouraging,
supporting, and preserving capital spending."
Professor Samuelson believes that May or April will be labeled
the turning point.

He also notes that, in view of historical experience

and the depth of the recession, a 7 percent rate of recovery is the
"minimum desirable social goal."

He observes that forecasters who

envision reasonably vigorous recoveries have assumed rates of money
expansion of at least 8 percent.

He feels that a premature monetary

restriction in 1958 retarded the economy, and he is apprehensive that
the experience could be repeated:
be a sorry matter."

"a similar philosophy this time would

-4-

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The overall picture that emerges from the views expressed by
Second District directors and other business leaders who were contacted
recently is one of a further moderation in the rate of the economic
decline, if not of an actual turnaround.

Retail sales rose strongly in

May, further progress has been made toward reducing inventories, and
district crop prospects look good.

The auto and construction industries

continue to display weakness, however, and the demand for bank credit
remains soft.
The retail sales picture brightened considerably over the past
month.

According to a survey by a local newspaper, sales at major

New York City department stores, which had been running below last
year's levels during the first four months of this year, were nearly 4
percent higher this May than in May 1974, while retail sales for the
entire metropolitan area were 5.4 percent higher than a year ago.
According to an official of a trade association, New York City area
merchants have become markedly more optimistic.

On the basis of his

contacts with local retail firms, he reported that, while the May increase
was in good part accounted for by increased apparel sales, sales of
major appliances and furniture had also increased.

He felt that the

improved retail sales atmosphere was due largely to a strengthening in
consumer confidence, with the tax rebates playing only a minor part.
The president of a nationwide department store chain felt that consumer
purchases of durable goods would likely increase as economic recovery

-5­

takes hold, a sentiment shared by other respondents.

The Buffalo Branch

directors reported strong retail sales in western New York in May, in
some areas as high as 15 percent above a year ago, and expressed optimism
that consumer spending would remain strong at least through early summer.
The respondents, however, were generally cautious regarding the near­
term outlook for automobile sales.

Several businessmen expressed the

view that auto sales might not improve significantly until the introduction
of the 1976 models.

The president of a large steel firm stated that he

was cautious regarding auto sales, but he noted that millions of autos
continue to be scrapped yearly and that a "hidden" demand must be building
up.
Regarding inventories, the retailers reported a substantial
decline from high levels at the turn of the year, although the president
of the department store chain mentioned above felt that durable goods
inventories remained high.

The president of a steel corporation reported

that his firm was reducing its stocks on hand and that the firm's customers
have rapidly reduced their inventories, which should be at "normal"
levels by the beginning of July.

The president of a nonferrous metals

producer, on the other hand, observed that, despite inventory liquidation,
stocks of metals other than steel remain at high levels.

Among senior

officials in the chemicals industry, several reported inventories under
control, although one felt that his firm's stocks were still too high.
Turning to agriculture, a Buffalo Branch director with farming
interests reported that spring weather conditions have been ideal for
crop planting.

If the favorable weather conditions continue through

harvest time, the prospects are for very high yields in most crops.

-6-

The high yields are expected to result in lower prices in general,
except for certain vegetable crops where the carry-over from last year
was particularly low.

Beef prices are expected to remain strong, but

lower prices are anticipated for eggs and poultry products.
On the darker side, none of the respondents expressing views
on the subject were optimistic over the near-term outlook for the construction
industry.

Among others, a senior official of a large New York City area

savings bank reported that, as a result of a large inflow of deposits in
recent months, his bank had much more funds available for mortgages than
there was demand for such funds, and he did not expect a turnaround in
construction activity for at least four to five months.

Some observers

noted the recent tendency of depositors to shun higher-yielding certificates
of deposit in favor of regular savings accounts, suggesting that they
may be building up liquidity for withdrawal in the near term.

The

Buffalo Branch directors generally felt that the 5 percent tax credit
and the large inflow of savings deposits had not provided a stimulus to
residential construction sufficient to overcome the depressing effects
of the uncertainties arising from current economic conditions and high
construction costs.

They expected a gradual recovery in the housing

sector but felt a quick return to the high levels of 1972 and 1973 does
not seem likely.

- 7-

THIRD DISTRICT--PHILADELPHIA

Overall business conditions in the Third District are much the
same in June as they were in May.

Manufacturers report increases in

their new orders and reductions in their inventories; but employment is
off marginally, and price movements are squeezing profits.

At the same

time, projections for the longer-term are more optimistic.

In the

second half of the year, these businessmen expect new orders to be up,
inventories to be lower, and work forces to grow.

Capital spending

plans remain cautious, however, and higher prices are anticipated.
Housing is beginning to show signs of slight improvement, and retailers
report somewhat higher sales volumes.

Area banks report that savings

deposits are growing, while demand deposits are flat at best.

In addition,

loan demand continues to be weak.
Manufacturers in the Third District, responding to this month's
Business Outlook Survey, report that business activity in the region has
changed little from last month.

Responses to the questionnaire indicate

that 70 percent of these businessmen had experienced no change in the
overall level of business activity--about the same as in May.

New

orders are up this month for the first time since September 1974, and
there is some indication that the decline in inventories is slowing.

A

little over one-third of the district's manufacturing executives report
lower inventories this month, compared with almost two-thirds in March.
While most respondents report no change in their work forces or average
workweeks, those that are cutting back still slightly outnumber those
adding employees.

- 8-

Area manufacturers report that the prices they pay are up
slightly in June, while the prices they charge are down to some extent.
Over the next quarters, however, these executives expect to be paying
and charging higher prices.

In fact, none of the respondents foresee

paying lower prices by year-end.
The outlook for the next two quarters has become increasingly
optimistic in recent months.

More than 90 percent of the respondents

now foresee a higher level of business activity by December, while only
45 percent of those surveyed in January were expecting an upturn within
a half year.

Almost 80 percent of the region's manufacturers expect new

orders to increase by winter.

Last January only half anticipated a

pickup within the next six months.

In addition, some further pruning of

inventories is expected, and by December about half of the manufacturers
surveyed plan to add employees.

But despite the growing optimism,

spending plans for new plant and equipment remain conservative.

Close

to two-thirds plan no change in their capital expenditures in the next
two quarters.
Retailers in the area indicate that their sales volumes are up
from a year ago and are somewhat better than last month.

They note that

this slight upturn in sales coincides with a warmer and dryer weather
pattern; but they have no idea what impact, if any, the federal tax
rebates have had on their sales.
that he is "under-inventoried."

None of the merchants contacted feel
In general, their outlook is for the

economy to pick up in the second half of the year, but no big boost is
expected until year-end.

As one retailer put it, "demand can stay pent

up only so long, and when people are more convinced that an upturn is
under way, we'll see the release of this pent-up demand."

-9-

Little change in retail prices is reported, but one merchant
discloses paying more for some big-ticket items.

Television prices are

up 5 to 6 percent this month, and increases are also anticipated on
other major appliances.

If oil prices are hiked further, it is expected

that the price of plastics will follow closely.

These executives expect

upward pressure on prices to emerge during recovery but don't look for
it to be excessive.
Residential housing activity in the district is beginning to
show signs of a gradual pickup.

Sales and new starts are improving

slightly, and one mutual savings bank official reports mortgage applica­
tions and commitments running much heavier than a few months ago.

He

notes, however, that there's still great reluctance on the part of big
builders to undertake any large project.

In addition, he feels that

"the picture won't brighten much further until builders see some clear
signals that buyer reluctance is down and incomes are up."

This official

looks for a revival in builders' plans by fall.
Bankers in the region report growth in their savings deposits,
but demand deposits are falling.

One banker notes increasing confidence

that the economic slide is over, but all report continued absence of
strong loan demand.

One bank has experienced a drop of $40 million in

commercial loans outstanding in the last two weeks.

There's a general

feeling that the downward pressure on interest rates will continue but
that rates will bottom out before Christmas.

None of the bankers contacted

view the recent drop in the discount rate as having much significance.
Most agree with one banker who says that, in terms of its relation to
other interest rates, this decline in the discount rate has been the
"least important ever."

The consensus outlook among bankers is for the

- 10 ­

economy to recover gradually in the third and fourth quarters, with

upward pressure on prices as the recovery unfolds, but it is not for
strong inflationary forces until the upturn is substantially under way.
The heavy Treasury borrowing scheduled for the latter part of the summer
is not expected to pose any problems for the credit markets until at
least 1976.

- 11 -

FOURTH DISTRICT--CLEVELAND

The decline in district economic activity has been slowing,
but signs of recovery in overall economic activity have not yet been
pronounced.

Inventory liquidation at the manufacturing level accelerated.

Nonautomotive retail sales improved.
to abate.

Inflationary pressures continued

Output and employment have been recovering in some industries

such as autos, tires, and chemicals.

Other industries, notably steel,

have still been reducing operations.

Residential construction edged up.

Some major banks were reported to have been following conservative loan
policies.
In the retail sector, the treasurer of a large discount store
chain said sales have improved in recent weeks and inventories have been
brought under better control.

He noted that price markdowns, which have

been used to entice consumers, will not be as extensive in the months
ahead because profits have been squeezed and inventories reduced.

The

treasurer of.a major Cleveland department store also reported that sales
picked up in May and early June, although big-ticket items still have
not begun to move.

Its inventories also have been whittled down.

Latest reports from Cleveland purchasing agents and early
returns from our survey of district manufacturers indicated further
slowing in the decline of new orders, production, and employment during
May.

Most companies said they are letting attrition reduce their work

forces.

Inventory liquidation of raw materials, supplies, and finished

goods was greater than for any other month this year.

Inflationary

pressures continued to ease as purchasing agents reported that they have
been negotiating lower prices, higher discounts, and improved terms.

- 12 -

For the third consecutive month, twice as many purchasing agents have
been paying lower prices as higher prices.
Among favorable industrial developments, auto companies continued
to recall some laid off workers.

An economist with a major tire firm

said the tire industry, on balance, has started to recall workers.
Sales and production have been recovering.

The economist estimates

that during the next four or five months the industry will reduce
inventories further by allowing tire sales to increase at a faster rate
than production.

A chemical industry spokesman said chemical products

that were depressed in the earliest part of the recession have rebounded,
with output now up to 70 percent of capacity, compared with 50 percent
in December-January.
In the steel industry, many large and small firms throughout
the district recently announced temporary or indefinite employment
cutbacks; thousands of workers are being affected.

One large firm has

decided against reopening its idled Ohio facilities, and 1,250 jobs are
being eliminated.

An economist with a major steel company said new

orders declined somewhat more than expected but have been showing signs
of levelling off.

Some customers that had not ordered for months (for

example, appliances) have begun to come back.

Several steel firms

reported uncertainties developing among oil country producers because of
new depletion allowance rules.
no longer been so bullish.

In particular, independent drillers have

Energy-related industries, which had been

strong steel buyers throughout the recession, have now been reducing
orders and cutting inventories.

Steel sources say customer inventory

liquidation has not yet run its course.

Steel sheet has been the largest

part of the excessive inventories, especially at the steel service centers.

- 13 -

According to the chief executive officer of a major utility in
northeastern Ohio, business from industrial accounts, especially steel,
machine tools, and other machinery goods, has been pointing down.

He

also indicated that they have been experiencing some collection problems
in higher income neighborhoods.
There have been scattered signs of improvement in the capital
spending sector, amidst still basically weak market conditions.

Dollar

awards for nonresidential building edged up slightly but have remained
well below last autumn's level.

Printing press orders have improved,

following softness for several months.

A major machine tool firm

reported a significant rebound in new orders booked during May, follow­
ing a wave of cancellations in April.

On the less encouraging side, an

Ohio office equipment producer announced it will lay off 700 employees
during the remainder of the year.

A major supplier to the heavy duty

truck market has scheduled an extended shutdown this summer because of
poor business.

Weak auto sales have caused a large steel firm in Ohio

to postpone indefinitely its plans to expand plant capacity for produc­
ing steel sheets used by the auto industry.
Residential construction contracts have improved moderately
during the past few months.

An economist with a Federal Home Loan Bank

in the district said that net deposit inflows at S&Ls were very strong
again in May and that the supply of funds available for mortgages far
exceeds demand.
Economists from three major Cleveland banks said their banks
have been following conservative loan policies in order to build liquidity
and capital.

They also expressed the view that conservative loan policies

could inhibit a sharp recovery in economic activity.

One stated that

-

14 ­

his bank has been accepting as little credit or interest risk as possible.
Another mentioned that the president of his bank instructed loan contact
officers not to be aggressive in seeking loans.

All three banks have

been making term loans based on a floating rate or a periodic reappraisal
that allows for rate adjustments.

- 15 -

FIFTH DISTRICT--RICHMOND

The May survey of Fifth District businesses supports the view
that business conditions are beginning to improve.

It is not yet apparent

that a strong recovery has taken hold, but survey responses and other
reports from around the district are more encouraging than at any time
in recent months.

Among the most encouraging signs at the present time

are reports of notable improvements in labor markets.

Several states

have begun to report declines in unemployment rates and increases in
employment.

Of the manufacturing firms responding to our survey, more

report an increase in the number of employees than report a decrease for
the first time since August 1974.

Shipments and new orders show little

further improvement, after significant improvement in the previous
month.

Optimism continues to spread in the manufacturing sector.

Recent contacts with Fifth District banks indicate that loan demand in
virtually all lending areas continues weak and that this weakness is
expected to continue for at least the next three months.
The latest district survey indicates improvement in a broad
range of activities and a continued swing toward brighter expectations.
In the manufacturing sector, shipments and new orders have held firm,
showing perhaps a slight gain, after a relatively strong showing in May.
In particular, the latest reports on new orders represent a substantial
change from the widespread declines which occurred from September 1974
through March 1975.

Backlogs of orders showed some further declines in

May, but the relatively weak declines of April and May indicate a distinct
slowing of the slide that began over a year ago.

The inventory picture

- 16 ­

appears to be improving, but the current adjustment process still has a
way to go.

One-third of the survey respondents report declines of both

materials and finished goods inventories, while only one-fifth indicate
increases.

This result may be significant with regard to finished goods

inventories, which apparently were still growing through March of this
year.

Despite the latest improvement, however, 50 percent of the

respondents still feel current inventories are excessive.
The employment situation also showed signs of improvement
during May.

For the first time since August 1974, the diffusion of

survey responses suggests an increase in the number of employees in
manufacturing firms.

Even more significant results are those concerning

the hours worked per week, as over one-third of the respondents indicate
increases in this area.

There remains a general feeling that current

plant and equipment capacity is excessive, but there is little indication
of any desire to alter current expansion plans.
The survey of retailers also suggests some general improvement
in overall conditions.

Over 70 percent of the retailers surveyed

indicate an increase in sales during May, although most report that
sales of big-ticket items relative to total sales remain weak.

Inventories

showed no change from the previous month, but most respondents view
current levels as about right.
In the area of prices, the period of weakness indicated in
recent months seems to have ended, or at least to have been interrupted.
Manufacturers and retailers report paying higher prices, and only the
retailers report little or no change in prices received.

There is now

general agreement as to expectations for the next six months.

A majority

- 17 ­

of manufacturers and retailers foresee business conditions, locally and
nationally, improving over that time period.
In the banking sector, commercial and industrial loan volume
at large district banks declined steadily during May, with cyclical
forces overcoming the strong positive seasonal movements normally
expected at this time of year.

Weak demand has led to especially low

loan volume in the textile industry as manufacturers continue to reduce
their inventories.

One bank indicates that demand for business loans is

particularly weak at its city offices.
its steady decline also.

Consumer loan volume continues

Notwithstanding the weak demand situation,

loan refusals are high in both business and consumer lending areas as
portfolio quality remains a chief concern.

Liquidity is steadily

improving as funds from strong time deposit flows displace purchased
money and as investments are substituted for loans.

Based on their

recent experiences, district banks generally feel that the recovery in
prospect for the remainder of the year is not likely to be vigorous.
Time deposit inflows are strong at both banks and S&Ls, even
though some institutions are doing little to encourage the longer maturity
deposits.

Net federal funds purchases in the Fifth District, although

high by historical standards, are considerably below last year's levels.
CD solicitations are being concentrated in local market areas due, at
least partly, to the fact that large district banks still must pay a
small premium for funds in the national market.

It has been noted that

short-term CD funds are plentiful but that longer-term deposits (maturities
greater than 120 days) are difficult to attract.

-

18 -

District cash receipts from farm marketing during the first
quarter were 12 percent below a year ago, but the decline was considerably
less than that for the nation.

Farmers generally have made good progress

in their field work in recent weeks.

Planting of most field crops in

the southern portions of the district is in the windup stage, with
earlier plantings reportedly in fair to good condition.

- 19 -

SIXTH DISTRICT--ATLANTA

The economic news is spotty this month.

Unemployment seems to

have stabilized, and a number of district industries appear to be growing
increasingly optimistic.

Car sales have improved slightly, and new

truck sales are reported as strong.

One Atlanta bank indicates that

credit card losses are running four to five times above normal levels.
Crop plantings in the district have progressed rapidly during recent
favorable weather conditions.

While residential construction continues

at low levels, announcements of commercial and industrial projects
remain brisk.
Reports from Louisiana and Florida suggest the rise in unemployment
has halted.

In Florida, the northern part of the state around Jacksonville

and the Panhandle apparently is already improving, and central Florida
is starting to show a pickup; but south Florida around the Miami area
remains depressed.

Public works jobs along with high levels of car

imports at the Jacksonville port seem to be adding strength to Jacksonville's
economy.
level.

Activity at the port in Mobile, Alabama, also is at a high
A central Florida director indicates that several local businesses

are now placing orders to build up inventories.

Directors in southern

Alabama and Mississippi report an improving job outlook, with new hiring
expected in the shipbuilding, pulp and paper, furniture, and chemical
industries.

They report that skilled job positions are still going

unfilled in many job categories.

Several businessmen in Georgia's

textile and carpet industries report business improving and some rehiring.
A Georgia apparel manufacturer notes a sudden increase in new orders,
indicating an improvement in business conditions.

- 20 -

All the news isn't good, however.

U.S. Steel shut down its

Ensley mill near Birmingham, Alabama, to meet the May 31 air pollution
abatement deadline; the closing will cost 2,000 jobs and result in a
Honeywell Aerospace, in

$60 million annual loss to the area's economy.

St. Petersburg, Florida, will lay off over 100 workers after failing to
win a government contract.

Several Georgia paper manufacturers have

recently scaled back their labor forces because of a drop in demand for
paper products.
Automobile manufacturers' representatives in various areas
report that dealers have benefited greatly from reduced borrowing costs
and from the sales increases of the past few months.

However, there has

as yet been no noticeable impact on car sales from the tax rebates.
Also, no noticeable shift in car size preference has taken place.
Representatives indicate that orders from dealers are strong and that
dealers are now much more optimistic.

Truck sales are reported as very

strong now, possibly because of the investment tax credit.

One Florida

director notes that auto dealers are now looking for new salesmen.

Used

car sales are reported as exceptionally strong in his area.
An Atlanta bank reports that its bank credit card losses are
running about five times above normal.

It is also getting hit very hard

this year with defaults on small consumer loans.
reevaluating its consumer lending practices.

As a result, it is

However, even with more

rigid lending practices, it estimates that 40 percent of the defaulted
loans would still have been made.

A mid-Louisiana director indicates

that bank loan demand remains down and that little effort is being made
to compete for certificates of deposit.

The S&Ls in this area have

- 21 ­

dropped mortgage rates below 9 percent and reduced in half the points
charged to close loans; but mortgage lending has not responded.
While crop plantings have benefited from a period of good
weather, over 50 percent of Louisiana's and 20 percent of Mississippi's
cotton acreage remained unplanted at the end of May; this is an unusually
late date for planting cotton.
progress in these two states.

Soybean planting also trails normal
District farmers seem concerned over the

threat of further fuel price increases.

Wind damage to Louisiana's

state and national forest lands is estimated at more than 20,000 acres.
The forestry services are making plans to attempt to salvage as much as
40 million board feet of prime timber felled by storms.
tomato crop was excellent.

Florida's

Citrus prices are reported as poor except

for grapefruit, where Japanese buying held up prices.
Residential construction has not as yet developed a noticeable
recovery, despite large inflows at S&Ls.

As reported last month, the

housing tax credit is apparently having only a slight impact on reducing
the stock of unsold houses.

A large Florida housing builder reports a

large inflow of new orders recently.

Residential construction in the

St. Petersburg area has improved slightly; but in the Miami area, the
housing situation is still bleak, and many construction workers have
moved out of the area.
Commercial and industrial construction projects continue to be
announced.

IBM has announced plans to build an 11-story office building

in the Atlanta area.

The Coca-Cola Company has announced plans for a

$50 million expansion project that will include a 20- to 30-story office
building.

Republic Steel Corporation has recently announced plans to

- 22 ­

spend $350 million at its Gadsden, Alabama, plant; the project will
increase the plant's raw material output by more than 1 million tons
annually.

Dow Chemical will build two new petrochemical plants in

Louisiana at a cost of $25 million.

The German chemical firm, Degussa,

announced another $10 million plant in their Mobile, Alabama, complex.
This brings the grand total of their investment to over $100 million
thus far.

- 23 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Economic conditions in the Seventh District are still deteriorating,
and prospects appear less favorable, overall, than for the nation for
the remainder of the year.

This region's important capital goods

industries report sharply reduced orders, while demand for consumer
durables, also important here, has not recovered significantly.

Most

manufacturers are cutting inventories, and markets for most materials,
components, and finished goods are highly competitive.
volume remains very depressed.

Transportation

No significant pickup is discernible in

residential construction activity, but sales of existing units have
improved in recent weeks.

Employment is probably still declining in the

district, with layoffs continuing to be heavy while new hiring remains
at a low level.

Retailers appear pleased with a modest pickup in sales

of seasonal merchandise in recent weeks.

Prospects appear excellent for

agricultural crops, with plantings completed in ample time.
Many firms have deferred or stretched out capital expenditure
programs because of idle capacity, reduced profits, and reduced estimates
of future growth.

Most producers of capital goods continue to report

cancellations and rescheduling of orders.

Cancellations would be greater

for some items, for example, railroad equipment, if such steps were not
too costly.

The market for trucks, trailers, and small construction

equipment is very depressed, and demand for farm equipment has weakened.
Some oil exploration projects have been curtailed, with the new tax law
cited as the reason.

Demand remains very strong for capital goods for

water control and sewerage facilities, as well as for mining and ore
processing (including coal, iron, and copper).

- 24 -

Generalized inventory cutting since late last year has created
some gaps, with shortages of particular products necessitating increased
orders and production.

This has occurred in autos, appliances, and

recreational equipment.
excessive, however.

Inventories, generally, are still considered

Freight transportation by rail, truck, air, and

water has been running 15 to 20 percent below last year, the largest
decline since World War II.

Much equipment is idle and not wearing out,

thereby reducing demand for both new equipment and replacement parts.
Residential construction is not leading the district out of
the recession, as in the past, and time is running out for this year.
Housing permits in the Chicago area for four months were down 27 percent
from last year and down more than 60 percent from 1973.

The mortgage

on a new 43-story office building on La Salle Street has been foreclosed.
Many other commercial and residential projects are in trouble but are
not being foreclosed because lenders see no advantage in such a course.
Condominiums have been especially hard hit.

On the favorable side,

sales of houses have picked up in recent weeks, and an act to extend the
9.5 percent usury ceiling in Illinois has been passed by the legislature.
Some manufacturers have recalled workers, but total layoffs
continue at a high level.

Voluntary separations are sharply reduced,

and demand for additional workers, including trainees, is very low.

New

claims for unemployment compensation in May were more than double last
year in the district, except for Michigan, where claims were very high
last year.

Unemployment in the building trades is said to be 30 percent

or more in the Chicago area, but unions have obtained increases of 5 to
8 percent after strikes or threats of strikes.
bricklayers is now $11.63 per hour.)

(Total compensation of

The city of Detroit has laid

- 25 ­

off workers, including police, and Milwaukee may be forced to follow
suit.

Many college and high school graduates have been unable to find

jobs, and temporary summer jobs are hard to find.
The largest producer of color TV sets and a major producer of
furniture report that consumer demand has picked up in recent weeks, but
they imply that they are outpacing their competitors.

Sales of boats,

recreational vehicles, and appliances (except for chest freezers)
remain very poor.

Major retailers of general merchandise saw some

improvement in sales of apparel and other seasonal merchandise in recent
weeks, with a boost from favorable weather.
to be in good shape.

Their inventories are said

Competition has forced a 35-store Chicago area

food store chain into bankruptcy, and a national food store chain has
been closing a majority of its stores in the Chicago area.
Crop plantings proceeded very rapidly in recent weeks.

By

June 2, virtually all of the corn and 85 percent of the soybeans in the
district had been planted.

In Iowa, where rains had delayed operations,

farmers were able to plant half of the state's corn in one week--many of
them using larger and faster equipment than in the past.

Farmers'

purchases of fertilizer and equipment have been below expectations this
year, reflecting cautious attitudes.

Dealers are said to be pushing

equipment sales with discounts and more liberal credit terms.

- 26 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT--ST. LOUIS

District businessmen continue to express optimism about the
prospects for an economic recovery in the second half of this year.
Several industries already report some turnaround in orders.
however, no great surge in consumer demand is being reported.

So far,
The two

big problem areas throughout this recession, automobiles and housing,
continue to be sluggish.

Savings funds continue to flow rapidly into

thrift institutions, although mortgage demand remains weak.

Farming

operations are proceeding at a rapid pace, and with better than average
crop prospects, increases in livestock feeding are likely later this
year.
Department store sales have apparently remained unchanged in
real terms in recent weeks.

One large St. Louis retailer reported

fairly strong sales aided by considerable advertising and price cutting.
Others, however, reported no sales gains.

An aggressively managed

appliance dealership reported that sales had held up fairly well in
recent months, despite the generally low sales volume for the industry.
This firm also noted a fairly large increase in sales in the past couple
of weeks.

Sales of some consumer durables, such as automobiles, continue

sluggish, while sales of home entertainment equipment, such as television
and hi-fi equipment, are reported to have picked up recently.

Lawn and

garden equipment sales are also reported to be above year-ago levels.
Several signs continue positive in the manufacturing sector of
the district economy.

Those industries reporting some recent pickup in

orders include chemicals, paints and coatings, food service equipment,

- 27 ­

and clothing.

Inventories have been reduced substantially in a number

of industries, and the current increases in factory orders are believed
to represent anticipated increases in final demand in the second half of
this year.

Reports from capital goods firms are mixed.

A manufacturer

of pumps and lubrication equipment reported strong sales and continued
unfilled orders, while a manufacturer of welding and cutting equipment
reported a sharp drop in sales.
Other areas of activity, such as mining and roadbuilding, are
reported to be doing fairly well.

Commercial construction is currently

fairly strong in the St. Louis area, although this is not representative
of the entire district.

Residential housing has shown only slight

improvement in recent weeks.
Unemployment has increased in the district much like in the
United States as a whole.

Representatives of several industries report

having recalled workers in the past several weeks, but layoffs in other
industries plus normal increases in the labor force have led to a
further increase in unemployment on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Mortgage funds are currently available at lower rates than
earlier in the year.

Rates have held steady in the past couple of

months, although S&Ls report continuing downward pressure on rates.
This pressure has been resisted due to the anticipation of a turnaround
in rates later in the year.

S&Ls also report a marked change in the

composition of their savings inflows from CDs to passbook savings.

One

S&L representative believes that this reflects the desire of savers to
be in a liquid position so they could take advantage of higher rates in
the future.

Mortgage demand is still reported to be weak, although some

- 28 ­

slight improvement was noted.
also sluggish.

Demand for business and consumer loans is

Total loans outstanding at large commercial banks in the

district, including both business and consumer loans, have continued to
drift downward in recent weeks.
The pace of plantings of this year's crops has been somewhat
above average for recent years over most of the district.

Given normal

weather, large crops and probably somewhat lower food and feed grain
prices are in prospect for later in the year.

With recent increases in

livestock prices, the stage is being set for a pickup in livestock
feeding this fall and winter.

Pork supplies may become tight later in

the summer, however, as hog producers, responding to the more favorable
feedings ratios, will tend to hold back gilts for breeding purposes.

- 29 -

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

District business activity has improved in recent weeks, and
Bank directors were able to cite evidence that the recession appears to
be bottoming out in their regions.

The decline in district labor demand

appears to be leveling off, and in some areas job openings have increased.
Several directors reported a recent improvement in consumer loan demand,
and district business loan demand has been stronger than nationally.
Nevertheless, manufacturing sales were expected to remain weak through
the end of 1975.
In commenting on current business activity, directors cited
various reasons why they felt that the recession seems to be bottoming
out in their areas or industries.

A Twin Cities area banker stated that

his bank's corporate customers reported that business activity has
picked up in recent weeks.

In the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, substantial

progress has been made in correcting inventories, and many companies
have achieved lower than desired inventory levels.

A director whose

firm produces consumer food products indicated that his industry's sales
prospects have improved in recent weeks.

Business in one director's

community took a definite turn for the better in May, and a major building
products manufacturer in the area has started to recall workers.

An

Upper Peninsula director reported that a major paper manufacturer recently
experienced an increase in orders, but business continues off for the
copper industry.

Tax rebates have stimulated consumer spending in

another director's area, but manufacturing has continued weak.

In

western South Dakota, preliminary evidence points toward a good tourist
season.

In the agricultural sector, spring planting has nearly been

- 30 ­

completed, and moisture conditions are generally satisfactory; if conditions
continue to be favorable, large crops are probable this fall.
Despite these favorable comments, the results of our latest
Industrial Expectations Survey, taken in early May, indicated that
manufacturers were feeling the impact of the recession and were not
optimistic about their future sales prospects.

District manufacturing

sales were up 4.5 percent from a year earlier in the first quarter, and
they are expected to increase only 1.1 percent in the current quarter.
In February, respondents had anticipated a much larger sales advance of
about 9 percent in both the first and second quarters.

District manu­

facturers do not foresee any substantial recovery during the last half
of this year, as no sales growth is expected in the third quarter and as
only a 4.0 percent sales advance is anticipated in the fourth quarter.
District labor market conditions have improved, and several
directors indicated that the demand for labor has recently increased in
their areas.

In the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area, there have

been few, if any, recent layoffs of workers.

Another Twin Cities director

felt that firms would have to start rebuilding inventories and step up
production, which, in his opinion, would cut the layoff rate and spur
the rehiring of workers.

Several directors reported that job openings

had increased in areas outside of the Twin Cities metropolitan area and
that some firms were recalling workers.

However, no directors foresaw

any significant decline in their area's unemployment.

Recent initial

claims data indicated that district joblessness will continue high.
Directors' comments on loan demand also reflect their views
about the recent improvement in business activity.

Several directors

characterized consumer loan demand at banks in their areas as good.

- 31 -

Depressed auto sales, however, have held down consumer loans in some
areas.

District banks have not significantly changed the terms or

interest rates for consumer lending.
Business loan demand has been stronger in the district than in
the nation, and directors characterized business loan demand as being
either flat, firm, or good.

The opinion was expressed that a turnaround

in the economy will probably bring forth some increase in business
credit demands during the second half of this year.

Whether or not this

will show up in bank loans, however, depends upon the competition from
alternative credit markets.

Currently, the wide spread between the

prime rate and the commercial paper rate makes it attractive for borrowers
to avoid banks.

Some companies which had been unable to sell commercial

paper during the 1974 credit crunch have now reentered the market.

The

Bank's directors, in general, reported little change in bank credit
requirements or loan terms.

One view, however, was that lending policies

on business loans in the Twin Cities became more restrictive in the past
three months.
commitments.

Also, strict constraints remain on the management of loan

- 32 -

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Strong inflows of funds to Tenth District savings and loan
institutions have continued, and mortgage lending activities have
increased.

Similar reports of strength in deposit inflows at commercial

banks for both time and demand deposits were received in response to
inquiries made of a number of Tenth District banks.

Although overall

loan demand continues to be sluggish, retail sales are apparently
continuing the improvement which was reported in the May Redbook, and
businessmen are expressing increased--if at times guarded--optimism
over future economic prospects.

With the stage set for a bumper wheat

crop in 1975, farmers now voice concern over the depressing effect which
such a crop might have on wheat prices.

Despite increases in the index

of prices received by farmers in both April and May, district farmers
still expect a sizable decline in net farm income over that received
last year.
Although a few of the S&Ls contacted reported small or moderate
deposit inflows, such terms as "extremely good," "substantial," "very
large," and "markedly up" were more often used by respondents to describe
their deposit gains.

Little enthusiasm was voiced over Treasury Secretary

Simon's request to allow higher interest rates to be paid on savings
bonds because of the likely competitive impact for their institutions.
Apparently, tax rebate checks have not as yet been a significant element
in overall deposit inflows, since most of the institutions contacted
reported little evidence to the contrary.

The strength in deposits has

permitted S&Ls to increase their mortgage lending activities significantly,

- 33 ­

while at the same time enabling them to greatly improve their balance
sheets by paying off their loans.

Their liquidity positions, with few

exceptions, are reported as substantially improved.

Mortgage rates are

generally expected to remain fairly stable over the next six months, and
the attitudes of their business customers suggest that they are becoming
somewhat more optimistic about future business prospects, although such
optimism was not without some reservation.

In part, their improved view

of the future is traceable to continuing growth in retail sales in
recent months.
The stage is set for a bumper wheat crop in 1975.

Current

estimates are that more than 1.6 billion bushels of winter wheat will be
produced this year.

The wheat condition is described as excellent

throughout the central parts of Nebraska, Kansas, and Oklahoma following
Some hail damage occurred,

widespread rains during the past two weeks.

but destruction was limited to isolated fields along a narrow band.
Western portions of Nebraska and Kansas have recovered from a very dry
winter and early spring, but the Oklahoma Panhandle remains very dry and
will produce little dryland wheat this year.
Farmers are concerned about the depressing effect a large crop
might have on wheat prices, since cash receipts from farm marketings
have fallen sharply from year-ago levels.

During the first quarter of

the year, cash receipts nationally were 17 percent below the first three
months of 1974.

In Tenth District states, first quarter cash receipts

fell 27 percent below the same period last year due to lower prices for
both crops and livestock.

The index of prices received by farmers

increased in both April and May, but net farm income is still expected
to fall about 20 percent below last year's $27.2 billion.

- 34 -

Bankers contacted in the Tenth District generally reported
continued sluggishness in overall loan demand.

Loans to farmers have

displayed greater than seasonal weakness, while commercial and industrial
loans still remain soft.

Some of the bankers contacted, however,

anticipated an improvement in the demand for loans in the near future.
They noted that their customers were optimistic and that preliminary
reports indicated retail sales volume in their local areas has risen in
the last 30 days.

Some bankers also reported that consumer loans for

automobiles were up slightly and that recreation and tourist-related
business in the western part of the Tenth District was experiencing
strong demand.
Deposit inflows at surveyed banks were reported to be quite
strong recently.

Both demand and time deposits have showed greater than

seasonal strength during the month of May.

Most bankers contacted

indicated they thought that the tax rebates had no significant effect on
their demand or time deposit inflows.

In view of the current strength

in deposits and the lack of a vigorous upturn in loan demand, virtually
all bankers contacted said their prime rates would probably drop slightly
over the next few months.

- 35 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The decline in industrial output in the district appears to
have bottomed out.

The Texas Industrial Production Index, after falling

throughout the first quarter, has turned up.

The primary reason for the

upturn is that many firms had liquidated their inventories to such low
levels that increased production was needed to maintain minimal levels
Petroleum refiners, for example, allowed stocks of gasoline

of stocks.

and heating oil to run off in the first quarter of the year before
increasing operations.

Garment makers have stepped up production in

response to a recent influx of orders from large chains and department
stores that placed virtually no bookings in the first quarter.
Textile producers also report increased orders but mention
that the industry's profit margins are being squeezed.

Escalating

electricity rates are boosting production costs, and manufacturers
consider the market for their goods still too weak to pass on the bulk
of the higher energy charges to customers.
Output of construction materials has leveled off after 12 months
of decline.

Shipments by the district's largest manufacturer of reinforcing

steel bars, for example, have stabilized at roughly half the year­
earlier level, but a company official maintains the firm is facing a
severe cost squeeze.

A buildup of inventories in the second half of

1974 forced prices of finished goods down a third from peak levels late
last year.

Meanwhile, production costs have continued to climb and are

the highest in the company's history.

- 36 -

Producers of oil field equipment report plants are still
operating at full capacity.
threatened.

However, future production appears to be

Bookings have fallen sharply in the past two months, and
Producers trace the softening in demand

many orders have been canceled.

to the suspension of the oil depletion allowance and to the government's
delay in drawing up a definitive energy policy.

A manufacturer of

offshore drilling rigs reports recent cancellations will probably force
layoffs at a plant in east Texas.

Producers of oil field pipe have

experienced a reduction in new orders as major oil companies are building
inventories cautiously, in contrast to last year when they frantically
stockpiled pipe.
Steel companies supplying the petroleum industry also report a
reduction in orders.

An official at one steel mill in Houston says his

company, which operated under a deluge of orders in 1974, will have
filled its backlog of unfilled orders by midyear.
The boom in drilling activity in Texas that prevailed during
Drilling in the state has dipped

1974 is showing signs of easing.

slightly below peak levels in the first quarter but remains higher than
a year earlier.

Wet weather has hampered drilling operations somewhat

by limiting the mobility of large equipment.
Recent legislation that increased taxes for oil companies is
likely to further dampen drilling.

Major companies and large independents,

having lost their depletion allowance, are reexamining their exploration
budgets.

Some signs that the new laws are already adversely impacting

on drilling have emerged.
more readily available.

Drilling rigs, in tight supply in 1974, are
Moreover, drilling contractors report lead time

for projects has been reduced.

The full impact of the increase in

taxes, however, will not be seen for several months.

Exploratory drilling,

- 37 ­

which involves heavy financial risks, will be harder hit than development
drilling, which increases the number of wells in proven oil fields.

But

even with the anticipated slowdown, the current backlog of commitments
will keep overall drilling high in 1975.
The rate of net savings inflows at district S&Ls, which accelerated
in the fourth quarter of 1974, has continued strong in 1975.

The composition

of these deposits differs from recent years, as a larger portion are
passbook savings.

The largest S&L in Houston, for example, reports

passbook accounts now make up a third of its total deposits.
passbook deposits account for a fifth of its savings accounts.

Normally,
In

recent weeks, this trend has accelerated by a large influx of income tax
rebate checks.

However, S&L officials believe most of these savings are

earmarked for summer expenditures, such as vacations.

Withdrawals

of passbook savings are not expected to strain the liquidity positions of
the S&Ls, since the inflow of large deposits--$100,000 and over--has
been great enough to offset large-scale withdrawals from the smaller
accounts.
Despite having ample funds, lenders have been reluctant to
lower rates on mortgage loans because the cost of funds remains high and
is not expected to decline.

Prevailing rates on 80 percent conventional

mortgages at S&Ls in the district range from 9 to 9.5 percent.

These

high interest rates have contributed to continued sluggishness in loan
demand, providing little incentive to homebuilders to step up construction
activity.

Residential building in the district is only slightly higher

than the low point early this year.
First year wage increases negotiated in the construction
industry this spring in district cities ranged from 6 to 13 percent.

In

- 38 ­

a few cities--El Paso for one--settlements followed strikes by union
locals.

Wage settlements might have been higher, but the depressed

level of building activity helped to hold down the increases.

Settlements

were larger where there were major industrial or public construction
projects under way and in those areas where large national contractors
were operating.

In Houston, for example, contractors report that the

building crafts won increases of 10 to 11 percent, only slightly less
than the 12 percent won last year.

Important factors in the settlement

were the extraordinary amount of work under way, especially industrial
projects, and the large concentration of national contractors in the
city.

- 39 -

TWELFTH DISTRICT--SAN FRANCISCO

Caution and conservatism seem to dominate the economic scene,
according to this district's directors.

Extensions of consumer credit

have been level for the past six months, and delinquency rates have not,
for the most part, risen sharply.
correlated closely with needs.

Requests for credit appear to be

Production levels in the metals industries

continue to decline as final demand continues to be weak in the user
industries, mainly automobiles and construction.

In some other industries,

however, such as textile, chemicals, and farm machinery, inventories are
no longer being liquidated.

Because of lower prices, farm incomes are

expected to decline this year; but crops were late because of the cool
spring weather, and some shortages accompanied by price increases might
develop as the year progresses.

There appears to be little alarm about

the immediate economic climate but little concrete evidence as well of a
resurgence of demand.
Consumers have adopted and are maintaining conservative buying
habits.
out.

People are shopping more at food stores in preference to eating

In the Los Angeles and Portland areas, directors report that big­

ticket items such as refrigerators and washing machines have been selling
well but only as a result of aggressive dealer activity, with discounts
and rebates not uncommon.

Retail inventory liquidation will probably

continue for another month while wholesale inventories appear to be at
satisfactory levels.

Dealers' stocks of automobiles are in good relation­

ship to sales, but final demand remains soft.

In general, the tax

rebate has had no noticeable effect on retail sales.

- 40 -

All of this district's banking directors report that the trend
in consumer credit over the past six months has been "flat" or stable.
Although the number of car loans is down, the average loan size has
increased.

The director of a large West Coast bank states that "delinquen­

cies have continuously dropped since the beginning of the year and are
currently below normal levels for this time of year."

Although this

experience is not general, there appears to be no alarm about current
delinquency rates.

One director from southern California, however,

reports revolving credit accounts as troublesome.

"Balances delinquent

two months or more, with no payment having been made for 30 days, are up
approximately 82 percent over the year-ago figure, and the number of
delinquent accounts is up approximately 71 percent over this same period."
But even here, the situation has improved over the past two months.
On the business scene, inventory continues to be heavy in
lumber, petroleum, and metals; but liquidation appears to have ended in
the textiles, chemicals, and farm machinery industries.

One director

reports that the decline in steel production has not yet hit bottom;
another indicates that "inventories in the hands of customers using
aluminum products have returned to more normal levels, and it is expected
that purchases of aluminum should start to increase in September."

In

Utah, copper continues to be stockpiled in the face of weak final demand.
In the Pacific Northwest, new orders for commercial aircraft show some
softening, but military business has improved with the production go­
ahead on the airborne warning and control system (AWACS).

In southern

California, concern was expressed about the prospects for the aerospace
sector of the local economy.

- 41 -

Most areas report heightened demand for mortgages in the past
two months, but the majority of loan requests continue to be for existing
properties.

A resurgence in new home activity appears to be contingent

on a lowering of mortgage rates which does not seem likely, at least
over the next three months.

Rates are now being quoted in the 9 to

9 3/4 percent range.
Lower prices are expected to affect farm incomes adversely
this year.

Crops are late due to the cool spring weather.

Labor and

supplies, however, are now readily available, and fertilizer prices have
declined between 10 and 15 percent.

One director commented that the

dairy business was better in April than in any other single month
during the last three years.
Although none of our business directors has experienced any
difficulty in obtaining credit, there is some feeling that the banks are
following an overly cautious lending policy where large loans are
involved.

One director expressed the view that "some banks are not

assuming their responsibility in making loans available in their local
community.....Banks are not exposing themselves to a normal loss ratio on
loans--which deters growth."

