CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 10, 1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY......................................................

i

First District -- Boston......................................

1

Second District -- New York ..................................

5

Third District -- Philadelphia................................

9

Fourth District -- Cleveland.................................

12

Fifth District -- Richmond ....................................

16

Sixth District -- Atlanta....................................

20

Seventh District -- Chicago..................................

24

Eighth District -- St. Louis..................................

28

Ninth District -- Minneapolis................................

31

Tenth District -- Kansas City.................................

35

Eleventh District -- Dallas...................................

38

Twelfth District -- San Francisco.............................

42

SUMMARY*

The economy continues to recover but at a lackluster pace.
Stepped up consumer spending is providing the primary stimulus for con­
tinued growth.

Retail sales have improved, and Christmas buying is

expected to be strong.

In addition, new car sales are well above year­

Industrial production has leveled off as new orders

earlier levels.

have slowed and some inventory liquidation continues, particularly in
durable goods industries.
ble goods industries.

Recovery, however, is evident in some nondura­

The demand for labor is generally weak, and con­

struction is depressed except for some modest pickup in single-family
housing starts.

Loan demand at commercial banks remains flat, and no

substantial rebound is expected in the near term.

Lower grain prices

have provided greater incentive to increase livestock production.
Retail sales have quickened, and merchants are generally
expecting a strong Christmas season.
San Francisco,

is

The improvement,

attributed to a diminution in

according to

the rate of price

increases for general merchandise and improved consumer confidence.
Philadelphia, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis report durable goods
are selling well; but Richmond,
household goods remain sluggish.

Cleveland,

and Chicago note sales of

November sales were held down by

unseasonably warm weather, according to New York and Chicago,
reports department store sales are weak in Florida.

and Atlanta

Auto sales are up

substantially over year-earlier levels but remain well below the rates of
two or three years ago.

*Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

The pace of overall manufacturing has slackened, and a return
to a robust rate of production is not generally expected in the near
term.

The inflow of new orders has slowed, and some inventory liquidations
New orders and ship­

continue, particularly in durable goods industries.

ments have fallen for the first time since midyear, according to Philadelphia.
Chicago reports steel shipments are off, and some major projects to expand
steel capacity in the Midwest are being re-evaluated.

The rise in manufac­

turing employment and the average factory workweek has leveled off,
especially in the eastern half of the country.

The recovery in capital

goods production is uneven according to Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis.
Producers in some depressed industries voiced optimism about a turnaround
early next year.
While production is off in durable goods industries, some
nondurable goods industries have staged strong recoveries.

Cleveland,

St. Louis, and Dallas cite impressive gains in the output of petrochemicals
and related products.

And apparel manufacturers have experienced a sharp

increase in new orders according to New York and Dallas.
The strength of labor markets differs markedly from district to
district.
percent.

In the Southwest, the unemployment rate has dropped below 7
The jobless rates in two New England states, by contrast, are

double that rate.

Cleveland also reports virtually no improvement in

employment since the recessionary low last spring.

And job markets in

Georgia and Florida continue to deteriorate.
Bankers report a pickup in deposit inflows and a flat loan
demand, especially for business loans.

Kansas City reports a sharp fall­

off in loan requests from national accounts.

Interest rates on business

loans have edged downward according to St. Louis and Richmond.
recovery in

loan demand is

Philadelphia and Richmond.

A slow

expected over the next three months by
And Boston sees a pickup in business loan

demand coming in late spring.
Residential construction remains weak in most areas, particularly
for multi-family housing.

Chicago, St. Louis,

note a revival in single-family starts.

Minneapolis,

and San Francisco

Home buying has picked up as mort­

gage rates have stabilized with a steady inflow of deposits at savings
institutions.

Both Philadelphia and Cleveland report active markets for

existing housing.

Kansas City finds no buyer resistance to present

interest rates and, like Philadelphia, sees no pressures that would increase
rates before March.
Nonresidential construction continues at a low level, as many
manufacturers regard their current production capacities as adequate.
Dallas reports the sluggish pace of nonresidential construction has cur­
tailed the output of construction steel.

San Francisco, however, notes

some new projects have been undertaken recently.

In addition, construction

in the Atlanta area will receive a boost when work begins on a new rapid
transit system.
A bumper harvest has led to a decline in grain prices.

San

Francisco reports farmers are complaining about the embargo on grain sales
to Russia since these commodities are expected to be in heavy surplus.

The

reduction in grain prices, however, has provided greater incentive to
increase livestock production according to St. Louis.

Kansas City states

the current trend in farm prices should lead to greater stability in food
prices in the months ahead.

- 1 -

FIRST DISTRICT--BOSTON

The directors of the First District remain concerned about the
recovery.

The outlook for energy, state and local governments, and capi­

tal goods related industries is uncertain.

However, Connecticut defense

contractors are enjoying good business, and most New England retail trade
bureaus are anticipating a rewarding Christmas season.

The rate of

unemployment for the region was 12.5 percent in October; the unemployment
rates for Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts were 11.1 percent,
14.1 percent, and 14.4 percent, respectively.
The retailing outlook is optimistic throughout New England.
Despite a sluggish recovery in recent months, retailers are expecting
a strong Christmas season.

One retailing director reports that he had

planned a 7-percent increase; however, December, so far, is more than 14
percent ahead of last year's volume.

The director also contends that

simple "inflation corrections" distort the gains in unit sales.

Shifting

consumption patterns, sales below list prices, and only modest increases
in list prices in many lines have meant that business has been more active
than the deflated figures might imply.

Inventories are purposely thin at

retail, wholesale, and manufacturing levels.

So far, vendor performance

has been good, and there have been no highly visible price changes.

A

strong season may initiate a scramble for goods.
Business investment for modernization and cost-cutting equipment
may begin to increase presently; higher interest rates and sales rates
expected in the future are stimulating businessmen to reconsider capital
appropriations.

Nevertheless, better sales rates do not necessarily mean

a boom, so expansion plans remain shelved.

Several directors have become

- 2 ­

highly skeptical of long-range planning in

their industries.

Basically,

planning seems to do little more than extrapolate trends, and there seems
to be no reason for these trend lines to be validated.
The carbon black industry continues to face excess capacity;
and, recently, orders have been canceled.
tire

industry has little

The major reason is that the

demand for this basic pigment.

tooling industry has seen no dramatic changes in
in

The machine

new orders.

Manufacturers

living off backlogged orders.

capital goods lines are still

panies have noted a hopeful turn in business,

especially in

Lumber com­

demand related

to cartons, crates, and pallets.
Loan demand is

still

flat in New England.

Businessmen are not

expected to approach the banks until late spring, according to directors.
And, despite the retail sales situation, consumer credit demands are
modest as well.

Bankers expect an

8

-percent prime by the summer of 1976,

increasing to almost 9 percent by year-end.

Recent growth in

demand

deposits and savings deposits has been used to buy Treasuries and the CD's
of New York and midwestern banks.
This month Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Solow, and Tobin were
available for comment.

Each was concerned about the prospects for recovery

and the Federal Reserve's position.

Eckstein reports that the fourth quar­

ter is weak and the current data are worrisome.

He is pleased to see signs

that the recovery has spread to the housing and capital goods industries,
but the near-term engine of growth is consumption.

High savings rates

and a slower growth of personal income could frustrate a continuation of
the recovery.
further.

Eckstein does not see much merit in

cutting the funds rate

The uncertainties of how this short rate influences GNP are such

- 3 ­

that a "wait-and-see" posture is appropriate.

However, he stresses that

the Fed ought to encourage credit markets to welcome businessmen; the finan­
cial community is scared of everything but "superpaper."

The capital ade­

quacy spectre should be consigned to the closet, and banks should receive
more encouragement for making term loans to lower-quality borrowers.
Eckstein is not happy with the money targets as they stand; they would
frustrate economic growth by mid-1976.

So, he would like to see the funds

rate near its current level for some time.
Houthakker is still disturbed by the many wobbles in money growth.
He feels that the funds rate should not be smoothed and made to move in
such narrow ranges--such smoothing causes erratic money growth and harms
the economy.

It is a curious monetarism that leads to interest rate tar­

gets, in his view.

He feels the consumer and the trade balance are carrying

the economy; and he, too, perceives a critical weakness in investments.
But he still firmly believes that there is little the Fed should do other
than maintain a steady 5- to 5.5-percent rate of money growth.

His read­

ing of recent price data leads him to believe that inflation may be less
than 4 percent by year-end 1976.

The dollar is clearly overvalued, in

his opinion; so gearing monetary policy to stabilize the current exchange
rate may be unhelpful, both to the domestic economy and to our trading
partners.
Solow foresees a year-over-year growth of 6 percent for 1976,
even under the most favorable conditions.

He sees a fourth-quarter

deceleration of growth, but it seems to be more than one should expect.
The economy is softening in a critical manner.

If there were ever a

period when rapid growth is welcome, appropriate, and may be accommodated,

- 4 ­

He would like to see the Fed hold the funds rate at its current

it is now.

level for some time to permit more rapid real growth and attendant money
Money growth may need to attain rates of 9 to 10 percent for

expansion.
a time.

Tobin also sees his fears of an anemic recovery being supported
by recent data.

The strength in final demand is lacking, and inventories

cannot do everything.

His belief is that the funds rate should be reduced;

holding it steady will not provide the necessary spur to investors' incen­
tives or to the credit market's spirits.

He, too, feels that once things

get rolling, we may wish to permit money growth to exceed 9 percent for a
period.

He feels that velocity is very volatile and that the Fed should

expect neither a continuation of its recent spurt nor a surge in money
demand to return velocity to previous levels.
monetarism:

He, too, questions recent

"Set interest rates to stimulate an investment recovery and

let the money numbers fall where they will."

Arbitrary rates of money

growth are misleading targets for recovery at this time.

-5-

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Consumer spending, notwithstanding its sluggishness in recent
months, is expected to provide the principal near-term stimulus to the
economy, according to the views expressed recently by Second District
directors and other business leaders.

Business capital spending remains

lethargic, although a number of respondents felt the longer-term need
for such outlays might well be building up.

The respondents on balance

looked for a continued modest improvement in residential construction.
Loan demand was generally characterized as weak.
The retail trade industry continues to provide the brightest
element in the economic outlook.

The president of a large nationwide

chain of department stores thus characterized the outlook for the
Christmas buying season as "glowing."

He reported that after a slow

start in November, which he attributed to unfavorable weather conditions
rather than to a lack of consumer confidence, nationwide retail sales
had risen sharply in the recent past and that he was "very" optimistic
regarding the prospects for the post-Christmas season.

He stated that

while retail sales in New York City were not doing as well as nationally,
he felt that even there the outlook was relatively favorable.

A survey

by a local newspaper indicated that November sales by large New York
City department stores were only 3.5 percent higher than during the
comparable period a year ago, with merchants attributing this relatively
poor performance to the adverse effect of the threat of a City default,
the 11-percent unemployment rate in the City, the City's generally
troubled economic conditions, as well as unseasonably warm weather

- 6 ­

through much of November.

Sales by the suburban branches of these

same stores, however, were substantially higher; and the combined sales
of these stores and their branches were nearly 7 percent higher than in
November 1974.

The chairman of the City's largest department store

reported that his firm's sales in the metropolitan area remained "strong"
and was generally optimistic regarding the outlook over the coming months.
New York City apparel manufacturers, moreover, reported a strong pickup
in orders, associated not only with the Christmas season but also with
the spring and Easter season.

Observers reported the outlook for the

Christmas buying season in Western New York to be favorable, citing a
"healthy" consumer attitude toward spending, adequate savings,

and an

increase in real disposable income as contributing to this favorable
outlook.

One exception was the Buffalo area, where a retailer reported

sales trends to be "spotty" and the outlook "not encouraging."
Regarding business capital spending, most respondents saw little
evidence of a near-term pickup in that sector.

Among others, the chairman

of a multinational oil firm stated he had not noticed any change in the
conservative attitude toward plant and equipment outlays in the petroleum
industry, and the president of a nationwide retail firm reported that, in
general,retailers continued to act cautiously toward the opening of new
branches or the expansion of existing facilities.

The president of a

multinational nonferrous metal concern indicated that his firm's customers
were planning only the absolutely essential capital expenditures.

He felt

that businessmen's generally conservative spending intentions were linked
to the uncertainties surrounding the 1976 economic outlook and the vigor
of the current recovery.

Several respondents, however, indicated that

underlying pressures for capital outlays might be building up.

A senior

official of a large paper firm thus stated that he placed "little faith"

-7­

in official capacity utilization data, which he felt incorporated a great
deal of obsolete facilities.

Moreover, he noted that over the coming years

the paper industry would be obliged to invest $1 billion or more to meet
the requirements of the Environmental Protection Act.

Several other

respondents, including senior officials of utilities, metal container
manufacturing,

and chemical firms,

expressed concern over the magnitude

of the outlays their firms and industries would have to undertake to comply
with this Act.

The chairman of a large New York State utility thus stated

that while there might not be an immediate demand for capital expenditures
in the public utilities sector, the eventual expenditures for environ­
mental control facing the industry were a "real sleeper."

A number of

respondents also expressed concern over the high and rising cost of
replacing existing facilities, and the adverse impact of this development
on their firms' cash-flow positions.
With respect to residential construction, several respondents
viewed immediate prospects as relatively poor, or only slightly improved,
reflecting the high cost of construction and maintenance, the continued
availability of existing houses and apartments, and the uncertainties
regarding the economic outlook.

The president of a manufacturing firm,

however, expected further moderate gains in single-family home con­
struction and a "considerable" comeback of apartment buildings over the
next 15 months.

And a senior official of a thrift institution in a

resort area reported that construction activities in

his area had picked

up in recent weeks.
Regardingloan demand,

loan officers at large banks in

general

reported a weaker demand than they had anticipated late last summer and
did not look for any significant pick-up over the near term.

The

-8-

Buffalo branch directors characterized the current and prospective
state of loan demand as "stagnant" and unlikely to improve significantly
until mid-1976 at the earliest.

The president of a retail firm, however,

expected loan demand in the retail industry to increase as retailers
rebuilt inventories.

Similarly, the president of a nonferrous metal

firm felt that corporate loan demand has begun to show signs of reviving
as inventory accumulation and capital outlays in certain sectors recover.

-9-

THIRD DISTRICT--PHILADELPHIA

Economic recovery in the Third District has slowed further.
In manufacturing, new orders and shipments are down this month,
employment is off marginally, and the workweek is unchanged.

At the

same time, prices paid and received in manufacturing are both higher,
although the rise of prices paid for supplies may be moderating.

The

outlook for the next two quarters is less optimistic than in recent
months.

Residential construction is weak, but the market for existing

housing is active.

Retailers report that sales are equal to or above

last month's and they are looking for a strong Christmas season.

Area

bankers report that demand deposits are level and savings accounts are
up slightly.

In addition, loan volume is reported to be flat.

Manufacturers in the Third District, responding to this month's
business outlook survey, report that economic activity is only fractionally
greater than it was last month.

In each survey from August through

November, 40 percent of the respondents reported gains over the previous
month.

This month, however, only 17 percent indicate improvement, while

69 percent report no change.

New orders are down for the first time in

seven months, and shipments are off for the first time since July.

At

the same time, additional inventory liquidation is occurring, with 40
percent of the respondents reporting fewer goods on hand compared to
31 percent last month.

Jobs in manufacturing are down slightly, and

the workweek is unchanged from last month.
The outlook for the next six months in manufacturing is some­
what less optimistic than in recent months.

Of the manufacturers polled,

- 10 ­

66 percent anticipate a higher level of economic activity by June.
This is the smallest proportion of respondents expecting improvement
over the next half-year since last February.

The peak was in June
None­

when 93 percent expected improved conditions six months out.

theless, manufacturers still look for new orders and shipments to be
higher, and a net accumulation of inventories is expected.

The work­

week is expected to be longer, and more than half of those surveyed
plan to add to their work forces over the next two quarters.

At the

same time, capital expenditures are expected to grow, with more than
a third of the respondents planning increases over the period.
Retail executives report that sales are level or up slightly
from last month.
well.

The majority report that durable goods are selling

All the merchants contacted are optimistic about Christmas sales,

and one expects sales for the month to be 2 percent higher in real
terms than last December.

Most of the retailers surveyed feel that

inventories are in line with sales, but one merchant notes that inven­
tories at his store are above desired levels.
On the price front, manufacturers report that costs of supplies
are higher this month, but the pace of the inflation in this sector has
moderated since last month.

Twenty-nine percent of the respondents to

the current survey report paying higher prices for their supplies com­
pared to 52 percent last month.

Prices received for goods sold are also

higher, with 23 percent reporting increases.
half-year is for additional increases;

94

The outlook for the next

percent of those surveyed

expect to be paying higher prices by June, and 71 percent expect to be
receiving higher prices for their finished products.

Area retailers

report that, in general, the prices they pay and the ones they charge
are both moving up but at a slower pace than in recent months.

- 11-

The market for existing housing is active, but residential
construction remains weak.

One MSB official notes that the brisk pace

in the resale housing market in the Philadelphia area has resulted
in mortgage rates that are 15-20 basis points above the U.S. average.
Given the current savings inflows, however, he expects no further rise
in mortgage rates through March.

Another contact cites high unemploy­

ment along with little population growth as factors helping to discourage
new construction.

None of the contacts surveyed expect any recovery

in residential construction in the area for at least six months.
Area bankers report that demand deposits are about even with
last month, and savings accounts are up slightly.

They also indicate

that loan volume is essentially flat, and the general outlook is for it
to increase gradually through the first quarter.

Interest rates are

expected to climb moderately next year, and inflation is expected to
average around 6 percent.

All the bankers contacted indicate that the

Federal plan to help New York City will have no effect on the attitude
at their bank toward lending to municipalities.

But one executive

feels that some fiscally sound municipalities have been hampered in
their efforts to borrow money by the uncertainty surrounding the situation
in New York City.

As a result, he feels that the plan may help by

removing part of that uncertainty.

- 12 -

FOURTH DISTRICT--CLEVELAND

Recovery in the Fourth District continues to be spotty, with
virtually no improvement in employment from last spring's low.

Capital

goods and steel remain weak, although signs of pickup are noted.
Retailers are cautious in their predictions for Christmas sales.

Deposit

flows into savings and loans were again at high levels, according to some
associations.
Nondurable goods producers continue to report strong recovery,
and conditions in capital goods industries are mixed.

Recovery in petro­

chemicals has been rapid, according to one producer, and sales have almost
returned to pre-recessionary levels.

A producer of plastics also reports

a fast recovery, as sales in October and November rose more than expected.
Production for this quarter is expected to be 15 percent greater than last
quarter.

An economist with a tire producer reports passenger tire sales

continue to recover.

Retail inventories are 15 percent below a year

earlier, but manufacturers' inventories are still a little high.
Machine tool orders continue their gradual climb.
expects a 50-percent increase in orders during 1976,
percent drop experienced this year.

One firm

compared with a

60­

Two mining machinery producers report

a good order book; one has backlogs stretching into 1978.
implements are also holding at high levels.

Orders for farm

A national producer of elec­

trodes and welding equipment reports it is still allocating orders because
of high demand from pipelines,
ness this quarter is
quarter.

mining, and shipbuilding.

Its welding busi­

expected to be at least 5 percent higher than last

Recovery from the slump in heavy duty trucks has been slow.

A

- 13 ­

producer reports that truck sales for the first 10 months of this year were
off 40 percent from the same period last year and that orders have been
picking up slowly since last spring.

He expects that uncertainty over

government regulations on braking devices will hamper recovery.

Demand

for other types of capital goods, especially from construction and electric
utilities, remains weak.

One producer reports that orders for generators

fell 50 percent during the recession and that little pickup is in sight.
Construction machinery continues to weaken, and prospects are for continued
weakness into 1976.

A producer of lighting fixtures for streets and high­

ways reports that public construction is also weak.
Steel orders have been picking up a little, although heavy inven­
tory liquidation is holding down recovery in orders and production.

Orders

for January delivery are somewhat better than for December, and steel
economists expect shipments for the first quarter of 1976 will rise 10 to
15 percent over the fourth quarter of 1975.

Steel inventory liquidation

next quarter is expected to be about half as large as in the present quar­
ter.

One economist reports that the October 1 steel price increases are

holding despite some discounting from published prices.
This Bank's monthly survey of manufacturing for November suggests
that the rate of increase in manufacturing activity in the District has
flattened in the last two months.

A preliminary report indicates an equal

number of manufacturers had increases and decreases in new orders and ship­
ments during November.

For the first time in a year, more manufacturers

built inventories than depleted inventories.

Manufacturers also report

no improvement in employment, and price increases were as pervasive in
November as they were in August and September.

For December,

manufacturers

- 14 ­

expect another month of inventory buildup, virtually no gain in employment,
and no abatement in upward price pressures.
A

Retailers are cautious in their appraisal of holiday sales.
financial officer for a large department store reports that sales in

November were somewhat stronger than a year earlier, except for household
goods, and that their inventories have been built in the hope of a better
selling season this year than last year.

An economist with a large national

department store chain reports moderate improvements in unit sales of soft
goods in recent months while sales of household goods remain weak.

Both

expect markdowns to be no greater than usual for this time of year, and
both express concern that retail sales will not recover if income tax cuts
are not extended into 1976.
Employment in the District has hardly improved from the low of
last April.

Scattered layoffs in the steel and machinery industries have

offset a gradual pickup in some other industries, especially rubber,
fabricated metals, and glass.

A supplier to the automotive industry

reports his firm laid off 5,000 workers during the recession and has no
immediate plans to rehire them.

A tire producer reports some recalls

have occurred in response to strengthening production but that additional
layoffs may be necessary in those lines that still have excessive inven­
Supplemental unemployment benefits funds are depleted for some

tories.

tire company workers.

One retailer reports it will hire more part-time

help for the holiday season than it did a year ago but still less than
normal, and another reports hirings will be about normal.
Net deposit inflows at savings and loans were strong in
November.

One association reports a record for the month, and another

- 15 ­

reports inflows were strong but below their record in October.
terms eased in recent weeks.

Mortgage

The bulk of loans are for existing dwellings.

Liquidity is generally well above requirements, although one association
will borrow funds in order to finance its aggressive mortgage lending
position.

- 16 -

FIFTH DISTRICT--RICHMOND

Once again the monthly survey of Fifth District businesses has
failed to confirm any strong trends.

Manufacturers' new orders and ship­

ments continued to increase during the past month, but in neither case
were the increases as widespread as in the three previous months.

Back­

logs and inventories showed little change in November, with inventories
apparently remaining somewhat higher than desired.

Employment and weekly

hours were also unchanged among manufacturing respondents, while price
movements continued on the up side.

One-third of the respondents view

current plant and equipment capacity as excessive, but nearly all feel
current expansion plans are about right.

Among retailers surveyed, sales

increased in November, but sales of big-ticket items relative to total
sales declined.

Retail inventories showed little change during the

month, and all respondents now feel current levels are about right.
Fifth District banks experienced healthy deposit flows and reduced their
reliance on borrowed funds in November.

Asset expansion was centered in

the lending area, with seasonal demands for business credit continuing to
account for most of the activity.

There is evidence of a greater willing­

ness to make loans of various types, and investments are being concentrated
in the shorter maturity ranges.

The November 1 crop report indicates that

there will be no record harvests in the District in 1975.

The cotton crop,

in fact, promises to be the smallest since records began in 1866.
The December survey of manufacturers suggests an overall increase
in shipments from a month earlier, but reports of increases were less com­
mon and those of declines more common than in November.

Much the same

- 17 ­

picture emerged in relation to the volume of new orders, a general increase
but less widespread than in recent months.
the level of backlogs or of inventories.

Little change is apparent in
In fact, survey responses suggest

greater stability in inventory levels than in any of the last six months.
Increases in the number of employees and of hours worked per week also
seem to have tapered off in the past month.

On the other hand, reports of

price increases became more widespread last month than at any time this year.
Most of the manufacturers surveyed feel current inventory levels
are about right, but approximately one-fourth continue to view current
levels as excessive.

One-third of the respondents feel plant and equip­

ment capacity is currently in excess, but none believe that current capi­
tal plans should be cut back.

Fewer than one in

sion plans should be enlarged.

ten think current expan­

Expectations for the level of business

activity remain essentially optimistic.

A majority of respondents expect

business activity nationally and in their respective market areas to
improve over the next six months, while one-half expect the level of produc­
tion in their own firms to improve.
Among District retailers surveyed, sales were up over the month,
while inventories showed little change.

Sales of big-ticket items rela­

tive to total sales declined somewhat after increasing in October.

Employ­

ment in retailing declined in November, but increases in employee compen­
sation were reported by all but one of the respondents.
were also reported by most.

Price increases

Inventory levels have apparently been brought

into line with desired levels, and 80 percent of the retailers view the
current number and size of their outlets as about right.

Once again,

optimism is widespread as most retailers expect the level of business

- 18 ­

activity nationally, locally, and in their own firms to improve over the
next six months.
In the banking sector, demand deposits of weekly reporting banks
increased substantially during the month, and lesser but still significant
gains were posted in time deposits.

Purchasers of CD's also increased,

and outstandings are now 3 percent above the year ago level.
borrowed funds is

Reliance on

far below the recent norm, with discount window borrow­

ings of member banks falling close to zero.

Average daily net purchases

of Federal funds by member banks over the first three weeks of November
fell by 30 percent from the previous month and are now at their lowest
level since June.
Business loans at weekly reporting banks increased at an annual
rate of about 6 percent in November, reflecting advances to retailers and
agricultural processors and increased purchases of bankers' acceptances.
Commercial and industrial loans are now about 6 percent below year ago
levels.

Small increases in

real estate area.

consumer loans were offset by declines in the

The November survey of changes in lending practices

indicates that a third of the reporting banks expect moderately stronger
business loan demand over the next three months.

Business lending terms

remain pretty much unchanged at District banks, except for some easing of
interest rates.

Interest in and willingness to make all types of loans

has increased, especially in the consumer area.

Investment assets of

weekly reporting banks declined by 1.3 percent from the previous month,
as substantial increases in U.S. Government securities were more than off­
set by reductions in municipal portfolios.
has been particularly strong.

Investment in Treasury bills

- 19 -

District cash farm income continued to improve during September
and for the first three quarters of the year recorded a 4-percent gain
over the same period last year.
stock receipts.

The biggest improvement occurred in

live­

Marketing of the 1975 crop of flue-cured tobacco was high­

lighted by lower prices and poorer quality than in 1974.

The season

average price dropped 5 percent, or $5.47 per hundred, below last year's
record.

Volume was up sharply (17 percent), however, so the value of gross

sales was 11 percent or $126.3 million above a year ago.

- 20 -

SIXTH DISTRICT--ATLANTA

An economic recovery is in progress throughout most of the
Sixth District, although the pace at which individual states are moving
remains very uneven.

Rapid growth is most evident in Tennessee, while

Florida continues to lag behind the other states.

The pattern of

recovery in nonagricultural employment reveals the principal areas of
strength and weakness in each state.

In Florida, the depth of the

construction industry decline is clearly reflected in retail sales.
Sales of department stores in other states indicate a broadly based
upturn in holiday sales.

Inventories are fairly well balanced except

for highly advertised goods or those for which raw materials inventories
are in short supply.

Two recent developments are contributing a much

needed stimulus to construction activity in the Atlanta area.
Sixth District nonagricultural employment in October stands at
98 percent of the November 1973 level, having recovered somewhat from
the low point of 96.3 percent reached last June.

Nonagricultural employ­

ment in Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee has regained the
November 1973 level.

In Georgia and in Florida, where employment is still

declining, employment lags by about 5 percent.

Construction and manufac­

turing employment have been fairly stable in Alabama and Louisiana, with
the remaining deficit from the November 1973 level limited to less than
4 percent.

In Florida and Georgia, the pronounced weakness in construction

employment has been a major depressant for business acitivity, with declines
from the base period level of 41 and 22 percent, respectively.

The effects

of these reductions are echoed by lower wholesale and retail trade employ­
ment and by fewer jobs in the financial, insurance, and real estate

- 21 ­

category.

Employment in these two states has also weakened in the

transportation, communication, and public utilities category.
turing employment has fallen about 10 percent in

Manufac­

Florida, Georgia,

and

mainly reflecting reductions in durable goods manufacturing

Tennessee,

In Florida, greater stability in

employment.

nondurable manufacturing

cushioned a larger decline in durable goods industries.

Tennessee's

weakness in durable goods manufacturing has been largely offset by much
more rapid growth in Federal Government employment and in services, which
reflects the vigor of the tourism industry.
The declines noted in employment in Florida have noticeably
affected that state's retail sales.

Unlike other states in the District,

Florida has experienced a leveling of the decline rather than an
This pattern is reflected in directors' reports

appreciable upturn.

that October auto sales remain substantially below 1974 levels and that
yearly increases of retail sales continue to lag behind the rate of price
increase.

Limited evidence of a revival appeared in November auto sales

in certain areas.
pattern.

Results of holiday season retail sales lack any clear

Where strong sales are reported, they are sporadic.

The bright

spots in the Florida economy are tourism, which is strong in Central and
Eastern Florida, and a citrus crop, which is large but not excessive in
relation to the expected level of demand.
are less encouraging.

Conditions in South Florida

The tourist business slackened in late summer, and

retail sales have been flat.

A director commented in November that "no

recovery can gain sustainable momentum without participation of the
construction and tourist industries, and neither appears too strong at
the moment."

Only limited improvement is reported in the overstocked

inventory of condominiums in many areas of Florida.

- 22 -

Many large department stores in the Sixth District, excluding
Florida, have experienced a marked improvement in sales since Thanksgiving,
a telephone survey indicates.

For certain stores, improving sales began

as long ago as May, and gains from last year run in excess of 25 percent.
A much more relaxed and confident consumer mood is reportedly the source
of this improvement, although some consumers retain an attitude of
uncertainty.

None of the retailers contacted report an appreciable

increase in the proportion of credit sales, while one stated that the
ratio of credit sales has continued to decline.

Most stores report

improved sales across the board without noticeable weaknesses in specific
types or price ranges of goods.

However, some reports were received of

improved but still below normal sales of more expensive furniture,
appliances, and electronic equipment.
is found in fashion goods.

The outstanding area of strength

Price resistance is not a noticeable problem;

medium- and high-priced goods are expected to show the sharpest sales
increases.
Some difficulty is reported in obtaining delivery of previously
ordered merchandise, particularly for the most popular new styles in
soft goods and for nationally advertised toys.

Most retailers regard

these shortages as a usual seasonal characteristic, although the decision
of some apparel manufacturers to operate on a strict "cut-to-order" basis
is mentioned as a source of longer lead times.

A related factor is the

increasing number of yarn varieties, which creates a difficult inventory
problem for textile raw materials manufacturers in view of more volatile
shifts in demand for particular finished goods styles.

Retail inventory

levels are well-balanced on the whole, although some remaining excess is

- 23 ­

reported in expensive furniture lines and to a lesser degree in appliances
and other big-ticket items.

Retailers expect continued gains in 1976,

although some concern is noted regarding the depth of the post-holiday
season downturn in consumer durable goods.
Construction activity, which has been weak in the Atlanta area,
will receive a boost in the near future when work begins on a new rapid
transit rail system.

Two recent developments are paving the way for the

beginning of construction.

First, the Urban Mass Transit Administration

is expected in the near future to announce the awarding of a $160 million
grant, primarily to finance construction during fiscal 1976.

The second

development contributing to initiation of construction on the project is
the recent settlement of a dispute concerning minimum wages between the
public transportation authority and 14 building trade unions.

This

agreement has ended a seven-month postponement of construction work.
first phase of the system is scheduled for completion in late 1978.

The

- 24 -

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Economic activity appears to be improving very gradually despite
many uncertainties.
hiring actively.

Layoffs are less frequent, but few employers are

Retail sales were held down in November by unseasonally

mild weather, but most merchants contend that Christmas volume will be
good, at least compared with last year's depressed level.

Many

manufacturing companies are continuing to reduce inventories, but others
have completed adjustments, and retailers' stocks generally are on the
low side.

All goods and services are in ample supply and most markets are

competitive, but prices of manufactured goods continue to rise.

Various

companies are reevaluating capital spending plans because of ample
capacity and high costs of equipment and new construction.

Developers

of new residential subdivisions are active again after a long period of
hibernation.
Retailers complained that warm weather during most of November
held down sales of seasonal merchandise.

Sales of nonseasonal items

were also hurt because of the adverse effect of weather on customer
"traffic."
effect.

Colder weather and snow in recent weeks has had a salutary

A revival in sales in December could easily offset the November

performance as it

has so often in the past.

Producers of appliances and

television sets have been disappointed by the level of demand for their
products.

Retail inventories are generally low and could limit total

Christmas volume because most buying commitments were made in October.
Sales of autos and small trucks are much improved from last
year's depressed level but remain well below the rates of two or three

- 25 ­

years ago.

Most auto industry analysts do not expect that new peaks in

sales will be achieved until 1980 or later.

Some analysts of markets for

appliances and televisions hold similar views.
Sales of heavy trucks remain depressed despite a pronounced
pickup in freight movements since last spring.

The new brake systems

required since March 1 are said to be holding down sales because of fears
of malfunctions and resulting heavy damage suits.
Virtually all goods and services are readily available from
suppliers.

One exception is quality shoes and boots.

No significant

supply problems are anticipated for petroleum products.

Gasoline prices

weakened in early November, but part of the decline has since been
restored.

While markets for most goods are competitive compared with

the period prior to the fall of 1974, most prices are holding up or rising
further because of cost pressures resulting from boosts in wages and
benefits, and rising costs for utilities, insurance, and other needs.
Fourth-quarter steel shipments will be the lowest for the year
and somewhat below earlier expectations.

Heavier steels for equipment

have weakened further while demand for steel for consumer products has
picked up.

Some major projects to expand steel capacity have been halted

or are being reevaluated.
is

One steel company says its

expansion program

going ahead full steam, but this statement appears to apply to projects

already started.
Some diversified capital goods producers who had been cutting
output say that the decline has about ended and that recalls of workers
are probable after the turn of the year.

New orders for railroad equip­

ment are at very low levels, but shipments have declined only moderately

- 26 ­

as substantial order backlogs are worked off.

Demand for small construction

equipment will revive if the expected improvement in home building
materializes.

Farm equipment sales are expected to rise next year because

of higher than expected cash receipts and anticipated heavy plantings of
crops.
The dollar volume of transfers of existing homes and apartments
has been very high in recent months while prices have been maintained or
Residential developers are "starting the process"

have increased further.

once again after about 18 months of inactivity but mainly for single­
family home projects.

Construction loans are available at about 10

percent, compared to 14 percent or more during the crunch, but lenders
are very careful in evaluating new risks.

Inventories of unsold apartments

have been reduced substantially, but it is unlikely that new apartment
building will rebound vigorously.

A large new hotel was started recently

in downtown Chicago, and some shopping centers are still being completed.
But commercial building prospects remain poor.

Office vacancy rates are

about 14 percent downtown both in Milwaukee and in Chicago and are even
higher in outlying areas.

This compared with an "acceptable" rate of

5 to 7 percent.
Auto insurance companies are pushing for large rate increases,
12 to 20 percent, to eliminate underwriting deficits, although increases
of similar magnitude had already been posted this year.

Soaring claims

for property damage and personal liability are responsible.
rates on homeowners' policies also have been very large.

Increases in

Costs of mal­

practice insurance for doctors, hospitals, and other professionals and
for manufacturers' product liability have multiplied in recent years and

- 27 ­

are still

rising rapidly.

There is

also a push for shorter-term insurance

policies, perhaps to a half-year for auto insurance.

- 28 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT--ST. LOUIS

Economic conditions in the Eighth Federal Reserve District
continue to improve according to latest reports from area businessmen.
However, the pace of the recovery is still described as moderate.
Christmas sales have been at a brisk pace so far, and retailers are
optimistic about continued strong sales.

Automobile sales in the

District appear to be keeping pace with the national upturn, and total
sales are reported to be moving ahead of the production schedules.

On

the financial side, savings inflows have accelerated somewhat in recent
weeks.

Commercial banks, however, continue to report no increase in the

demand for business loans.

In agriculture,

an expansion of livestock

production is under way as farmers respond to the improved profit incentive.
Retailers in the survey expressed more enthusiasm about sales
and prospective sales than in recent months.
sales are proceeding at a rapid pace.

They reported that Christmas

A representative of a large depart­

ment store noted that televisions, radios, digital watches, and many other
big-ticket items were selling well.
conditions were not present.

They cautioned, however, that boom

For example, it was noted that sales of

some home-related items were still sluggish.

Automobile sales were

reported good throughout the District, with October and November sales
considerably above 1974 levels.

These months, however, were only average

when compared to earlier years.

Reports from automobile dealers indicated

a longer lag in obtaining cars, with sales a month or more ahead of deliveries.
Manufacturing activity continues moderately upward in the District,
with the advances widespread among most industries--both durable and non­
durable.

Manufacturers of chemicals, appliances, boxboard, processed

- 29 ­

foods, and certain home-construction items reported improvement in sales
in the past several weeks.

On the negative side, one car assembly plant

announced a closedown in operations for one week early next year.

Also

a manufacturer of tailored clothing for rural markets reported that orders
for the spring season were below expectations.
A few firms have announced increased capital spending budgets
over last year.
somewhat.

Also, single-family residential construction has improved

On the other hand, the amount of commercial construction is

generally slow in the District.
With the decline on short-term market rates from the August
and September levels, savings inflows have picked up at financial inter­
mediaries.

Banks reported increases in all categories of deposits including

passbook savings and negotiable CD's; also, savings and loan associations
had larger net inflows.

Loan demand, especially business loans, continues.

sluggish at commercial banks.

Some smaller banks reported increases in

consumer and installment loans, although total District data do not con­
firm this trend.

Rates on bank loans to business in the District have

generally declined, along with interest rates nationally.

Mortgage rates,

however, have risen at some institutions in recent weeks.
One St. Louis savings and loan association representative noted
that nonmortgage lending is becoming more important as an outlet for funds.
He reported a doubling in his nonmortgage loans in the past year.
Banks,

particularly in

rural areas, are reporting lower loan­

to-deposit ratios, fewer bad loans,
months.

and generally lower profits in recent

A year ago rural bankers were placing significant amounts of funds

in the Federal funds market at relatively high interest rates, thereby
boosting profits.
such investments.

But currently there is little opportunity for

- 30 -

Improvement in livestock product prices relative to feed
costs in recent months has provided greater incentive for livestock
feeding.

Expansion of livestock production is under way; however,

major increases in output of most livestock products are not anticipated
before mid-1976.

In contrast to the favorable prospects for livestock

producers, some crop farmers, particularly soybean producers, are
experiencing considerable downward pressure on prices.

Some shifts in

acreage from soybeans to other crops is expected to occur next spring.

- 31 -

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District is currently experiencing solid, though
not spectacular, economic gains.

Consumer confidence is rising, and

retailers are having a good Christmas season with sales perhaps stronger
than had been anticipated.

Manufacturers have also revised their sales

expectations upward, and inventories at both the retail and manufacturing
levels are at more satisfactory levels than a year ago.

Some improve­

ment is occurring in residential construction.
Trends in farm income in the District are mixed.

On balance,

net income in the District may be down from 1974, though actual year-to­
year changes vary widely depending on local weather conditions and on
local product mixes.

Directors from Wisconsin, Michigan, and Minnesota

say that higher dairy prices have added to farm incomes.

Directors

throughout the District say that cow-calf operators probably have better
incomes than a year ago but are still not operating at break-even points.
Incomes of other livestock producers are most likely up from a year
ago, while the incomes of grain farmers are down in many areas due to
lower prices.

Spending remains strong in rural areas throughout the

District.
Ninth District directors feel that consumer spending may
provide a basis for a firm recovery in the first half of 1976.
directors report that fourth-quarter retail sales are good.
big-ticket items are improving.

Most

Sales of

Car sales are up from a year ago, and

used cars are moving especially well, according to one director.
spending on machinery and equipment remains at high levels.

Farm

One director,

- 32 ­

noting that retail sales during Thanksgiving week were very strong, says
that fourth-quarter sales appear quite good when compared with 1974's
fourth quarter but also cautions that the gains are less impressive when
compared with sales of two years ago.

Many directors observe that consumers

remain extremely "value-conscious" in their selection of merchandise.
According to most directors, residential construction activity
in the District has shown some improvement in recent months.

However,

as one director noted, the gains thus far have not been very substantial,
and the demand for home loans remains light.

Directors from many rural

areas of the District indicate that housing construction has been fairly
steady throughout the recession.
The Ninth District industrial sector is expected to show slight
improvement in the fourth quarter and should score stronger gains through
the first half of 1976, according to the latest quarterly industrial
expectations survey taken in early November.

The 164 manufacturers

responding to the survey are expecting current-dollar sales to increase
7.0 percent in the fourth quarter but anticipate sales gains of more than
10 percent during the first half of 1976.
In addition, manufacturers are becoming more optimistic, and it
now looks as though fourth-quarter gains will be greater than had been
anticipated in the August survey.

The 7.0-percent anticipated increase

in manufacturing sales represents an upward revision from the 4.8-percent
gain which was forecast in the August survey.

In real terms, after

allowing for a moderate rate of inflation, sales in the fourth quarter
may still be somewhat above last year's fourth-quarter levels.

However,

- 33 ­

1976 should bring a more substantive pickup in real sales--provided that
current expectations are borne out and that inflation does not accelerate
from its current pace.
Stronger fourth-quarter sales gains are expected in the
nondurables sector than in the durable goods industries.

For instance,

fourth-quarter sales in food and kindred products are expected to rise
by 12.1 percent and to be followed by a 14-percent sales gain in the
first quarter of 1976.
The outlook for most durable goods producers is less promising
if manufacturers' expectations are correct.

Sales in the primary metals

and nonelectrical machinery industries are expected to lag year-earlier
levels in the fourth quarter, though a turnaround is expected in the first
half in these industries.

On the other hand, manufacturers of lumber and

wood products foresee strong sales gains beginning in the fourth quarter
and continuing through the first half.

Recent gains in housing starts

have perhaps, in part, been responsible for the brighter outlook in that
industry.
The District's rural areas currently appear stronger than the
Twin Cities' economy.

Manufacturers in the Twin Cities Metropolitan Area

expect fourth-quarter current-dollar sales to remain below last year's
level.

In the areas outside the Twin Cities,

sales are expected to

advance at rates of nearly 10 percent throughout the fourth quarter and
should maintain slightly higher rates of growth through the first
of 1976.

half

However, the prospective first-half recovery is expected to be

somewhat stronger in the Twin Cities than in rural areas of the District
due to a sharper upturn in the Twin Cities' durable goods sector.

- 34 -

Results of the November industrial expectations survey indicate
that producers still appear cautious in expanding inventories, though the
ratio of inventories to sales appears to be attaining more normal
proportions following the inventory reductions of recent quarters.

- 35 -

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Tenth District savings and loan associations report that they
are satisfied with their current liquidity.

Mortgage demand and deposit

inflows have been steady or slightly increasing in recent months.
small decline in mortgage rates is expected before next spring.

A
Mid-

November auto sales in the Kansas City region were considerably stronger
than in the same period in 1974.

Farm prices have declined sharply in

the last two months, and pork and beef supplies soon should be rising.
Tenth District banks report a still weak, though improved, demand for loans.
Tenth District savings and loan associations reported either a
steady or slightly increasing deposit inlfow during the past two to three
months.

In general, they now consider their liquidity "about right

where we would like it to be."

Almost half of the respondents reported

that mortgage demand was good or stable, while the other half noted a
recent slackening in demand.

Similarly, while some respondents stated

that "we are making as many loans as we would like to make," other
associations noted a (possibly seasonal) slackening in traffic.
Conventional mortgage rates generally ranged from 9 to 9 1/2
percent, though two associations quoted an 8 3/4-percent rate and one
in St. Joseph, Missouri, an 8 1/2-percent minimum.

Respondents were

unanimous in stressing that they have encountered no resistence to present
mortgage rates.

On the other hand, no respondent expected rates to rise,

and the great majority expected a decline to about 8 3/4 percent by the
end of the first quarter of 1976.

Considerable internal debate on rates

and competitive pressure were often mentioned.
Comments by respondents indicated that the attitudes of business­
men toward the economy varied by geographic area.

In Wyoming and New Mexico,

- 36 ­

businessmen were "all satisfied" and "think it's

great."

In Nebraska,

the emphasis was on an excellent outlook for consumer spending during
the holidays and in early 1976.

"Guarded optimism" was expressed by

one Missouri respondent and "gloom among builders" by two others.

A

concern about inflation and a confusion as to why it cannot be stopped
was noted in Denver.
General Motors and Chrysler Corporation reported that in midNovember,

car sales in

the Kansas City area improved significantly over

the same period last year.

From November 10 to 20, GM noted a 52-percent

increase in sales in the region compared to a 36 -percent national gain.
Similarly, Chrysler said its

sales in the Kansas City region for the

first 20 days of November rose 22 percent over the 1974 period.
compares with a 23 percent year-to-year national gain in

This

the mid-month

period.
After rising for six consecutive months,
declined sharply in the last two months.

farm prices have

For the month ended November

15, the index of prices received by farmers was off about 4 percent due
to lower prices for hogs, cattle, and most of the major grains.

However,

the index remained 2 percent above the year-earlier level.
Farm price trends in recent weeks have increased the likelihood
that retail food prices may show greater stability in the period ahead.
In view of the likely increase in hog farrowings in the period ahead,
together with confirmed evidence of larger placements of cattle in feed­
lots, red meat production should soon be on an upward path.

Although

output will likely continue below year-earlier levels for several more
months, the prospects for potentially larger meat supplies will probably
dampen any tendency for livestock prices to return to the very high levels
realized last summer.

- 37 -

Banks contacted in the December survey said that while loan
demand continues weak, some improvement has occurred.
reported that local customer demand is
national accounts.

Respondents also

much stronger than demand from

Seasonal increases were reported in retailing and

leisure-activity loans, while a few banks reported some improvement in
auto loans.

Above-normal gains were reported in

loans to cattle feeders.

Bankers who were surveyed indicated that retailers expect a significant
increase in real sales over their 1974 levels.
from 7 1/4 to 7 3/4 percent.

Current prime rates range

- 38 -

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Industrial output in the Eleventh District has risen steadily
since last spring.

The recovery in production, however, has been uneven

among District industries.

Those industries tied to the production of

oil field equipment, such as fabricated metals and nonelectrical machinery,
continue at boom levels.
And apparel makers,
tion.

The output of chemicals has rebounded strongly.

deluged with new orders,

are running at full produc­

This has meant strong demand for textiles and those chemical
But output in construction-related

products used in synthetic fibers.

industries--most notably, primary metals--remains depressed.
The recovery in chemical production has been due, mostly, to
rebuilding of stocks by users.
liquidation.

This follows a period of heavy inventory

But now, producers report that new orders are being pushed

up by widespread inventory speculation as price pressures mount in that
industry.

Prices of some basic plastics, such as monomers, were raised

25 to 30 percent in the summer and fall.

As a result, users would like to

build stocks further before the next round of price hikes, expected in
January.

But, they add, producers are largely preventing this by deliber­

ately delaying shipments.
Recent price increases have resulted in a severe cost-price
squeeze for plastics user firms.

Demand for their products has not

strengthened enough, thus far, to allow these firms to pass the bulk of
higher costs on to their customers.

Consequently, a number of smaller

firms are being pushed out of the market and are looking for larger firms
to buy them out.

The treasurer of one of the District's leading producers

- 39 ­

of plastic pipe said that in one week recently he received three such
overtures.
Apparel manufacturers continue to step up production in response
to a backlog of orders.
opening.

Payrolls are being expanded and new plants are

And several garment makers are seeking sites for additional

manufacturing facilities.

Some clothing lines are sold out until February.

And District firms generally feel retailers will continue to build inven­
tories from current levels.

An El Paso manufacturer, for example, reports

that brisk sales at the retail level are forcing his customers to abandon
the cautious ordering policies they had been practicing.

One indication

that retail stocks are still too low is that retailers are now accepting
late shipments.
Steel production at District mills is severely depressed.
Output is down roughly 25 percent from a year ago.

The largest steel mill

in the District reports business is "horrible," with new orders running at
the slowest pace of the year.

The falloff has been centered in structural

steel and has been due, primarily, to the steady decline in nonresidential
construction in the Southwest in 1975.

Manufacturers do not expect a sub­

stantial recovery in demand until, at least, mid-1976.

And there is con­

cern that when the recovery comes, a large part of the business will go
to foreign producers.

Today, foreign mills, particularly Japanese pro­

ducers, are undercutting domestic steel prices by 20to 25 percent.
The sluggish pace of construction activity has led to extremely
aggressive bidding by manufacturers of building materials for new projects.
A Fort Worth manufacturer of reinforcing steel bars said mills are engaged
in the most aggressive price-cutting that he has seen in 25 years in the

- 40 ­

industry.

Many jobs are actually being bid below cost as mills try to

keep their share of the market and attempt to hold on to the backbone of
their work force.
A survey of independent oil producers reveals a consensus of
opinion that the proposed energy legislation before Congress would be a
disaster if enacted.

The respondents feel changes are due but not in

the direction of those proposed.

Not only would changes now being con­

sidered roll back crude oil prices from an average of $8.75 per barrel to
$7.66, but legislation would tighten the rules expensing intangible drill­
ing costs.

The latter change would reduce funds available for drilling

and impact most severely on small independents, who account for much
exploratory drilling.

Passage of the legislation would not affect current

drilling commitments, but thereafter, new commitments could fall off sharply.
New car sales have firmed at District dealerships.

Compared with

a year ago, sales in Dallas and Houston were up 54 percent and 32 percent,
respectively, in the mid-November reporting period.
is two-tiered.

Demand is strong for the smaller economy cars and the

large luxury models.

In addition, customers are much more willing to buy

optional equipment than a year ago.
tight this fall.

The market, however,

Inventories of new cars have been

In one case, a leading dealer in North Texas sold 253

new cars in November, out of an inventory of 270 units.

But factory ship­

ments are expected to catch up with sales by year-end, and dealers are
looking for continued improvement in sales in 1976.
On balance, labor markets in the District states continue to
improve, as the rise in employment is outpacing the growth in the labor
force.

The number of jobholders is 2 percent above the level of a year

- 41 ­

ago,

and the unemployment rate has dropped to 6.9 percent.

employment in

nonmanufacturing is

Growth in

faster than in manufacturing.

Factory

payrolls are up, bolstered by the increase in workers in nondurable goods
industries.

The average workweek in Texas also continues to edge upward,

but employment in

durable goods manufacturing in the District states is

slow to recover.

The number of construction jobs has increased but only

with the ending of a series of strikes, and employment in the building
trades remains substantially below the level a year ago.

- 42-

TWELFTH DISTRICT--SAN FRANCISCO

In general our directors report that business continues to
improve but at a very moderate pace.

Retail sales gains over the

Christmas season are expected to be about 10 to 11 percent higher than
last year, which should generate some momentum as the new year begins.
Many directors report a slowing of price increases and project a more
stable price situation over the next six months.

Industry voices little

interest in plant expansion and appears to be extending the time horizon
for a strong business revival.

Residential construction is reported to

have increased rather strongly in the last few months, while commercial
and industrial activity remained weak.

A significant increase in con­

struction is not anticipated over the next six months.
Although estimates vary from gains of 7 to 20 percent, most of
our directors believe that the Christmas retail sales volume will exceed
the 1974 season by 10 to 11 percent.

Since this volume will involve lost

sales due to conservative stocking, some impetus to new orders might carry
over to the new year.

Retail merchants have noticed a decided diminution

over the past few months in the rate of price increases for general mer­
chandise and a rise in the level of consumer confidence.

A large depart­

ment store representative states that store prices "should trail the
consumer price index by a couple of points."

There is general support for

the view that prices at the retail level will tend toward stability over
the next six months.
On the industrial level, prices have been weak for metals and
forest products.

A director in the nonferrous metals business anticipates

no significant change in aluminum prices over the next few months but

- 43 ­

believes that prices will rise in the spring as business expands.

A

large manufacturer of paper products states that "prices of our industrial
paper products have been very stable in spite of increasing costs.

Volume

has picked up, and we expect prices to rise over the next six months in
response to cost pressures."

In the aerospace industry, a director states

that price trends have, to a large degree, been influenced by the cost
of labor as determined by cost of living escalation clauses.

"The general

expectation is that labor costs will rise at about 8 percent per year for
the next couple of years."
mixed trends.

Petroleum refinery product prices have had

There has been softening in the wholesale and retail prices

of motor gasolines.

Prices of distillates, diesel fuels, and natural gas

liquids have been very strong; and residual fuel is in heavy oversupply
with "no market at any price."
Except for beef and hogs, farm product prices have declined
gradually since last summer.

Bumper crops this fall have led to this

development, and farmers are complaining about the embargo on wheat
and feed grain sales to Russia since these commodities are expected to
be in heavy surplus.
Residential construction is reported to have increased rather
strongly in the last few months, while commercial and industrial activity
remained weak.

A siginificant increase from current levels is not

expected over the next six months for either residential or commercial
and industrial construction; multiple-housing starts are expected to
remain especially weak.
In some areas, the outlook for construction activity is brighter
than in others.

The Seattle area continues to benefit from work connected

with the Trident Project and Alaska pipeline construction.

New office

buildings, warehouses, and shopping centers are under construction.
There has been steady growth in residential and commercial construction
in the Greater Bakersfield Area over the past eight months due to the
successful attraction of new industrial firms, and Idaho claims not to
have been affected at all by the recent recession.
In many areas of the Twelfth District, vacancy rates are at
relatively low levels, and thrift institution deposits continue to
increase insuring sufficient mortgage funds to meet demand.

