CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 12, 1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Eighth District - St. Louis .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Ninth District - Minneapolis

.

.

*

.

.

.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

First District - Boston . .
Second District - New York

.

Third District - Philadelphia
Fourth District - Cleveland
Fifth District - Richmond . .
Sixth District - Atlanta

. .

Seventh District - Chicago

Tenth District - Kansas City
Eleventh District - Dallas
Twelfth District - San Francisco
LO

.

.

• • • • • • • • • • • • •

SUMMARY*

The general impression given by this month's Redbook reports
is some moderation in the rate of decline in economic activity.

While no

District reports suggest that a general economic upswing is "just around
the corner", with some exceptions the March reports indicate that the
deepening pessimism that had characterized businessmen's outlook in previous
recent months may have abated significantly.

Respondents in most Districts

either expect a turnaround at some point in the second half of the year,
or expressed relatively bullish sentiments regarding prospects for their
individual firms and industry.

Retail sales were generally described as

running at a lower level than a year ago in unit terms, but the decline
in consumers' outlays in general appears to be levelling off, and some
Districts actually reported some improvement.

Retail inventories have

been substantially reduced, but manufacturers' inventories still remain
high.

The outlook for the housing industry on balance appears to be

improving, if only slightly.

There were further reports of price cutting,

both at the retail and production levels.

On the darker side, the employ­

ment situation continued to deteriorate in many parts of the country.
Among the comments regarding the economic outlook, Boston
reports that its directors were more hopeful, and while they did not as
yet believe the economy to be on the threshold of a turnaround, they felt
that following the rapid deterioration in previous recent months, business
activity was now stabilizing.

Philadelphia reports little change in

economic activity, which it considers an improvement compared with the
declines in previous months.

Moreover, it notes that businessmen in

* Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

ii
general expect the District's economy to pick up in the fall.

Similarly,

while Richmond reports a continuation of a broad decline in economic
activity, it also reports an easing of the pervasive mood of pessimism
displayed during the past few months as more businessmen now see "a light
at the end of the tunnel."

St. Louis reports that the rate of decline

in unemployment and output has moderated, and indeed notes that activity
in selected industries continues at relatively high levels.

Respondents

in the San Francisco District expressed the belief that conditions in the
District's hardest hit industries--construction, lumber, and transportation
equipment--have now stabilized.

On the other hand, Chicago reports that

pessimism has not been so deep and widespread since the 1930's.
Retail sales continue to be generally sluggish in most Districts,
but there appear to be scattered encouraging developments.

St. Louis,

for example, observes that no further decline in department store sales
has been reported.

Cleveland reports that bonuses as well as rebates

spurred a sharp jump in auto sales in February, while more modest increases
were reported in several other Districts.

Dallas reports a rise in sales,

with big-ticket items in particular moving well ahead of their sluggish
pace of recent months.

Atlanta, on the other hand, reports that home

appliance sales have been particularly weak but that apparel sales have
been doing well.

A very recent pickup in retail sales was observed by

Kansas City and New York, while Philadelphia reports optimism on the part
of retailers despite sluggish sales.

Minneapolis reports that retail sales

have held up well in Montana and that the area's businessmen have grown
more optimistic.

Most Districts commenting on the subject report a

decline, in varying degree, in retailers' inventories from their excessive
levels at the turn of the year.

Continued high inventories at the

iii
manufacturing level, however, are mentioned by a number of Banks, including
Atlanta, Boston, Cleveland, and Richmond.
Activity in the housing industry in general continues at a low
level.

There were indications, however, that the industry may be coming

out of its slump as mortgage funds become more readily available with
the sustained inflow of funds to thrift institutions and as the inventory
of unsold residential units is being worked off.
report some improvement in home sales.

Atlanta and Kansas City

Cleveland reports a moderate rise

in residential construction contracts from their severely depressed
levels, while builders in the St. Louis District anticipate an early
increase in residential construction activity.
The darkest spot in the current economic picture, of course,
is the high level of unemployment reported by most Districts.

Richmond

reports that unemployment rates have risen to record levels in many areas.
Minneapolis reports a sharp rise in unemployment in January, although
the jobless rate for the District remains below the nationwide average.
Cleveland mentions that numerous lay-offs have been reported thus far
in March, while Chicago also refers to "waves" of lay-offs in durable
goods industries.

San Francisco and Philadelphia respondents do not look

for an increase in the level of employment over the near term, which
combined with the growth in the available labor force is expected to
be reflected in further increases in the jobless rate.

On the other

hand, Kansas City notes an improvement in the employment situation at
automobile manufacturing plants in the Kansas City area, while St. Louis
mentions that scattered reports for February suggest a levelling off of
the unemployment rate.

- 1 FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

For the directors of the New England region, the outlook has
stabilized.

Formerly, they were concerned about the signs of rapid

deterioration; now they note a pause in the erosion.

Although the

directors are generally more hopeful, they are not yet anticipating that
the economy is on the threshold of recovery.

January unemployment in

New England is 9.5 percent, up .7 from December and 3 points from
the previous January.

Rhode Island has a 12 percent unemployment rate,

the region's highest, while Massachusetts and Connecticut report rates of
10 percent and 8.6 percent, respectively.
Directors in Massachusetts and Connecticut have specifically
mentioned concerns about state budget trends.

Economic weakness has

brought deficits, and state authorities are undertaking major efforts to
reduce spending and increase taxes.

It is felt that these reactions

will retard recovery.
In New England, only the industries connected with defense
projects seem to be

doing well.

Despite the strength of United Aircraft

and Electric Boat, one director's index of business activity for Connecticut
is forecast to be 110 for 1976 (1967=100), 3 percent below 1974.
reports are generally dismal:

Profits

"Fourth-quarter reports are full of minuses,

with few exceptions."
Consequently, there will be a period of time before business is
willing to commit important outlays for expansion.

A director involved

with the production of fasteners, milling machines, and machine tools
reports that new orders are down sharply.

His personal indexes for the

direction of business activity cause him worry; May and June will bring
reduction of output.

Several directors have reported that suppliers are

-2­
stepping up shipments (steel, for example) by as much as six months in
addition to padding orders.
Those connected with the production of automobile parts have
noted a stabilization of conditions.

It appears that the industry has

adjusted production to a level consistent with a 6 million unit year.
Housing starts have all but disappeared.
sales volume has placed pressure on him

One director mentions that low
to increase prices.

Reduced

rates of utilization of factors of production require larger margins to
cover overhead.
For retail sales, "there is no spring optimism".
down, and consumer resistance is in the air.
supermarkets to hard goods.

Promotions are common from

A director notes that his sales are running

well, compared with his modest planning.
control.

Orders are

His inventories are under

However, manufacturers have significant overhang so that the

director attempts to remain liquid, capitalizing on distress sales.
"Massively heavy promotions" are to continue.
Bankers seem to expect a 7 percent prime to prevail for the
second half of 1975.

They also note that quality loan customers are

moving into bond issues whenever possible, leaving low-quality paper.
There seems to be a reticence to embark on a growth binge again, and
construction lending will be approached with serious caution.

Bankers

also note that year-end statements show high inventory figures which
require attention.
Prospects of a large tax cut have made Eckstein much more
sanguine about the economic outlook.

He now believes that the tax cut,

combined with a monetary policy which lets the Treasury bill rate remain
at 4 percent, will allow the economy to experience real growth rates of
3-4 percent in the second half of 1975 and even more vigorous growth in

-3­
1976.

He believes that the role of the Federal Reserve in the next six

months is to allow businesses to rehabilitate their balance sheets by
creating market conditions in which corporations will be able to float
long-term securities.

Eckstein also noted that the Fed should be

encouraging banks to make loans.

The Fed, he argued, should put in

abeyance its program of capital adequacy because "it is grossly
inappropriate to the current situation".
While Eckstein was optimistic about a recovery, he did note
that a sharp housing recovery is crucial to his scenerio.

If the banks

refuse to make construction loans, he argued that the Fed must make the
do so.
Duesenberry expressed qualms about the early and strong upturn
in Eckstein's forecast.

He believes that demand may be much weaker than

in past recoveries because the decline in real disposable income is much
greater and because there is a big overhang of unsold houses and condominiums.
He feels the present situation is most similar to the housing picture in
1963.

He notes that the $20 billion upturn in residential construction

forecast by the DRI model is as large as the whole tax cut and if it
doesn't occur, there will be.no second-half upturn.
Professor Solow remarks that further easing will not lead to a
sudden expansion.

He believes that the real guide to the leniency of

monetary policy at this time is the level of long-term interest rates.
Consequently, he advocates an aggressive policy designed to reduce the
cost of long-term financing.

He suggests a revival of operation twist.

Although Professor Solow admits this experiment was not a "terrific success"
in the past, "nothing awful happened".

"It is wrong to watch money demand

decay and short-term interest rates fall and say the Fed is doing its
job."

A revival of the economy will revive M1 figures.

The economy is

- 4 ­
not poised to inflate, in his view, and he feels aggressive fiscal
policy coupled with concomitant monetary ease is necessary to germinate
recovery.
Eckstein, Solow, and Duesenberry all expect second-half
recoveries.

However, Solow and Duesenberry see only modest growth, and

they feel the risk is that they are being optimistic.

Eckstein sees

a more vigorous recovery, but it is predicated on monetary and fiscal
policy sufficiently aggressive to cause a significant resurgence of
housing.

All three advocate more monetary ease.

-5SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District directors and other business leaders who were
contacted recently on balance took a rather dim view of the near-term
economic outlook, but most expected a turnaround in business activity
during the later part of 1975.

The retail sales picture remained uninspir­

ing, particularly in New York City.

More encouraging was the reported

significant reduction in retail inventories, and the improvement--albeit
limited--in certain manufacturers' inventory positions.

Comments regarding

business capital outlays reflected a note of caution in that sector.
There continued to be reports of a softening of prices of certain raw and
semi-finished products and, at the retail level, of further price conces­
sions, including a spreading of the "rebate" device.

The District un­

employment rate continues well above the nationwide average, although the
most acute problems seem to be concentrated in New York City, Buffalo,
and northern New Jersey.
None of the respondents commenting on the swiftness of the
deterioration in the economy foresaw a bottomless downward spiral.

Con­

siderable uncertainty, however, surrounded the timing of the turnaround,
with the respondents in general looking for a recovery to take place later
than suggested by some official forecasts.

Among others, the chairman

of a large airline stated that, at this juncture, he saw no indications
of a turnaround as yet.

The chairman of a large metal producing firm

expected the upswing to be delayed until the start of the fourth quarter,
when he looked for an improvement in auto sales as new models were
introduced.

Among the Buffalo branch directors, those from the Buffalo

area, which has been hit especially hard by the downswing, felt that
it might well be year-end 1975 before the turnaround takes place.

On

-6­

the other hand, a director from the Rochester area, where business activity
has remained relatively strong, expected the turnaround by summer or early
fall.

Among other respondents, the chairman of a diversified international

chemical concern stated that the recession would be worse than had been
generally expected, and the chairman of a conglomerate stated that he
could not get enthusiastic until retail sales picked up, and would not
predict when that would occur.
Regarding consumer spending, New York City department stores,
following a poor January, had another poor month in February.
conditions prevailed in Buffalo.

Similar

Sales elsewhere in New York State con­

tinued to perform somewhat better than in the State's two largest cities.
An official of a trade association reported that while sales at some
New York City stores had picked up somewhat, business at others had
declined, and that on balance February sales at City department stores
would be somewhat lower in dollar terms than in February 1975.

On the

brighter side, however, his impression was that there had been a slight
improvement in recent days, a view also expressed by some retailers.
Moreover, he reported that the merchants he has been in contact with were
somewhat more optimistic than last month, and looked for an upturn as
the spring season gets underway.
A number of reports indicate that further progress has been
made toward reducing retail inventories, in good part reflecting signifi­
cant cutbacks in merchants' purchases from their own suppliers.

In this

context, the chairman of a very large New York City-based department store
chain with branches across the country stated that while his firm had
been badly overstocked last November, it has now managed to significantly
reduce its inventory position.

He also felt this was true of the retail

-7­

industry generally.

Similarly, a senior official of another nationwide

department store chain stated that as a result of an aggressive reduction
program, his firms' inventories were now 20 percent below their level
in the comparable period in 1974.

At the manufacturing level, the chair­

man of a chemical firm reported that his firm had reduced inventories to
desired levels, and the chairman of a health and cosmetics products manu­
facturer stated that his firm had no overstocking problem.

Another

observer noted that while there has been a general attempt by industry to
reduce inventories, a decline in sales has partly frustrated such efforts
in some cases.
A note of caution characterized comments on capital spending.
A director stated that businesses were attempting to restore liquidity
positions and as a result were scaling down large projects.

One of the

nationwide retail firm officials mentioned above reported that his firm
was completing stores at shopping centers that were already on the way,
but was putting "little new on the books".

One of the metal producers

reported that his firm had completed a new aluminum plant, but was not
putting this plant "on stream" at this time because of the softening in
the demand for aluminum.

An airline official stated there were 100 to 250

too many jets available for the airline industry.

(He further predicted

that the airline industry would show "zero profits" in 1975.)
Regarding prices, the nationwide decline in wholesale prices was
reflected in reports of price declines for a number of primary products,
including copper, brass, fibers, and raw materials used in the health
and cosmetics industry.

At the retail level, there were further reports

of price concessionsin connection with promotional activity and of a
spreading of the rebate device to such products as cameras, sewing machines,

-8­

and home appliances.

In the New York City area, rebates are being offered

on purchases of condominiums and on leases of luxury apartments.
The District unemployment rate continues well above the national
average, in large part reflecting the high jobless rates in New York City,
northern New Jersey, and Buffalo.
rose to 9.3 percent in January.

The unemployment rate for New York State
It was 10.6 percent in New York City,

where many of the City's principal industries--such as dressmaking, printing,
construction, and retail trade--are acutely feeling the downswing in
economic activity.

In Buffalo, the rate was up to 13.4 percent, reflecting

the downturn in the auto, steel, and machinery industries.

-9THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District remains mostly unchanged
in March from February.

Manufacturers report no change in new orders,

shipments, and unemployment, but are optimistic for the outlook six months
ahead.

Our retailers report continued declines in sales; however, the

outlook this summer from resort business at the New Jersey shore is strong.
The outlook for prices suggests some easing of inflationary pressures.
Area bankers are somewhat confused about what the Fed and other regulatory
authorities want in terms of loan policy, but loan levels remain flat.
According to this month's business outlook survey of manufacturers

in the Third District, industrial activity remains about the same as it
was in February.
recent months.

However, "no change" is an improvement, compared with
In November, almost 90 percent of the respondents reported

a decrease in the general level of business activity.

However, as of this

month, only 18 percent of the businessmen report a decrease in the level
of activity.

Area businessmen are more bullish for the fall, though.

Almost 80 percent of the respondents expect the general level of Third
District business activity to pick up, and three quarters anticipate that
this upward trend will be reflected in increased volume for their own
firms.

Despite this glimmer of new optimism, however, capital investment

plans six months out remain about the same.

Our businessmen don't intend

to increase spending plans until they have a firmer grip on the outlook.
Employment levels are also flat in March, compared with a month
earlier.

Half of the respondents report no change in the average number

of employees, and three fourths report no change in the length of the
workweek.

In addition, manufacturers expect little change in their work

force and the length of the workweek through September, despite hopes for

- 10 ­
increased output.

This lack of increase in the size of the work force

will likely spell continued high unemployment in the region, as the total
labor force continues to grow.
Area retailers are harder hit this month than the rest of the
region.

For the second month in a row, dollar sales are again running

slightly below last year's levels, and retailers are continuing their
"no hire" policy.

Retailers are optimistic though that, if warm weather

comes soon, sales may be up by 2 or 3 percent over last year despite
the tendency for early Easters to dampen holiday sales.
concerned about the impact of a tax cut on sales.
President's proposed tax rebate might boost sales.

Retailers are

They had hoped the
However, a survey of

Delaware Valley residents shows that only a minority of taxpayers anticipate
making purchases they would not normally make.

Most residents plan to use

the additional funds to pay off existing debt or to save it, according
to

the survey.
In contrast to area retail sales, early bookings for summer

vacations at the New Jersey shore show a bullish trend.

A survey of

rental agents at shore points found a high rate of renewals for shore
homes and apartments and strong demand for one-time rentals.

The

explanation apparently is that vacationers will be staying closer to home
this summer, as the cost of vacations continues to climb and jobs are more
precarious.
On the price front, the inflationary pressures that have been
plaguing the regional economy may be easing somewhat.

Three fourths of

the respondents report no change in the prices they must pay for raw
materials as well as in the prices they receive for finished goods.

- 11 Manufacturers look for a continued easing of inflation during the next
six months.
Area bankers report conflicting signals about what they regard
as appropriate loan policy.

While most Philadelphia banks have been

holding down loan levels, partly on a strictly voluntary basis and partly
because they think that is what the regulators want, some confusion exists

following Governor Sheehan's speech in New York in which he implied that
the Fed is no longer advocating a restrictive loan policy.

Some bankers

in Philadelphia expressed the need for the Comptroller and the Fed to "get
together" to develop a consistent policy stance.

Several banks report

that they would anticipate few problems in increasing loan levels with
quality customers.

One large Philadelphia bank, however, reports that

Governor Sheehan's remarks mirrored those of Governor Coldwell's when
he was in town recently and that they are already pursuing a looser loan
policy.

General loan levels, however, remain essentially flat at area

banks, and demand deposit levels are down slightly from last month.

- 12 FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

District economic activity continues to decline generally,
although new car sales have been exceptionally strong.

Firms report

considerable further slowing in prices they pay for materials and
Few companies see any near-term improvement in business.

supplies.

Many

industries expect further weakness in the months ahead, although there
are scattered reports of bottoming-out for a limited number of products.
Numerous layoffs have been reported thus far in March.

Nonresidential

construction is declining, and residential construction remains severely
depressed.
New car sales rebounded in February much more in the Cleveland
area than in the nation.

Compared with year-ago figures, sales in Cleveland

were down 22 percent in January, but up 13 percent in February.

This

reflected the effects of not only the manufacturers' rebates but also
bonuses

offered by a number of firms in the Cleveland-Akron area to

employees who purchased a new car.

These included a steel company, two

advertising agencies, an auto producer, several large banks, a radio
station, two major tire companies and various auto suppliers.

In addition,

some banks helped promote auto sales by advertising reduced interest rates
on auto loans.

Many firms will continue the rebates until late spring

or early summer.

Cleveland auto dealers report that sales have slowed thus

far in March; but their inventories are down, and they are placing orders
for April delivery.
Early returns from our survey of manufacturers indicate additional
widespread weakening in manufacturing activity during February.

New orders,

shipments, backlogs, inventories, employment, and hours all continued to
decline sharply.

In addition, price pressures continue to ease.

The

- 13 ­

proportion of firms reporting price decreases has risen significantly
in recent months and is now roughly equal to the proportion paying higher
prices.

On balance, no improvement in general business conditions is

expected this month.
Several industrialists believe the worst of the decline in
a few product lines may be over.

One chemical producer said its business

has been sliding, but the decline in pigments (for industrial, commercial,
and household appliance uses) appears to have bottomed out.

Another

chemicals firm said its inventory excesses are rapidly dwindling, and it
expects to increase production in March.

A machine tool executive is

hopeful that signs of a bottoming-out in its declining order bookings
are appearing (cancellations exceeded new orders by only one machine in
February, compared with a significant volume of cancellations in excess
of new orders in the previous three months).
Other firms indicate further adverse developments may be in
store.
weak.

A major tire producer said the tire replacement business remains
Tire inventories held by the industry are massive and still rising.

More production cutbacks and layoffs will be necessary.
household appliances are described as "miserable".

Shipments of

A large appliance firm

said it will take three to five months to bring inventories into balance.
Sales are not expected to improve until midyear, assuming tax rebates
become effective in late spring.

Several large glass companies laid off

a substantial number of additional workers in late February and early
March.

A major truck producer in Cleveland, which cut output one third

last month, is closing its Cleveland plant for two weeks in March and
three weeks in April.
In the steel industry, new orders are tapering off slowly.
decline in steel demand thus far has centered mainly in stainless and

The

- 14 ­

specialty steels and in carbon steel sheet and strip.

The result has

been cutbacks and fairly substantial layoffs at a number of steel plants
in the District.

Further curtailments and layoffs are likely over the

next two months unless there is an unexpected quick improvement in steel
demand.

Much of the raw steel currently being produced is going into

mill inventories to rebuild stocks run down last year when demand was
extraordinarily strong.
An economist with a major steel company said he was invited to
visit with purchasing agents of three auto producers in recent weeks.

The

auto firms were looking for price cuts and were wondering who was buying
all the steel they were not taking.

(Some of the sheet metal that would

normally be purchased by the auto companies is being used for storage
tanks, which are in strong demand.)

The economist noted that the auto

firms are torn between wanting lower steel prices and wanting the steel
industry to generate profits sufficient to expand capacity so as to avoid
future bottlenecks in supply.

The auto companies still have large

inventories of steel even though they have sold some flat-rolled steel
that has age hardened.

They are not expected to be ordering steel until

the model changeover this summer.
In the construction sector, nonresidential building contracts
have been declining sharply since the peak reached in the third quarter
of last year.

Residential construction contracts turned up moderately in

January but are still at a severely depressed level.

The dollar value of

residential contracts is down about 50 percent from the peak of early
1973.

Some local savings and loan associations report continued net gains

in deposits in February and early March.

Mortgage rates continue to slide,

but there has been no recent pickup in loans.

- 15 FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Results of the February survey of Fifth District businesses give
no indication of any significant change in business conditions but rather
reveal the continuation of a broad decline in activity.

Generally, un­

employment rates have continued to rise, reaching record levels in many areas.
Whereas in recent months pockets of severe unemployment were notable exceptions,
the noteworthy areas are now those with moderate rates of joblessness.

Survey

responses suggest further declines in manufacturers' shipments, orders, and
backlogs, as well as some further accumulation of finished goods inventories.
More plant closings and layoffs have occurred in a wide range of industries,
with the paper and cardboard packaging materials industry becoming a prominent
participant.

One change indicated by the survey responses concerns a break in

the pervasive mood of pessimism displayed during the past few months.

Responses

suggest more businessmen now see "a light at the end of the tunnel".
Recent surveys of Fifth District banks indicate continued easing of
credit demands and some greater willingness, on the part of banks, to lend to
qualified customers.

Bank sources of funds are changing somewhat, as declines

in demand deposits are being partially offset by inflows of consumer time deposits.
Manufacturers responding to our latest survey reveal continued weakness
in shipments and new orders and further declines in backlogs of orders.

Meanwhile,

inventories of materials remain stable, although further accumulation of finished
goods is indicated.

Over 46 percent of the manufacturers surveyed reported in­

creases in finished goods inventories, while one out of three reports a reduction
in inventories of materials.

Almost 60 percent report declines in the number of

employees as well as in the hours worked per week.

For the second consecutive

month, relatively few manufacturers report increases in employee compensation,
suggesting some decline in the rate of increase.

- 16 The February survey further reflects some continued softness in
prices received, and perhaps some early indication that prices paid by the
manufacturers are no longer showing the widespread increases which were
prevalent in recent months.

Over 60 percent of the manufacturers surveyed

feel current inventory levels are too high, and over 50 percent view current
plant and equipment capacity as excessive.

Nevertheless, over 80 percent feel

current expansion plans are about right, while only one out of nine thinks
expansion plans should be cut back.
District retailers responding to the February survey offer much the
same picture.

Little change in the dollar volume of sales is indicated,

although the slump in sales of big-ticket items continues.

Inventory levels

appear to have stabilized, and concern over inventory levels seems to be
diminishing.

Employment by retailers declined further in February, but survey

responses indicate further increases in employment hourly compensation.

The

suggestions of price weakness offered by the manufacturers are not yet being
duplicated by the retailers.

Although price increases may not be so widespread

as in recent months, the diffusion of response suggests the upward trend persists.
If there is any discernible change indicated by the February survey,
it is in the area of respondents' expectations for the next six months.

It is

clear that the pessimism prevailing over the past half year has begun to dissipate.
Among retailers, 40 percent now expect improvements in the level of business
activity over the next six months and, perhaps more significant, not one respondent
to the survey of retailers foresees a worsening of business over that time period.
Among manufacturers, the shift is not quite so dramatic, but almost 40 percent
of the respondents expect the level of production in their own firms to improve
over the coming six months.

- 17 Recent surveys indicate that current economic conditions are having
a definite impact on Fifth District banks, affecting both their sources and
uses of funds.

Credit demands continue to ease considerably, and some banks

are developing a greater willingness to lend to qualified customers.

Consumer­

type time and savings deposits remain strong, and increases are partially off­
setting declines in demand deposits.

Competition for these types of deposits

remains strong, and most banks surveyed report paying maximum permissible
interest rates on them.

Holdings of negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs)

at weekly reporting banks have fallen steadily since the beginning of the year.
Member banks continue to place less reliance upon the discount window, average
borrowings in February having declined for the eighth straight month.

At

weekly reporting banks, the level of loans, including both business and consumer
types, continued to decline across a broad range in February, and most bankers
expect the demand for business loans to weaken further in coming months.

There

is also concern that high prices on homes and durables will keep consumer lending
depressed.
District farmers' cash receipts from farm marketings in 1974 climbed
to a record $5.3 billion, up 10 percent over the previous high set in 1973.
Crop receipts, up 25 percent, paced the advance, but a 6 percent decline in
receipts from livestock was partially offsetting.

Last year's large jump in

farm production expenses, however, will most likely more than offset the gain
in cash income and result in a drop in net farm income.

- 18 -

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The most recent reports from District businessmen and directors
contain a mixture of pluses and minuses.

On the plus side, tourist

traffic remains brisk in Florida and District manufacturers have recalled
some workers.

Although residential construction activity remains at low

levels, there is some spotty evidence that the large unsold housing
inventories are beginning to sell.

Oil exploration and mining activity

also are adding strength to the District economy.

On the minus side,

retailers are reporting continued weakness, especially in home appliances
and furniture.
levels.

Inventories in many lines still remain above desired

Delays and cancellations in capital spending plans are still

being reported.

There is evidence that the previously heavy steel demand

may be slackening off, with layoffs on the horizon.
The most pleasant surprise has been tourist traffic in Florida;
it has been a lifesaver for that state's economy.

South Florida's

tourist trade has remained at high levels after the Christmas rush.

No

rental cars were available in Miami for a two-week period, and the hotels
are sold out.

However, tourists are apparently staying for shorter

periods than in the past and are spending more carefully.

One cruise ship

line reports that business is so good that they are turning away people.
They are not sure whether it is bad weather in the North or people taking
a last fling that is responsible.

However, the cruise ship business

does not appear to be booming across the board.

The Carnival Cruise Lines

have mothballed the "Bahama Star" because of low bookings and increased
costs, particularly for fuel.
Reports continue to indicate that mortgage money is becoming
more available.

A New Orleans director indicates that mortgage rates

- 19 ­
there are currently at 8.75 percent; he envisions rates going below
8 percent by April.

A large, regional life insurance company reports

that the sharp decline in short-term interest rates is causing them
to consider putting some of their new money into the housing area.
As yet, this greater availability of mortgage financing has not trans­
lated into a noticeable pickup in sales.

A New Orleans businessman

reports that, while more people are looking for houses, the discretionary
home buyer is still not in the market.

New Orleans resisted the

condominium market and, hence, has no

"Condo" problem.

A speculative

builder in the Jacksonville, Florida area has reduced prices by as much
as $15,000 but is still having trouble selling new houses.

Florida still

has 60,000 to 70,000 unsold condominiums, but they appear to be starting
to sell because of the greater availability of permanent financing.
Apparently, the high-priced condos are still not selling, however.
Anticipations of lower interest rates and prices were also reported as
deterrents to sales.

Nevertheless, house sales in South Dade County

(Miami) have picked up in the past two months.
The Gulf Coast area is booming from oil exploration.
industry is one of the few still experiencing shortages.
skilled labor and materials has slowed activity.
welders.

This

A lack of

They are begging for

Steel pipe and pumps are still in short supply and delivery

time remains long. Construction is under way on an oil refinery in the
New Orleans area.

A company representative reports that anything of

sophisticated fabrication is hard to obtain, and there is no fixed price
on this type of equipment.

The largest strip-mining operation in

Tennessee is expected to spend $10 million in new equipment on new coal
fields.

- 20 The sales and inventory picture remains mixed in the District.
It would appear that most retailers are still experiencing slow sales
and high inventories.

Only auto dealers, as reported last month, have

made much progress in reducing inventories.
has been particularly weak.

The home appliance business

One South Florida retailer indicates that

inventories are heavy at both the manufacturing and the retail levels.
Manufacturers are just beginning to make some selective price reductions.
He notes that his credit business had doubled from 30 percent to 70 per­
cent of total sales.

He expects that this large portion of credit sales

will cause problems in coming months.

A large department store representa­

tive reports that apparel sales are now doing well but that appliances
are not selling.

The consumer is buying either the very deluxe or the

most economical appliances; he has gotten away from the intermediate
market, where inventories are heaviest.

Furniture manufacturers have

tremendous inventory overhangs and are now taking losses to move their
goods.

Reflecting these depressed sales and high inventories, plant

closings and layoffs continue by textile, apparel, appliance, and furni­
ture manufacturers.

Paper and lumber mills are still operating at low

levels; many remain closed.
An area of growing weakness is capital spending, where new
reports of delays and cancellations of previously announced projects have
been received.

Plans for a large $100 million chemical plant for the

Mobile, Alabama, area have been suspended until market conditions improve.
Dupont will delay construction of a $125 million plant in Mississippi until
business in the paint,paper, and textile industries picks up.

The huge

Tenneco-Westinghouse project to build floating nuclear power plants near
Jacksonville, Florida, received an additional jolt.

First, Tenneco pulled

- 21 ­
out of the project; then the New Jersey Electric Company, the only
customer for four plants, asked for a five-year delay.

Westinghouse

has laid off workers and is now just hanging on, with its future
uncertain.
The recession is apparently beginning to hit the steel
industry; foreign steel is now cheaper than United States steel.

One

businessman indicated that he is now getting promises of steel deliveries
in three months rather than the eighteen- month period needed only a
short time ago when manufacturers were building up inventories.

He

indicated that multiple orders will soon be canceled, which will reduce
steel order backlogs.

- 22 SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The business downturn continues in the Seventh District.

The

rate of decline may be slowing, but there are no indications of a near-term
improvement in general conditions.

The drop in manufacturing employment and

output since October has not been matched since 1945-46, and pessimism has
not been so deep and widespread since the 1930's.

Consumers are buying

cautiously, business firms are attempting to cut costs (often reducing staffs),
many companies are reducing capital expenditure plans, and lenders are more
selective in making new commitments.

Reflecting reduced demand, including

inventory liquidation, the rate of inflation has slowed substantially and
many prices have been reduced.
Regardless of estimates of overall rates of unemployment, it appears
that job markets weakened further in February and March.

Deterioration has

been especially marked in the central cities of Chicago and Milwaukee.
remains a disaster area, despite recent call-backs of laid-off workers.)

(Detroit
Waves

of layoffs have continued in a wide variety of durable goods industries, which
are predominant in this region.

Construction activity is at a very low level,

and freight tonnage is down sharply.
Although techniques leave much to be desired, state agencies have
been attempting to estimate unemployment in central cities, in addition to
metropolitan areas as in the past.

For the city of Chicago, unemployment is

estimated at 8.5 percent in February, compared with 7.2 percent for the SMSA.
For the city of Milwaukee, which had been relatively vigorous, the unemployment
rate is estimated at 11 percent for January, compared with 6.5 percent for the
SMSA, and 16 percent for a 15 square mile area within the city.

The current

picture is undoubtedly worse.
In Chicago, a discount department store to be opened in May processed
5,600 applications for 300 prospective jobs.

A job conference for prospective

- 23 ­
college graduates in marketing was able to accept only 800 of 1,400 applicants
for interviews, compared with a total of 350 applicants a year ago.

The weak­

ness of the job market reflects not only layoffs but hiring freezes and a
sharply reduced rate of voluntary separations.
Some unions have moderated demands for upcoming negotiations.
Chicago area construction laborers agreed to forego a wage increase for 1975,
and electricians will work a four-day week and will accept an unspecified pay
cut.

Some employers, however, say union militancy is as strong as ever, even

when layoffs are large and continuing.

Some employers have reduced the wages

and benefits of white collar workers and are asking unions to accept similar
reductions.

However, a survey showed average compensation of executives in

the Chicago area to have increased 16 percent from May 1, 1974 to January 1,
1975, compared with a 10 percent rise in the average from 1972 to 1973.
A search for favorable developments yielded scattered and inconclusive
reports of increased orders for metal stampings, cardboard cartons, textiles
and mobile homes.

Some of these reports may indicate the need to correct

excessive inventory reductions.

Most of the heavy capital goods industries

continue to operate at high levels, although with declining backlogs.
companies are increasing output schedules through May.

Auto

Previous drastic cut­

backs in output and the sales stimulus of cash rebates resulted in unbalanced
inventories.

If demand does not pick up a solid basis, these assembly schedules

probably will not hold up.
Perhaps no industry was hit so suddenly and so hard by reduced sales
and order cancellations as heavy trucks.

Plants producing components and

finished vehicles that were fighting to reduce heavy backlogs last summer are
now operating at about 30 percent of capacity.

Experts have been surprised at

the rapid turnaround, even those who had forecast a substantial drop-off.

A

small producer of heavy trucks is in bankruptcy proceedings, Chrysler has pulled

- 24 ­
out of the market, and marginal plants are being taken out of production
"permanently".

Highway freight tonnage is down 25 percent from last year.

The largest drop in any earlier recession since World War II was 10 percent.
Moreover, many trucks had been sold and produced with a view to "beating" the
costly air-brake standards that became effective March 1.

The current

inventory of heavy trucks is equal to about six months' prospective sales.
There are signs that demand for heavy construction equipment will soon start
down, although probably not so rapidly as in the case of heavy trucks.
Price cuts on manufactured goods have been substantial and widespread,
both at the wholesale and retail levels, perhaps to a greater extent than at
any time since World War II.

Many of these price cuts, e.g., auto rebates and

department store markdowns, represent attempts to reduce inventories on hand
and will not be permanent.

Most costs of production continue to rise, and

various manufacturers without inventory problems are raising prices.

Prices

of some models of autos have been "reduced" by changing the product, e.g.,
substituting lower grade tires.

Prices of services continue to rise rapidly,

including apartment rents, hospital care, utility rates, insurance rates, and
professional services.

Many prices of goods had been at unsustainable levels

in view of market forces.

Some types of steel are coming down, most nonferrous

metals are cheaper, and gasoline stations are in a minor price war.

Many price

adjustments are indirect--a return to freight absorption, elimination of extras
and surcharges, and restoration of quantity and cash discounts.

Individual

negotiations between buyers and sellers are more likely to result in lower
prices.

Overall, price reductions on goods probably are not fully reflected

in official indexes.

- 25 -

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Eighth District businessmen reported that economic activity was
at substantially reduced levels in recent weeks in comparison with most of
However, the rate of decline in employment and output has ap­

last year.

Department store sales continue at a slow rate, but no

parently moderated.

further decline was reported.

Automobile sales have increased somewhat.

The

rate of savings inflows at thrift institutions has increased in the past
couple of months.

Although new home construction has not responded to the

greater availability of mortgage credit, builders anticipate an early in­
crease in home construction activity.
Department store sales continue sluggish, according to area re­
tailers.

Sales are reported to be down most for durables products, such as

refrigerators, washing machines, and television sets.

Price promotions are

being used to clear current inventories of both automobiles and other durable
goods.
Manufacturing activity continues at a reduced level throughout the
District, compared with last fall.

However, the rate of deterioration appears

to have moderated in recent weeks.

Representatives of the hardest hit in­

dustries, such as automobile, housing, appliance, lumber and forestry, and
clothing and textiles, did not report much further deterioration from Jan­
uary levels.

In fact, a few firms reported plans for recalling workers and

for achieving a higher level of output.
Activity in the chemical, steel, petroleum, and food industries
has continued at relatively high levels.

A major chemical firm reported

good sales for drugs, but poor sales for some types of synthetic fibers and
industrial products.

- 26 -

Unemployment increased dramatically near the close of the year
in most parts of the District.

Data for January indicate employment declines

in almost all industrial categories, and unemployment rates jumped substan­
tially from the December level.

Scattered reports for February indicate

the unemployment rate has tended to level off.
Mortgage funds are reported to be more available and interest
rates somewhat lower in recent weeks.

Savings and loan institutions re­

ported an upturn in net savings through March 1.

These institutions report

that they are using additional funds to make new loans on both old and new
housing and to build their liquidity through increased holdings of cash
and short-term instruments.

Also, they are paying off debt to the Federal

Home Loan Banks.
Mortgage rates on an 80 percent loan in St. Louis have declined
from 9 1/2 percent late last year to 8 1/2 percent in recent weeks.

Savings

and loan officers point out that the extent of further reductions must be
related to rates offered to savers.

Some institutions have already dis­

continued the 7 3/4 percent six-year certificates and are increasing the
minimum size of the 7 1/2 percent certificates from $1,000 to $10,000.
The upturn in availability of loans had no noticeable effect on
new housing starts so far; however, representatives of the building indus­
try are becoming more optimistic.

A considerable inventory of unsold homes

currently exists, but these inventories are beginning to move.

In addition,

the apartment vacancy rates are quite low in some parts of the District.

Hence, with funds available, building representatives expect a sizable
pickup in housing construction this year.

A number of businessmen, however,

expressed serious reservations concerning the continued availability of

- 27 ­

funds once major government borrowings to finance the deficit begin.

Com­

mercial construction in the downtown areaof St. Louis is quite active, but
elsewhere in the District, including St. Louis county, such construction
is at a relatively low level.
The volume of business and consumer loans in the District has
declined in recent weeks, reflecting reduced loan demand.

As a consequence,

the rates charged have declined and a number of banks are actively solicit­
ing loan accounts.

Total demand deposits at District commercial banks have

fallen off in recent weeks, but savings and time deposits have increased.
Farmers have become more pessimistic about current agricultural
conditions with the decline in crop prices and little increase in livestock
prices.

Livestock producers, especially cow-calf operators, are under a

considerable profit squeeze; however, the profitability of the cattle
feeding business has improved as a result of the lower priced feeders.
Cotton producers in some areas of the District are planning sizable cutbacks
in acreage.

Soybean prices have also become less favorable, yet some

farmers, particularly cotton farmers, plan to substitute soybeans for cotton.

- 28 -

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Recent evidence indicates further weakening in District business
activity.

Unemployment rose sharply in January, and manufacturers are not

so optimistic as they were last November.

Nevertheless, bank directors cited

several sectors where business activity has improved.

In addition, directors

report that District businesses have not been confronted with overly excessive
inventories; inflationary pressures have also eased.

The District's rural

areas continue to be relatively unaffected by the recession.
Unemployment continues to rise.

The District's unemployment rate,

seasonally adjusted, increased from 5.9 percent to 6.4 percent between Decem­
ber and January, with the Minneapolis-St. Paul area rate jumping from 5.1
percent to 6.2 percent.

In early 1975, District help-wanted advertising

was down 30 percent from a year ago and initial claims for unemployment in­
surance were up 35 percent.
District manufacturers are not so optimistic about their sales
outlook as they were last November.

After increasing 15.9 percent from a

year earlier in the fourth quarter, District manufacturers look for their
sales to surpass year-ago levels by around 9 percent during the first nine
months of this year.

(Last November respondentshad anticipated a 14 percent

sales gain during the first half of 1974.)
producers revised downward their sales

Both durables and nondurables

expectations, with price increases

probably accounting for most, if not all, of the anticipated sales gains.
Recent declines in District manufacturing employment also denote a weakening
in manufacturing activity.

There are, however, some areas of strength.

Twin

Cities producers of medical equipment and peripheral electronic data process­
ing equipment are enjoying strong sales.

Small local machine shops are also

doing quite well from both a volume and profit standpoint.

- 29 -

Although District business activity has continued to weaken, some
District industries have recently shown improvement. Several directors commented
that the automobile rebates have had a favorable effect upon sales.

The sub­

stantial inflows of savings to thrift institutions have made more mortgage
money available, and one large Minneapolis-St. Paul area savings and loan
association has begun to advertise the availability of funds.

In addition,

the observation was made that lower interest rates have benefited finance
companies, the securities industry, banks and utilities.

A director associated

with the retail trade industry indicated that his firm's sales improved in
February but cautioned that it was too early to ascertain whether a definite
pickup in consumer spending has occurred.
Directors from outside the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area
indicated that business has held up quite well in their areas.

Two directors

from the Dakotas described business in that region as normal for this time of
year.

A Montana director stated that his area's businessmen are more optimistic

than earlier this winter and reported that his area's retail sales have held
up quite well.

A director from the upper peninsula of Michigan, however, in­

dicated that business has been off in his area's copper and paper industries.
Directors indicated that no excessive amount of unwanted inventory
accumulation has occurred in the District.
in the Twin Cities

Many local and regional companies

area are holding inventories above desired levels.

The

situation, however, does not call for any forced liquidation of inventories.
Most managers are of the opinion that, with a modest reduction in their rates
of output, the desired level and balance of inventories can be achieved by
midyear or earlier.

Another report indicated that the inventory situation

- 30 ­

in the retail trade industry has improved.

Directors from outside the

Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area generally agreed that excess inventories
are not a problem.

However, two directors reported a weakening in farm machinery

sales and a recent buildup in inventories.

Also, the District's livestock

industry is burdened with an excessive supply of cattle; one director felt
that the District's livestock industry would not recover until 1978.
Bank directors were unanimous in expressing the opinion that in­
flationary pressures have or will be easing.

One director, for example, indi­

cated that his firm's budgeted price increases for 1975 were only half as
large as price increases experienced in 1974.
price reductions in their area or industry.

Many directors cited examples of
One report indicated that list

prices are not being cut because of some fear that there will be a return of
wage and price controls.

However, transaction prices are declining as business­

men provide special incentives or volume discounts.

- 31 -

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Interviews and local newspaper reports point to some improve­
ment in the Tenth District new housing industry.

Tenth District builders,

home builders associations, and savings and loan institutions all indi­
cate a degree of cautious optimism for 1975.

Employment has improved at

automobile manufacturing plants in the Kansas City area.

Retail sales

remain soft, while inventory levels appear to have stabilized.

Winter

wheat prospects are still regarded as good, although potentially damaging
dry conditions do exist in some areas.

The pronounced decline in farm

product prices could pose a serious financial problem for some producers.
Total loan volume at Tenth District Banks has declined in recent weeks,
while deposits have moved slightly upward.
Savings and loan associations report a fairly heavy inflow of
funds in January and February, mainly into passbook accounts.

One officer

notes that, while he does not foresee any large drain-off of funds, "the
'smart' money is waiting for some higher rate that seems inevitable when
the Government has to look for financing for the rebate program".

Despite

this fear, mortgage rates are softening and money is becoming available
for the qualified buyer.

A Kansas City official comments that "raising

the Missouri usury ceiling (from 8 percent to 10 percent) did not have
the immediate effect we thought it would, but sellers seem to be finding
out they can now sell and not be charged points".

Savings and loan officials view the construction picture as
rather cloudy.

One man in Oklahoma City notes that construction has been

slow but is picking up, with most activity in single-family homes.
ment building has dried up, however.

Apart­

An interviewee in Omaha reports that

- 32 ­
the main market is in old houses and thinks this may be due to the energy
scare, with people wanting to live near the center of town.
Representatives of home builders associations and builders them­
selves stress that while current sales are small by past standards, they
do appear to be on an improving trend, and this is encouraging.

Low

inventories were widely reported, a situation achieved by design due to
uncertainty.

One builder in metropolitan Kansas City notes, however, that

he is holding back on building at this time because some 1,500 newer
resale homes will be coming on the market soon due to the Richards-Gebaur
Air Base transfer.
The president of a Nebraska home builders association comments
that, while labor and materials costs have stabilized, "we builders worry
about what will happen once the economy gets going again".
Kansas City builder states:

A major

"We are quite optimistic about 1975, judging

from our activity and work load so far this year.

We realize it is early

in the year to predict, but that is really a plus for us in that conditions
are easing and we have most of the year to benefit from it."
Employment at the three automobile manufacturing plants in the
Kansas City area has improved significantly in the past two months.
Ford Claycomo plant has recently returned to full production.

The

While the

two General Motors plants continue to have workers on indefinite layoff,
this number is smaller than was the case in January.
Among department store retailers, sales have continued to soften
since January 1, although some strength has been seen in the past week.
Inventory levels now appear to be generally stabilized, with little need
seen to cut back further from current levels.

- 33 Although the prospects for the District's winter wheat crop
are still regarded as good, some concern is being expressed about the
very dry conditions that exist from central Kansas and Nebraska westward
into Colorado.

A continuing deterioration of farm prices could pose

serious financial problems for District farmers faced with steadily
advancing production costs.

During the past year, crop prices have

declined 14 percent while meat animal prices have fallen 28 percent.
A reversal of the present price trends is not likely in the near future,
according to current projections.

Production of most 1975 crops is

expected to exceed last year's levels, and livestock prices are expected
to remain in a depressed state during the coming months as the oversupply
of cattle is worked down.
A survey of large Tenth District banks reveals a further decline
in total loans outstanding during recent weeks.

This change contrasts

with an expected seasonal increase and is indicative of the weakness
reported in business and consumer loans.

The less than seasonal increase

in commercial and industrial loans is due, in part, to desired reductions
in inventories by firms which, in turn, also reduce new loan requests.
Consumer instalment credit continues to fall in response to increases
in unemployment and to postponement of durables purchases.

Nebraska banks,

however, report that automobile rebates have raised consumer loan demand
to a level comparable toa year earlier.

Farm and real estate loans are

relatively stable, with grain and fertilizer loans showing some growth
among Nebraska banks.

On the supply side, several banks stated that their

loan accommodations remain highly selective.
Deposits moved slightly upward over the last few weeks, with
strength in demand deposits and consumer time deposits offsetting weakness

- 34 ­

in large negotiable certificates of deposits (CDs).

The large inflow

of consumer-type time and savings deposits reported by many banks has
not reduced their efforts to solicit these deposits, which continue
to yield the maximum allowable rates.

Large negotiable CDs declined

sharply, as banks adjusted their offering rates relative to reduced
yields on most short-term financial assets.

A withdrawal of United

States Government demand deposits prompted several Oklahoma banks to
liquidate Treasury securities pledged against such deposits.

Many banks

that are experiencing a net inflow of deposits but a reduction in their
loan portfolios are taking the opportunity to augment their cash positions.

- 35 ELEVENTH DISTRICT- DALLAS

Savings and loan associations in the District report the rate of
net savings inflows, which quickened in the fourth quarter of 1974, has
continued to accelerate since the first of the year.

An influx of large

deposits--$100,000 and over--has accounted for a major portion of the in­
crease.

The cost of these funds, however, has been high.

As recently as

mid-February, large associations in the District were paying 8.5 percent
annually on large certificates of deposit (CDs).
costs have risen sharply.

As a result, portfolio

A large savings and loan association in Houston,

for example, reports CDs with rates over 7.25 percent comprise 60 percent of
their portfolio, or double that of a year ago.
With higher portfolio costs, lenders have been reluctant to reduce
mortgage rates, which now average more than 9 percent on conventional loans.
Some institutions, however, have reduced the number of points charged to
customers and have cut the charges of other services to stimulate loan demand.
Nevertheless, loan demand has continued weak.

Few new commitments

have been made this year, and inventories of new unsold homes in metropolitan
areas are still close to the peak levels of 1974.

Indicative of the continued

slump in residential building, housing starts in Texas are only slightly higher
than their lowest level last year.
Increased deposit inflows and the sluggish demand for mortgage loans
have left savings and loan associations flush with funds.

Concerned that another

round of disintermediation will result from the Treasury financing of the budget
deficit, lenders have increased their liquidity to unusually high levels.

In

addition, they have had ample funds to pay off much of the borrowing they under­
took in the period of disintermediation last year.

Several of the largest

- 36 ­
associations in the District report borrowings from commercial banks have been
completely repaid.

Moreover, other lenders are considering repaying borrowings

from the Federal Home Loan Bank early, even though a prepayment penalty would be
incurred.

With increased liquidity, savings and loan associations have increased

their participation in the Federal funds market.

In Houston, for example, several

savings and loan associations are selling Federal funds for the first time in
eighteen months.
Seasonally adjusted department store sales in the District have risen
since the first of the year, reversing a downward trend that began last summer.
Sales of big-ticket items, in particular, have moved well ahead of their sluggish
pace of recent months.

Retailers attribute much of the increase in sales to

promotional campaigns designed to reduce unusually high post-Christmas inventories.
According to a survey of the larger department stores in the District, most out­
lets have generally been successful in reducing stocks.

In fact, the regional

manager of one of the largest retail chains in the District says his inventories
are in excellent shape.
Attempts to run off inventories have led to a marked change in the
relationship between many retailers and their suppliers.

Faced with shortages

and rising prices during much of 1974, retailers generally accepted overshipments
and late arrivals without complaint.
penalty fees for such deliveries.

Now, however, they are charging suppliers

In addition, the controller of a big department

store in Houston says his store has recently received merchandise at bargain prices
from wholesalers that are anxious to lower their own inventories.

This has prompted

aggressive price cutting at the retail level--particularly by large national
chains--in an attempt to recover lost market shares.
Commercial banks in the District continue to pay maximum allowable
rates of interest on consumer-type time and savings deposits.

However, since

most banks already have relatively high liquidity positions, they are not

- 37 ­
aggressively seeking these types of deposits by advertising consumer savings
programs.

District bankers are generally opposed to lowering interest rates

on these deposits, since they expect money market rates to rebound after midyear.
Bankruptcies in the Eleventh District rose nearly 40 percent in 1974,
with much of the increase coming late in the year.

The rate of bankruptcies so

far in 1975 is about a tenth higher than last year's pace.

Business reorganizations

under Chapter 11 of The Bankruptcy Act are accounting for a growing number of
filings.

In Dallas and Houston, for example, nearly a third of the cases filed

in February were under Chapter 11, up from 10 percent in January.

According to

Federal district courts, much of the increase in filings has been by construction

firms.

- 38 TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors are looking to government for a restoration of
confidence in the economy and an indication of the long-run direction
that the economy will take.

The hardest hit industries in the current

recession continue to be construction, lumber, and transportation equip­
ment.

However, the directors connected with these industries are now

expressing the belief that the situation has stabilized, but they foresee
little change in employment over the next six months.

In the absence of

a very basic surge in demand, however, the outlook is for a rise in the
overall unemployment rate, as new entrants into the labor force are not
likely to be absorbed.

Many anticipate beneficial results for their

own businesses if the declining rate of inflation persists.
In manufacturing, the picture remains mixed, with energy- and
petroleum-related companies operating at high levels, while construction
materials and consumer goods producers are experiencing a decided but
decelerating decline in demand.

On the positive side, several directors

mentioned the intensity of petroleum exploration activity in their areas.
A director in charge of a broadcasting network reports that advertising
expenditures are higher than a year ago, and another director states
that demand for mobile homes is still good.
In many instances, such as lumber, residential housing, and
transportation equipment, activity appears to have stabilized, but at
very low levels.

Commercial aircraft orders are not expected to rise

substantially until a strong economic recovery is under way.

The Boeing

Company's optimistic forecast of February, when early 1975 sales exceeded
expectations, was based for the most part on foreign orders, and this

- 39 ­
source of strength has since waned.

The company is now making lower

projections on the basis of weaker domestic demand.

Automobile sales,

after being stimulated by the producer rebates, have again met with
consumer resistance, while in the area of nonresidential construction,
intensified competition is evident in a sharp rise in the number of
bids per project.
Agriculture, which has been one of the mainstays of the
Western economy, remains strong, but is beginning to develop some
weaknesses.

The potato crop, for which contracts were available at

$75 per ton in the spring of 1974, is now selling in the open market at
$20 per ton.

On the positive side, one director reports that, although

California dairy farmers have been in a loss position for the past
three months due to high grain and low beef prices, improvement may
now result from falling feed prices.

Reduced consumption of dairy

products, which this director claims is recession induced, however,
continues to affect the industry adversely.
In response to a specific question regarding business loan
expectations over the next six months, our banking directors leaned on
the side of optimism.

However, this is not attributable to a belief

that this six-month period will witness a sharp upswing in loan applica­
tions, but rather that such an upswing might occur toward the end of the
year.

Currently, retailers are working off inventory, and loan demand

is practically nil.

At the same time, one director states:

"We are

starting to see some home building in small tracts, and borrowing by
small timber operators for log inventory and some commercial
construction ... is active among the smaller custom manufacturing shops."
The larger corporations appear to be getting their liquidity positions

- 40 ­
in order and conceivably might unshelve some expansion project as soon
as the outlook is propitious.
In response to a related question, which asked whether the
volume of loan demand was dependent on interest rates, the replies
mostly were negative.

However, one response commented that "business

credit demands are sensitive to the behavior of interest rates, but
when rates are falling there is a general tendency to postpone borrowing
to await still lower rates.

When rates begin to turn up, it can be

expected that loan demand will pick up as well."

