CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 13, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 12
Fifth District-Richmond page 16
Sixth District-Atlanta page 19
Seventh District-Chicago page 23
Eighth District-St. Louis page 27
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 30
Tenth District-Kansas City page 34
Eleventh District-Dallas page 38
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 41

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.]

District reports generally suggest some recent moderation in the
pace of overall economic expansion as well as in the rate of inflation. For
the most part the manufacturing sector continues to expand but at what is
characterized as a sluggish, modest, or less vigorous rate. Retail sales
have been erratic in recent months but are apparently increasing at a
moderate rate over time. New automobiles are selling well in the Atlanta,
Chicago, and Minneapolis Districts. Current outlays for capital goods
have yet to improve significantly. New York and Cleveland, however, report
a pickup in capital goods orders. Construction of single-family housing is
showing strength in the Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas Districts and
remains firm in St. Louis' District despite some recent leveling off.
Other construction remains basically weak except in the Atlanta District.
The agricultural sector remains depressed, suffering from the recent drought,
soft commodity prices and erratic weather conditions. Most districts appear
to be experiencing some abatement of upward price pressures but price
expectations have not been affected uniformly. Soft demand, slower growth,
and excess capacity are causing downward revisions of some inflation forecasts.
On the other hand, New York, Cleveland, and Kansas City cite continued concern
over inflation among some businessmen, due to continuing cost pressures,
notably wage settlements in excess of productivity gains, rising energy
prices, and the higher costs of new plants.
Chicago, Richmond, Cleveland, and Atlanta report some recent pickup
in orders for machinery and electrical equipment. Primary metals producers

continue to experience sluggish demand although New York Directors expect
demand to strengthen in the near term. Manufacturing in the Philadelphia
District is generally expanding while San Francisco notes unexpectedly
strong orders for commercial aircraft, which has contributed to a leveling
off in the aerospace industry.
Retailers have been experiencing wide month-to-month variations
in sales, and September seems to have been a generally weak month except
in the Boston District and in the New York area where new-found strength
in consumer spending extended into early October. Expectations regarding
fourth quarter sales vary across districts but what is widely perceived as
erratic consumer behavior is apparently creating a mood of caution and
uncertainty among retailers. On a more positive note, Chicago reports that
sales of television sets are up significantly although still below expectations.
Sales of new automobiles seem to be proceeding well, with the strike having
only minor and scattered effects. Minneapolis and St. Louis report some
spot shortages, such as of full- and intermediate-sized cars. Tourism
appears relatively strong although some areas have yet to experience the
expected level of activity. Chicago reports consumers spending freely for
travel and entertainment.
Some strength appears to have developed in residential construction,
particularly in the Minneapolis, Chicago, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Dallas
Districts. But with the exception of Atlanta and Chicago the pickup seems
to be concentrated in single-family dwellings. Minneapolis reports that
housing unit authorizations have reached 1972 levels. Commercial and
industrial construction remains basically soft although Atlanta and Chicago
suggest some revival of interest in this area.

The overall level of business loan demand remains weak nationwide.
Kansas City, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Dallas report little sign of
renewed strength in business loan demand.

Richmond, on the other hand,

reports a healthy increase in loans during September.
lending does there seem to be consistent strength.

Only in agricultural

Dallas, Minneapolis,

and Kansas City point to particular strength in this sector, which they
attribute partly to producers holding commodities off of the markets.
News from the agricultural sector is generally gloomy, at least
from the standpoint of farmers.

Widespread drought and erratic rainfall

have been disruptive*causing reduced yields on many crops, while what are
perceived as low prices are discouraging farmers from marketing some crops
and livestock.

Kansas City in particular notes that the weakness in prices

of Tenth District agricultural products is putting producers in a precarious
financial position.

Specifically, low prices for wheat, rice, and cattle

are reported to be depressing factors.

Minneapolis expects the reduced

crop yields due to the drought and the depressed livestock industry to
adversely affect income.

Richmond District farmers, on the other hand,

have experienced an increase, although slight, in cash farm income.
There seems to be no general concern over supply or capacity constraints.
Boston foresees no problems other than perhaps in the lumber industry.

Chicago

mentions some lengthening of lead times for electrical components, and in the
St. Louis District a manufacturer of diesel engines is reportedly operating
at capacity and extending order backlogs•into next year.
The most commonly held view of future price developments is that
the inflation rate will decline further due to a moderation in demand.

Atlanta, New York, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Richmond all suggest expectations
of some further decline in the rate of price increases. New York, Cleveland,
and Kansas City, however, indicate continued concern over inflation. Continuing cost pressures deriving from imminent wage negotiations, rising
energy costs, and higher costs of plant expansion are cited by these
districts.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
The New England directors have noticed few changes in the trends of
business conditions during recent months. Except for lumber and some paper
products, most industries are experiencing modest rates of growth and no
industry (other than lumber) expects to encounter capacity shortage problems
for the foreseeable future. Retail sales have continued to surge and wane
while averaging moderate rates of growth.
Even though August retail sales were a major disappointment for
some stores, September was a very strong month. However, the gains in September only managed to offset the weak volume of previous months by a small
margin. One major retailing director reports that his average volume is
basically meeting his plan of 5-6 percent growth. He also' stresses that
the surges and slides in the sales figures have made retailers very uncertain
and cautious, since they see no clear trends emerging.
Banking directors, continue to report that business and commercial loan
demand is weak.

In spite of reports of price cutting and competition among

banks for loans, the New England directors are aware of only a few isolated
instances of loan offers tied to the Euro-dollar rate (very short-term, limited
commitments) or of reduced compensating balance requirements. According to
the directors, no bank loan offerings are currently subject to an interest
rate ceiling.
In general, capacity limitations are not thought to be a problem by
New England businessmen. Major manufacturers of electrical apparatus, appliances,
industrial thread and sewing products and steam generating equipment all reported
no significant increase in new orders over the last year. A director connected

with machine tooling notes that the close of machine tool shows has brought
more inquiries from prospective buyers but "no orders with signatures." Even
though the order backlogs are increasing for some suppliers of tools, executive
officers and directors seem to be restraining plant managers and delaying the
release of machine tool orders.
Lumber suppliers, defense contractors, fabricated metal manufacturers,
and newsprint suppliers have reported substantial increases in new orders over
last year. But, even though order backlogs are increasing, capacity is not a
major problem. None of the businesses contacted was having difficulty obtaining
materials, although a major thread producer thought a worldwide shortage of
cotton might occur and an appliance manufacturer was stockpiling copper in
anticipation of a strike. Most firms reported raw materials price increases.
The most commonly cited rates of increase were in the range of 5-10 percent.
The academic correspondents contacted this month—Professors
Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin—were unanimous in the view that the Federal
funds rate should be lowered 50 to 75 basis points.

"Not to do so," according

to Eckstein, "is to ignore all the evidence. The economic pickup

is based

entirely on theory; the momentum is just not there." With fiscal policy
paralyzed by the elections, the Fed alone can lean against the wind.
Samuelson stressed that a good "optimal control" policy would, based on
present evidence, lower rates now even if subsequent events should support
a reversal. Holding rates steady when demand is weak (and we don't know
just how weak) is a restrictive policy. Because inventories are in fairly
good balance, there is no danger of an uncontrollable downward spiral.
However, there is a danger that the mid-year slowdown will undermine the
hoped-for recovery in capital spending which is needed not only for purchasing

power but also for capital formation to avoid future shortages. Low capital
formation is the logical outcome of a system in which the central bank always
plays the lead role in curbing inflation. The inflation rate is not sensitive
to an acceleration in real growth to 5 or 6 percent. At this stage in the
business cycle, a sustained period of trend rate of growth is "a policy
scandal."
The market response to the Thursday afternoon reports has been
"comic." The market must learn how to handle a choppy series. Samuelson
suggested that the Chairman make clear to the Congress and the market that
the self-imposed monetary growth targets would not be allowed to stand in
the way of heading off a growth recession. This will pave the way for topof-range or above-target monetary growth if the economy deteriorates further.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
The continuing improvement in economic conditions in the Second
District appears to have been sustained in the face of the apparent slowing
in the pace of the nationwide recovery, judging from comments of directors
and other business leaders who were contacted recently. The strengthening
in retail sales in New York City has carried into early October and appears
to have spread into other parts of the region. While capital spending
continued to lag, there are scattered reports of a pickup. The rate of
joblessness in the region appears to have stabilized and the gap between
the regional and national unemployment rates has narrowed. On the outlook
for prices, respondents generally felt that inflation was moderating gradually
and that the recent resistance to attempted price increases would help temper
the future inflation. Nonetheless, many remained concerned over the prospects
of mounting cost pressures.
Consumer spending in New York City appears to have retained its newfound strength. While for most of the year, New York City merchandising has
been a weak spot for many national retail chains, that situation seems to
have changed in recent months. The vice president of a national department
store chain reported that the increase in September sales for New York
exceeded that chain-wide average and that, while sales in the rest of the
country showed signs of a weakening in early October, sales in New York
City remained strong. According to a City department store executive, sales
were strong in September and were better than expected in early October. The
pickup in consumer buying appears to have spread outside of New York City as
well. The directors of the Buffalo Branch detected a modest improvement in

department store sales in September. Part of this impetus in the recovery
in consumer buying may have been due to growing acceptance of Sunday openings.
The head of a large department store chain in the Buffalo area noted a marked
improvement in sales of the final weeks of September, which he attributed
to the success of recent Sunday openings. He expects Sunday openings to
become a way of life in the Buffalo area. In New Jersey, a trade association
official noted that, although new car sales continued to be more sluggish than
nationwide, automobile dealers were generally optimistic about the future.
He also commented that sales apparently had been unaffected by the Ford strike.
Capital spending in the District continues to lag, but there has
been scattered evidence of a pickup. The president of a company producing
petroleum and building equipment expected his firm's capital outlays, which
were up 50 percent this year, to double next year. The president of a manufacturing company was also optimistic concerning plans to augment capacity,
stating that his firm would be emphasizing machinery and tools rather than
additions to plant. On the other hand, the vice president of a mining concern
did not feel that his company would increase capital spending before early 1977,
and the president of a maritime corporation stated that his company planned
to purchase fewer new ships this year than usual.
Production of capital goods in the District continues to lag.
A national manufacturer of industrial machinery announced a 2 percent
reduction in its work force. At the same time, a major steel producer in
western New York announced layoff plans in conjunction with the closing of
relatively inefficient blast furnace facilities. Directors of the Buffalo
Branch, however, expected the near-term prospects for new orders, production,

and employment in steel and other heavy industries in western New York to
be strong. One director, whose firm is a mgjor purchaser of steel, contended
that press reports were misleading in conveying the impression that recent
cutbacks in steel production reflected weak demand. Rather, in his view,
they were primarily attributable to a spreading out of existing orders to
achieve more efficient production.
While the recovery in the region's economy since the trough of the
recession has still not matched the national recovery, there have been some
encouraging signs in the employment situation of late. The seasonally
adjusted unemployment rates of both New York City and State held steady
from June to August despite an increase in the national rate. Furthermore,
in recent months the slide in the City's private employment appears to be
coming to a halt. Indeed, for the New York-New Jersey metropolitan area,
private employment increased in July for the first gain in almost three years.
On the outlook for price increases, a majority of respondents
expected inflation to diminish slowly in coming months. The president of
a national retail store chain thought the recent sluggishness of the economy
would have a moderating influence on prices—both materials prices and
product prices. Consistent with this view, the chief economist for a paper
company stated that prices of his firm's products had "softened" recently,
and the vice president of a company dealing in minerals said that demand
conditions had not allowed cost Increases to be passed on. The chairman of
a major New York City bank felt that the recent resistance to attempted price
increases was encouraging and a healthy development in helping to assure the
continuation of the economic expansion. Other respondents echoed this view
and generally felt that there was little danger of a return to double-digit

inflation. The president of an international oil firm expected industrial
prices to increase 5 to 6 percent over the coming year. The Buffalo
directors expected prices of industrial materials to rise about 6 to 8
percent during the next six to nine months.
Although there was a consensus that inflation was likely to diminish,
strong cost pressures remained a matter of concern to a number of respondents.
One director expected major wage settlements to continue in the neighborhood
of 10 percent. A senior economist of a major manufacturer also thought that
the momentum for large wage increases still remained.

Indeed, he felt that

wage increases might become larger as certain groups of workers sought to
regain their relative positions in the wage structure. Because this economist
felt that the bulk of cyclical productivity gains had been exhausted, he
expected upward pressures on prices to remain strong, with prices-rising by
a minimum of 6 percent in 1977. On the other hand, the president of a major
chemical firm anticipated that employees would become less aggressive in
their wage demands. As a result, wage settlements would moderate slightly,
perhaps to a rate of 8-1/2 percent. An investment banking economist felt
that price expectations would wind down, causing wage pressures to moderate.
The president of a retail store gave another reason for wage moderation. He
expected that businessmen would toughen their bargaining stances as they
experienced difficulty in raising prices.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Business conditions in the Third District are improving, but the
pace of improvement is somewhat sluggish. Retail sales are only slightly
above the same period last year, and while the manufacturing sector is
expanding, job growth is at a standstill. New orders and shipments in
manufacturing are higher this month, while inventories along with work forces
are unchanged. The longer term outlook in manufacturing remains optimistic,
and retailers are hoping for a healthy fourth quarter. Reports of higher
prices for finished products in manufacturing are less widespread than in
September. Businessmen indicate that their outlook for inflation over the
next three quarters has not changed within the last few months. They still
expect the current rate to continue through the second quarter of next year.
Bankers report that business loan demand remains weak, and they foresee no
pickup in the near future. As a result they face growing pressure to ease
their lending terms and are gradually lengthening the maturity of their
government securities portfolios.
District manufacturers, responding to this month's business outlook
survey, report a somewhat higher level of economic activity than last month.
New orders and shipments are higher this month, and the factory workweek has
been lengthened as well. However, inventories and jobs are unchanged for the
second month in a row. While inventories declined on balance during the
summer, the sluggishness in employment comes on the heels of monthly job
gains in the April-August period.
The outlook in manufacturing for the next six months is for additional
expansion. Of the executives polled, 3 out of 5 look for better business

conditions over the next two quarters.

Increases are projected in new orders

and shipments, and the employment picture is expected to brighten as well.
A longer factory workweek is anticipated by 20 percent of the respondents
and 40 percent plan to hire additional workers—up from last month. At the
same time, one-half of the manufacturers surveyed plan to hike their spending
for plant and equipment over the period while one-tenth expect capital
expenditures to be lower by next April. This "net increase" is about the
same as last month. The only major indicator not projected to increase over
the longer term is inventories which are expected to be unchanged from
present levels.
With respect to prices, 50 percent of the respondents indicate paying
higher prices for their supplies—about the same as in September.

At the same

time, 20 percent report price hikes for their finished products. This is down
from last month when 30 percent were reporting increases. By April, 8 out
of 10 expect to be paying more for their inputs, and 7 out of 10 anticipate
higher prices for the products they sell.
The question of inflationary expectations was explored with several
retailers, bankers, and manufacturing executives. All of those surveyed
expect the current rate of inflation to continue through the first half of
next year. In addition, all but one of those questioned indicate that these
expectations are unchanged from a few months ago. One banker has lowered his
forecast of the inflation rate for the next three quarters. Seven weeks ago
this executive expected prices to be climbing at a somewhat higher rate over
the period in question. Now, however, "As a result of the continued pause in
the recovery," he looks for the rate of inflation to stay flat through the
first half of 1977.

Area retailers report that current dollar sales are running only
1-2 percent above the same period last year. This performance is several
percentage points below their expectations. One merchant says that furniture,
floor coverings, and major appliances are selling well, while most of those
contacted single out men's and women's apparel as being relatively weak.
Retailers express mixed views about the rest of this year. The highest forecast is for a fourth quarter gain over last year of 12 percent, but some of
this will be the result of an additional branch store which has been in
operation for only a few months. Another merchant, as a result of the soft
third quarter, is scaling down his projections for the last quarter of the
year. He notes that, "I'm still looking for a small improvement over last
year, but this, is a very 'iffy' guess."
Bankers in the area report that the loan picture is little changed
from previous months. While consumer loans are reported to be more or less
steady, business loan volume is labeled as "very very sluggish" and "worse
than flat." Bankers indicate that the pressure on them from potential
borrowers to ease up on loan conditions is continuing. Interest rates,
credit line fees, and compensating balances are all reported to be slipping
"modestly." This applies especially to balances, which bankers indicate, "are
not being watched very closely."
For the longer term, business loan demand is expected to remain weak.
One banker sees no pickup in business borrowing until spring at the earliest.
At the same time, the pressure to ease conditions on loans is expected to
intensify over the next few months. The outlook for interest rates is for
continued softness into 1977 with some possibility of a further drop in
the prime rate before year-end '76. Bankers report that the maturity

structure of their government security holdings is lengthening somewhat,
but they expect to be liquid enough to meet increased loan demand when it
materializes. One financial executive, however, voices some concern over
the longer maturities, noting that, "our expectations have been wrong
before."

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Economists who met to discuss the economic outlook at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland on October 1 were optimistic that the expansion
would continue through 1977 and the rate of unemployment would improve
gradually. However, they forecast the rate of inflation to step up
somewhat from 1976. Capital spending is forecast as a major source of
strength in 1977, although no boom is expected. Steel operations are not
expected to pick up from recent levels until next quarter. With few
exceptions, there is no indication of shortages nor are any expected at
least through 1977, unless the economy grows faster than the standard
forecast Indicates. Upward price pressures remain strong.
Twenty-eight economists who met' at this Bank expect the expansion
to last through 1977. Not one of the group expects real GNP to decline in
any quarter next year. Forecasts of gains in real GNP for 1977 ranged from
4.5 percent to 6.5 percent, with a median of 5.1 percent: The group was not
particularly concerned about relatively sluggish performance in recent
economic activity, nor did they point to any excesses that might contribute
to a slowdown in 1977.
The most optimistic of the group expect larger gains next year
than in 1976 in both consumer spending and capital spending to support an
increase in real GNP in 1977 of about 6 percent. In contrast, the less
optimistic expect gains in consumer spending next year to be somewhat less
than estimated for 1976. New car sales, for example, are expected to rise
nearly 8 percent, following a 20 percent gain in 1976.

The economists are counting heavily on capital spending as a
major source of strength in 1977. Even the least optimistic expect gains
in nonresidential fixed investment of about 13 percent from 1976, with the
median at 16 percent. According to an economist associated with a large
machine tool builder, the current mild recovery in capital spending
reflects the fact that the drop during the latest recession was neither
as severe nor as long as some other contractions in spending since World
War II. His firm's orders for machine tools rose sharply in the last
two months, continuing a V-shaped recovery from depressed levels in early
1975. Orders from automotive producers account for much of the recent
spurt. Another economist with a major capital goods producer reported
that demand for some types of capital goods, including motors and generators,
has rebounded sharply in recent months, but that demand from electric
utilities and for new plant construction remains weak. According to his
estimates, real spending by the electric utility industry for generating
capacity is unlikely to match 1970-1971 expenditures until the early 1980's,
because an estimated 35 percent of the industries' capacity is idle, and
because long-range projections of electric power consumption have been scaled
down. Plant expansion also is being dampened by environmental regulations
that lengthen lead times and by high costs that hold the return on investment
on new plants lower than for existing facilities. His firm has no plans
for new plant construction but will accelerate spending for modernization
and replacement in 1977. A bank economist estimates there should be ample
funds to finance capital spending, reflecting further improvement in corporate
cash flow and new sources of lending by life insurance companies and foreign
banks.

Steel economists have scaled down their estimates of steel shipments and production for this quarter but expect production next year will
be about 10 percent higher than in 1976* They are depending on acceleration
in capital spending and some inventory building to boost production. Industry
plans to add upward of 20 million tons of capacity over the next few years
are apparently being held in abeyance because of environmental regulations,
high costs of new plants, lower return of new investment, and inadequate
prices to finance new plants. One economist expressed the view that the
spot shortages that might surface in 1977 can apparently be accommodated
with foreign steel.
Various industry sources indicate they do not expect shortages to
reappear in 1977. One economist reported that projected gains in real GNP
of 4 to 5 percent for 1977 do not imply bottlenecks in supplies, although
some spot problems may surface, especially for some chemicals. Utilization
of capacity in materials-producing industries is projected to Increase to
about 86 percent by year-end 1977, compared with 80 percent last quarter and
a high of 93 percent in 1973. If the economy were to expand at a 6 percent
or higher rate in 1977, bottlenecks might appear in some other industries,
including steel, aluminum, and paper. A financial officer with a petrochemical firm confirmed tightening in demand for some chemicals. Demand for
flat-rolled steel products, which were informally allocated by some steel
producers last spring, fell sharply during summer months, and these products
are no longer considered in tight supply. Production in the steel industry,
which fell to about 80 percent of capacity last month, continued to ease in
early October.
There is little evidence of relaxation in upward price pressures.
Preliminary results from a limited sample of this Bank's monthly survey of

manufacturers show nearly 70 percent of respondents expect price increases
in October, as was the case during the summer months. Need for higher prices
to finance high costs of new plants, a continued rise in energy costs, and
management worry over some type of wage-price guidelines seem to be the most
frequently cited reasons. An executive with a fastener producer noted weak
demand and heavy imports have prevented a price increase since August 1974,
but his company hopes to raise prices for some lines late this year or early
next year. One steel source expects that the industry will again seek to
raise prices for sheet steel in December or January as consumer inventories
are brought down to desired levels. He noted that although scrap prices have
declined substantially in recent months, prices of iron-ore, transportation,
natural gas, and oil continue upward.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Responses to our October survey of Fifth District business conditions
suggest continued sluggishness in demand at both the retail and the manufacturing levels. Although shipments by District manufacturers increased
in September, the volume of new orders remained soft and backlogs of orders
declined somewhat. Manufacturers' inventories are still apparently above
desired levels, although stocks of materials declined slightly. Manufacturers'
responses showed the first signs of weakness in employment since spring.
Retailers reported sales as steady but with big ticket items continuing
to move slowly. Inventories at retail continued to expand in September.
There is some evidence that price pressures may be abating. Increases
were less widespread in September than in most recent months and respondents
in a follow-up to our regular survey cited relatively low capacity utilization,
growing inventories, and continuing weakness of demand as reasons to expect
greater price stability over the next three to six months than in the recent
past. With only a few isolated exceptions respondents anticipate no difficulties
in obtaining supplies or in meeting orders. In line with recent developments
in business conditions, there seems to have been some downward revision of
respondents' expectations for the level of activity over the next six months,
although the general tone of those expectations remains positive.
Of manufacturers responding to our latest survey, over one-third
report an Increase in the level of shipments during September and nearly
one-half noted no change from August. With respect to the volume of new
orders, however, only 28 percent reported increases, slightly fewer than
reported declines. Over 20 percent indicated declines in employment and a

comparable number reported reduced weekly hours. Despite virtually no change
in finished goods inventories and a slight decline in stocks of materials,
the proportion of manufacturers viewing current inventory levels as
excessive was somewhat larger this month than last. The view that current
plant and equipment capacity is excessive remains widely held but few
respondents indicate any inclination to alter current expansion plans.
The fraction of manufacturing respondents expecting business to improve
over the next six months declined slightly in our latest survey but about
45 percent still expect some improvement, while another 45 percent expect
the general level of business to remain unchanged.
Among individual industries, producers of consumer goods, particularly
apparel and furniture, seem to have accounted for much of the slowing in
activity. Primary metals producers also apparently have experienced some
slowdown, but producers of machinery and equipment, electrical equipment,
and chemicals continue to report some improvement.
At the retail level respondents once again noted a weakening in
sales of big ticket items but overall sales apparently held at almost the
August level. Inventories expanded further in September and remain somewhat
above desired levels. Retail price increases were also less widespread than
in recent months.
Responding to a brief follow-up survey concerning price expectations,
a small sample of our respondents expressed general agreement that prices
should show little change or remain flat over the short-term future. Such
reasons as generally soft demand, the failure of earlier optimistic expectations to be met, stability of materials costs, and growing inventories in
many sectors were cited as explanations for this view. One respondent

expressed great hesitancy to comment on the future of prices because of
what he called a most confused market, with prices for some lines remaining
quite strong and others showing considerable weakness.
Our survey of District banks suggests some healthy increases in
loans over the past month, particularly business loans but also in the
consumer and real estate areas. Much of the strength in business loans
seems to have originated among wholesalers, commodity dealers, and public
utilities.
With the sharp decline in crop receipts through the first seven
months of the year, the District's total cash farm income has registered only
a slight increase over a year earlier. But with the marketing of the fallharvested crops, this situation could improve significantly. Both soybean
and cotton prices are higher than last year, while flue-cured tobacco prices
are at record levels, 14 percent above a year ago.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Deceleration occurred in the stronger sectors of the Southeast's
economy, but the lost momentum is considered temporary. The outlook for
moderate prices of lumber and wood products has become more favorable.
However, curtailment of natural gas supplies and increased rates for natural
gas and electricity are creating upward price pressures. Retail sales, with
the exception of new automobiles, flattened in August and September. Tourist
traffic, although still strong in some areas, has also been disappointing.
Offsetting these weaknesses, some improvement has occurred in portions of
the construction and real estate sector. Diverse indicators of general
business conditions, on balance, suggest an uptrend in economic activity.
Several developments affecting the outlook for prices have been
reported by directors. Demand for lumber has decreased by more than normal
for the season and prices have declined. Concern has been expressed in
previous reports about the effect on prices of lumber and wood products of
legislation restricting clear-cutting in national forests. Prospects now
appear good that Congress will produce "an acceptable piece of legislation."
Several energy-related developments also have potential price effects.
Electrical utilities are pressing for sizable rate increases. The recent
action by the Federal Power Commission raising the wellhead price for natural
gas takes effect in Tennessee during late October. Customer rates will increase
from 17 to 21 percent. Nevertheless, curtailments of gas supplies to
industrial users are expected to amount to 24 percent of requirements. These
curtailments will necessitate substitution of alternative fuels such as propane
and liquefied natural gas which are much more expensive and more hazardous to

handle. Furthermore, delivery problems resulting from limited railway tank
car and barge capacity may complicate the problem of obtaining adequate,
reliable supplies. Finally, the Tennessee Valley Authority is investigating
new methods of burning high-sulfur coal in steam-powered generating plants.
This research may permit Tennessee to rely more heavily on coal deposits
located within the state.
At the retail level, department stores are expected to emphasize
seasonal promotions during October in an effort to boost lagging sales
increases; price concessions are anticipated.

Sales of new car models

are proceeding without any evidence of resistance to the higher prices.
Within the construction and real estate sector, some further
brightening is occurring in Southeastern condominium markets. Several
reports have been received that unfinished, apparently abandoned projects
have been revived, completed, and placed on the market. In the Atlanta area,
units in such projects have been sold at public auction. Some unsold projects
are being rented. But, despite the declining overhang of unsold units, the
condominium market remains soft in Florida, Tennessee, and the Atlanta area.
"No-frills" housing is being constructed in parts of the District.
Invest Florida, substantial numbers of standardized, inexpensive units have
been built. This approach has also been followed in Alabama but has not been
well received. Apartment construction is becoming increasingly attractive
in several areas. Occupancy rates are rising in parts of Alabama and
Tennessee. New construction is beginning or is receiving serious consideration.
But, in central Florida, the only effect of Increased occupancy has been to
end a price war.
Renewed interest has also developed in warehouse and shopping center
construction. A permit for foundation work has been issued in Mississippi

for a large regional shopping mall; plans for additional commercial construction projects have been submitted for approval in several Alabama cities.
Government construction remains a strong point, with a new state capitol
building under construction in Florida, and planning is under way for a
new convention center and hotel complex in Orlando, Florida. In Louisiana,
the Red River Navigation Project is receiving annual funding of about
$100 million.
Unfortunately, the improved outlook in real estate and construction
is offset by some weaknesses in retail sales and tourism. Although sales of
new automobile models appear to be consistently strong, according to initial
reports, general merchandise retailers indicate that sales flattened or
became sluggish in September. However, according to most reports, retailers
retain highly positive expectations for the upcoming holiday season. Inventories
appear to be well in line. However, many retailers are stressing seasonal
promotions in an effort to stimulate sales.
In view of these mixed results, a report from a Florida boat manufacturer is informative. A 25 percent increase in sales volume compared to
last year is attributed to higher unit cost as much as to higher unit volume.
Larger and higher quality units are being purchased, while less expensive
units are difficult to sell. This observation is consistent with recent
findings of a disparity in consumer confidence between higher income
consumers and low- to moderate-income individuals.
Tourist activity presents a varied impression. A south Florida
director feels that Miami is increasingly by-passed by tourists in favor of
central Florida and the Caribbean. Occupancy rates in Miami are down. Some
softness is also apparent in central Florida, although certain attractions

continue to record gains.. Northeastern Florida tourism has turned up again
after a period of declines. Tourist traffic is at record levels in Tennessee,
both at Opryland and in the Great Smoky Mountain National Park.
Finally, an array of indicators of general business conditions appeared
in this month's directors' reports. In Alabama, sales of energy-saving building
products such as double-paned windows have risen. In addition, engine and
stand-by generator sales are strong, reflecting increases in public construction projects such as hospitals. Mining equipment sales are also good.
However, declining sales of lift trucks are interpreted as a reflection of a
general slowing of the economy as a consequence of their widespread usage.
Cargo transported into Florida by trucks has risen 21 percent, year to date,
reaching its highest point since late 1973. Truck leasing and rental, after
a steady 20-month decline, have risen rapidly in the last 60 days. The
reversal is regarded as evidence that consumption is increasing, necessitating
increased shipments to maintain a steady flow of goods. Increased truck
usage by firms engaged in building trades, redistribution of wholesale hard
goods, and fertilizer and chemicals is noted. Increasing TVA power sales
to industry, following a lengthy decline, indicate increasing industrial
activity in Tennessee.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
The past month has produced no solid evidence from Seventh District
sources that the tone of less vigorous growth and general caution reported
in previous months will soon change, either for better or worse. There are
no problems with shortages either currently or anticipated in the near
future. Expectations of a near-term acceleration in price inflation for
manufactured goods have moderated. Large retailers report good levels
of sales, but somewhat less than had been anticipated. Demand for capital
goods, overall, has not improved significantly with increases in some lines
about balancing declines in others. The single-family housing boom continues, but prospective increases in other types of construction are
relatively moderate. The supply of loanable funds remains ample in all
sectors. Although it is commonly asserted that the November elections
"will not change anything," many observers believe that uncertainties
related to a possible change in the political environment are partly
responsible for caution in executive decision making.
Chicago area purchasing managers' report for September shows somewhat higher rates of increase for new orders, output, and backlogs. Slightly
over half of the group expects better business activity in the fourth quarter,
compared to the third quarter, against only 9 percent who see a decline. For
the first quarter of 1977, 70 percent expect an improvement, while 10 percent
see a decline. The proportion reporting higher prices paid dropped to 53 percent in September, about the same as a year ago, but down from 75 percent in
both July and August. However, the proportion reporting lower prices paid
has been virtually zero for the past twelve months.

Although price increases continue, most boosts are smaller than
expected and others are being delayed awaiting stronger markets. Steel
producers, having canceled the boost for sheet scheduled for October 1,
are anxious to please customers with promises of quick delivery and improved
quality and service. Paper companies report similar conditions. The main
products for which lead times have lengthened significantly recently are
various electrical components, but no one speaks of shortages. Some concern
had existed several months ago as to the availability of ferrous and nonferrous castings, but a diversified independent foundry says "when do you
want it?" A very large general merchandiser expects prices paid and
received for consumer goods to average 4 percent higher in 1976 and sees
a 4.2 percent average rise for 1977.
The Increase in retail sales from year-ago in most Seventh District
areas seems to be about in line with the rise in disposable income. Purchases
of motor vehicles continue strong with only a minor loss thus far because of
the Ford strike. One Chicago area lender has begun to advertise 48-month
car loans, but most banks have held to 36 months, except for very good
risks. Consumer credit experience has been favorable. Television sales
are up significantly this year, but not as much as expected, and Japanese
imports are taking a larger share of the market. Another Seventh District
TV producer recently was acquired by Japanese interests.
Consumers continue to spend freely for travel and entertainment.
A major airline reports the increase in air travel to be above expectations,
with trips to Hawaii near capacity. A large amusement park, which opened
north of Chicago in late spring, started slow, but now expects two million

guests this year. Outlays per family average at least $50, with many
waiting out long lines.
Exhibitors of the international machine tool show held in Chicago
in mid-September gave mixed reports on business generated. There was great
interest in new labor-saving machines. For example, some machine tools now
can operate for two days unattended. Wisconsin producers of large machine
tools say that orders for big units are "beginning to move." Several companies see a gain of about 20 percent in orders for 1977 with a marked
improvement already underway.
Demand for large earth-moving equipment continues to lag badly, and
one producer has just reported a layoff. However, this company is stepping
up production of front end loaders, mainly smaller units, which had been
cut back.
Slow demand for producer equipment in general is the main factor
causing steel producers to reduce forecasts of consumption. Various
reports from architects, engineering firms, contractors, and zoning
authorities indicate some revival In nonresidential construction activity,
but mainly for smaller projects.
Apartment building permits granted in the Chicago area are running
far above last year, but are only a fraction of the level of the early 1970fs.
Lenders are much more cautious than a few years ago and some overhang of vacant
units remains, but, most important, current rentals do not justify most plans
offered by promoters.
A major airline has placed a substantial order for new B727-200's
to replace older DC 8's. This order was not expected to be placed so soon.

Traffic has improved, but the major factor is lower fuel consumption by the
new aircraft. One railroad has placed a substantial order for locomotives
and freight cars with District producers, but railroad capital spending,
overall, is still far below the levels required to maintain the systems
properly.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Business conditions in the Eighth District continue to improve
somewhat, although the rate of expansion has been at a slower pace in recent
weeks than in the first half of the year. Businessmen generally remain
optimistic as to economic activity through next year. Their views on
future price movements, however, were mixed ranging from moderation to
some acceleration in the inflation rate next year. Retailers reported
that sales volume has been unchanged, on balance, in recent weeks from midyear levels. Most manufacturing firms noted a slower growth rate of orders
through the summer which has continued in recent weeks. While housing construction has made substantial gains this year, this industry has tended to
level off recently. Harvesting of crops is well underway in the District.
Yields are generally below average due to the damage inflicted by drought,
but in some areas are good.
Businessmen were asked in this month's interviews about their
expectation of future price increases for the rest of this year and for
1977. Responses indicated that for the rest of 1976 price increases will
be more moderate than that of recent months. Most firms noted that their
own prices had been increased earlier in the year. No clear consensus
emerged from the responses concerning inflation next year. Those who were
pessimistic pointed to the recent wage settlements which they considered
too high to be offset by productivity gains and to the tendency for
excessive government spending. Those viewing inflation as likely to slow
next year pointed to continued excess capacity, the slower rate of economic
gains in recent months and the moderate rate of monetary growth. Business-

men generally report a more cautious expansion than in the 1972-73 recovery
which is viewed as an important factor in achieving an orderly transition
to stable prices.
Retail sales have registered little or no gain in recent months.
Retailers noted that sales during the back-to-school period were good, but
sales subsequently fell back to the previous level. Despite this lull in
sales, retailers generally expect sales gains later this year. Automobile
sales apparently suffered recently in some areas from a lack of car
Inventories.
Manufacturing activity apparently leveled off during the past
month. A chemical industry representative reported that business was
steady in the third quarter after substantial gains in the first two
quarters of the year. A major appliance manufacturer reported that sales
of appliances are approximately 3 percent ahead of a year ago, but that
sales gains in recent weeks have been slower than expected. Nevertheless,
a 10 percent increase in sales and production is expected in 1977. Paper
and steel manufacturers reported slower increases in business in recent
months than earlier in the year. A paint and coating firm noted some
pickup in demand in August and September, but not as much as had been
expected earlier. On the other hand, a manufacturer of diesel engines
reported operations at full capacity and order backlogs well into next
year. This firm is now planning further capital expansion.
Housing activity in single-family construction, after making
sizable gains throughout the District in 1975 and 1976, has apparently
leveled off. Apartment construction is picking up slightly in various
parts of the District, but remains relatively low compared with 1972 and

1973. Commercial and industrial construction continues rather sluggish.
One contractor noted that major retail chains are planning expansion for
1978 through 1980 but are contemplating little expansion next year.
Demand for commercial and industrial loans has remained unchanged
in the past two months and interest rates have declined somewhat according
to local bankers. One reason given for the low loan demand by business is
that corporate treasurers are underpaying corporate taxes and thus have
more funds for financing inventories. One banker expects loan demand to
rise in the near future, and the increase to be observed first in small
communities. Savings and loan associations report sizable gains in deposits
during recent months. Liquid investments are substantially above last year
and borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Banks are down considerably.
Interest rates on home mortgages in the St. Louis area, however, remain
unchanged in the past month.
Crop harvesting appears to be ahead of schedule in most of the
District reflecting favorable harvesting weather. Yields are generally
below average in the western portion of the District, while generally good
in the eastern portion. Cotton yields are likewise mixed depending on the
location. Rice yields are good to excellent in Arkansas but prices are
relatively low. Reports indicate that land prices are continuing to rise
rapidly in parts of the District. Recent farm land sales in parts of
Illinois have been reported at prices up to $3,500 per acre and cash rents
at $125 per acre.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
The dominant economic event in the Ninth District continues to
be the drought and its impact on the region's business activity. Reduced
crop yields and a depressed livestock industry are manifestations of this
situation, and concern now centers on their impact on income in late 1976
and into 1977. In contrast to agricultural developments, however, some
strengthening is evident in other sectors of the region's economy. District
retailers report some pickup in sales while auto sales and the tourist
business continue to be good. District home building has been quite strong
this year. With regard to price expectations, District firms do not foresee
any excessive inflationary pressures developing and many Indicate demand is
not yet strong enough to justify large price increases.
The drought has affected the District economy in several ways.
The most obvious is reduced yields on many crops, especially corn and soybeans.
Though the District wheat crop was quite good, dry weather has impaired river
navigation and some difficulty is being experienced in shipping wheat from
this region. In addition, the drought has increased livestock marketings and
this has helped push livestock prices well below year-earlier levels. Also,
the drought conditions are currently retarding seeding of winter wheat, and
if top soil moisture is not replenished this winter and next spring, reduced
yields are likely again next year. Drought-induced shortages in cash farm
receipts throughout the remainder of the year and into 1977 will hold down
District personal income growth and restrict District business activity. In
response to this situation, loans at District ag banks, Federal land banks,

and production credit associations have already increased. However, bank
liquidity is not yet a problem, though some lenders were voicing concern
about loan repayments.
Retail sales were disappointing last quarter, with summer and
back-to-school business below expectations. Nevertheless, business in this
region was reported to be better than in many other parts of the country.
More recently though, District retailers surveyed by this Bank stated that
business has begun to improve, and they are quite optimistic about the
outlook for fall and the holiday season* Although some unwanted inventory
accumulation occurred this summer as sales slackened, retailers are generally satisfied with current inventory levels and are cautious about
building inventories for the Christmas season.
District auto sales have been rising about in line with national
sales increases. Full- and Intermediate-sized autos are In particularly
short supply in this area, although demand for these sizes has moderated
slightly over the last quarter. Ford and Lincoln/Mercury dealers so far
have had no problems satisfying consumer demands, despite the strike.
It was a good sunnier for the tourist business. Large resort
owners throughout the District had a very profitable summer, with most
reporting an increase in vacation traffic. However, the closing of this
fall's hunting and fishing seasons in northern Minnesota, due to dryness
and fire danger, is expected to significantly decrease that area's tourist
and recreational spending.
Home building in the District has been particularly strong. Although
residential building permits for the year are only 7 percent above 1975
compared to the 30 percent national growth, the District's decline in 1973-

75 was not nearly as severe as the nation's. As a result, District housing
unit authorizations are back to the 1972 rates, whereas the nation is still
running 30 percent behind its 1972 pace. Availability of mortgage funds for
private housing is good, loan commitments are at a high level, and liquidity
at financial institutions is above year-earlier levels.
Home building may be showing strength, but other construction
activity is weak. In dollar terms, both nonresidential and nonbullding
contract awards are off significantly from last year in the District.
Although prices are expected to continue climbing, District firms
responding to a special survey do not foresee excessive price increases
either for the goods they purchase or the products they sell. An economist
for one major retailer headquartered In the Twin Cities indicated that his
firm's prices on merchandise purchases have been quite stable and expects
his firm to increase their prices about 5-172 to 6 percent next year.
Another Twin City-based retailer's economist believes retail prices won't
increase significantly until demand becomes firmer.
Two construction firms report moderate increases for most material
costs, except for lumber and plywood, and don't look for that trend in price
increases to change.
Most manufacturing prices are stable. Weak demand was holding price
increases down for an apparel manufacturer and a major paper products manufacturer in our District. Also, three manufacturers of communication and
computer equipment do not foresee excessive price Increases. However, a
publishing firm did indicate a steady increase in paper costs.

An area food producer said milk prices have dropped and expected
them to stay low. Only seasonal increases are foreseen for poultry and
eggs; however, some Increase is foreseen in beef and pork prices by the
end of the year.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
In light of a series of negative economic indicators, some Tenth
District directors are expressing uncertainty about the strength of the
recovery. Concern about inflation is also widespread, but inflationary
pressures appear to be abating somewhat. The weakness in prices for District
agricultural products, however, especially for cattle and wheat, has put many
producers in a precarious financial position. Loan demand at savings and loan
institutions for single-family houses remains strong, but business loan demand
at commercial banks has shown little sign of renewed strength.
Nonbank directors surveyed expressed uncertainty over the strength
of the recovery. Although the likelihood of a slump was viewed as slight,
the recent collection of negative indicators has generated uneasiness in certain
management groups. One respondent suggested that we might be experiencing a
pre-election pause, with consumers and businessmen holding off spending until
a clearer picture of the economic course that will be followed is available.
Respondents generally viewed their local economies as in good shape, with
most sectors up moderately. The situation in agriculture and ranching, however, was said to be very grim, with cattlefeeders losing $100 to $125 per
head and some wheat farmers unwilling to sell their wheat but also unable
to borrow any more money on it.
Inflation remains a major concern of several of the directors, who
expect the CFI to increase from 5 to 7 percent during 1977. Price expectations
reported by purchasing agents for several area companies, however, were varied.
A steel warehouse and service center reported that most steel items are
readily available, that it is "definitely a buyer's market," and that there

have been real efforts at stimulating demand with price cuts from the mills.
"Retail prices shouldn't go up significantly until something happens at our
end and I just don't see anything on the horizon to change things," he noted.
A lumber company reported that "prices have leveled off at a high note" and
will continue there unless demand softens in the housing area. A major
purchaser of paper goods identified two different markets:

that for coated

paper (as in brochures), which is strong, and that for uncoated paper, which
is "soft." In the uncoated market, no more price increases are expected this
year and an 8 percent rise is expected for 1977. Coated paper, however, may
rise an additional 5 percent in 1976 and then 12 percent in 1977. Finally,
a major purchaser of materials for chemical containers expects another 5 to
6 percent tacked on to its paper and steel purchases in the next few months.
District bankers are expressing deep concern over the present state
of agricultural prices. The recent reduction in commodity prices, while
reflecting the typical bulge in farm marketings that occurs during the fall
harvest period, has put many producers in a precarious financial position.
In particular, cattle and wheat producers have seen their hopes for higher
prices vanish. As a result, farmers have sharply increased their requests
for renewals and extensions on current obligations. Furthermore, wheat
producers, who purportedly will plant as much winter wheat this year as
last fall, are trying to line up financing for the new crop. Although many
rural banks have good liquidity and are actively seeking other new loan
accounts, there seems to be little enthusiasm for making new loans on wheat
in the current economic environment.

It is likely, then, that some wheat

farmers will be forced to sell their grain at depressed prices to pay off
loans that bankers may call. Cattle producers can be expected to continue

making adjustments in herd sizes and feedlot placements. Others will no
doubt try to wait for a recovery in the market, and thus will seek alternative
sources of financing. The decline in wheat prices, combined with the less
lenient attitude of bankers in making or extending loans, is provoking widespread support for higher government loan rates.
Tenth District commercial banks and savings and loans were surveyed
on the volume and composition of their recent construction loan demand.
Generally, the picture reported by the banks was not good, with multifamily construction especially weak. The one bank that did report some new
multi-family demand was not lending due to the poor quality of the projects.
There was also little report of renewed industrial loan activity. While
some commercial borrowing for new, small shopping centers was noted, major
improvement was not expected before early to mid-1977, and then mainly for
commercial warehouses. Only about half the respondents expected significant
improvements in multi-family construction in 1977 and little mention was made
of industrial construction.
Savings and loan associations, on the other hand, reported excellent
single-family loan demand and continued strong savings inflows. Conventional
loan rates averaged about 9 percent with some mention of softening to 8-3/4
percent. In general, those savings and loans who made commercial loans
stressed that they were very quality conscious, but that "there was not a
lot of quality stuff out there." Some pickup in loans for small apartment
houses and for warehouses was mentioned. One Oklahoma respondent noted that
insurance companies were undercutting savings and loan rates In attempting
to attract borrowers.

Most bankers contacted for the October survey Indicated that loan
demand had changed very little over the past month. Some reported an
increase in farm loans due mainly to operating loans to farmers and
ranchers who are withholding grain and cattle from the market. Several
bankers expressed disappointment that the new car models had not yet
increased consumer loan demand. Most of the banks contacted have lowered
their prime rate to 6-3/4 percent for their national customers. Banks
maintaining a local prime rate have reduced it 1/4 percent to 7-1/4 percent.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS
The economic recovery In the Eleventh District has settled back to
a lackluster pace. The growth in total employment has been relatively flat
since June, and with a faster rate of growth in the civilian labor force,
the unemployment rate has increased to 6.6 percent—the second highest level
this year. Industrial production in Texas continues to edge up, but largely
because increases in drilling and crude oil production are offsetting declines
in manufacturing. According to this month's survey, residential construction
remains strong, and the prospects for commercial building next year have
brightened. Curtailments in natural gas supplies this winter should not
seriously affect economic activity, and the demand for agricultural loans
has strengthened as farmers defer utarketing grain in anticipation of higher
prices.
Residential construction in the District continues to be strong, and
a majority of the home builders surveyed expressed optimism about the overall
outlook in coming months. Housing starts in Texas are at the second highest
level this year, and construction employment rose by 700 workers in August.
Residential builders in Dallas and Houston report that they are actively
recruiting labor from outside the state. Host respondents feel that employment prospects in the industry will continue to show improvement.
Most of the home builders surveyed think that sales of single-family
homes are good. An El Paso contractor reports that sales are "unbelievable"
and that his only problem is a shortage of lots. The prices of most homes
are rising moderately as demand strengthens and construction costs climb.
Most respondents believe housing inventories are about normal for this time

of the year. In Houston, however, a recent study indicates that the inventory
of completed but unsold homes in that city is growing, as sales have begun to
lag behind new housing starts. Texas home builders familiar with the recent
housing lotteries in Southern California do not see any prospect for lottery
sales here. They cite the greater availability of land for development and a
larger number of home builders supplying the Texas housing market as primary
reasons why the demand for new homes can be met fairly easily.
Multiple-family construction in the Eleventh District is improving
slowly. Apartment occupancy rates In major Texas cities are high, ranging
from roughly 90 percent in Dallas to 96 percent in El Paso. The majority of
the apartment builders surveyed Indicate that the current level of rents is
not providing them with the incentive to build at a faster pace. They report
that the fast rise in utility rates and their general inability, due to lease
arrangements, to pass these rate increases on to tenants quickly is a major
constraint on the expansion of apartments. A Dallas builder also feels that
the recently enacted tax reform bill could further dampen the incentive to
build new apartment units.
Commercial building continues to be the weakest area of construction.
A commercial builder in Dallas reports that construction financing will likely
be tight the remainder of this year and that some new form of interim financing
is necessary to stimulate industry growth. Almost all the commercial builders
surveyed are optimistic about the prospects for increased construction activity
next year.
A survey of mobile home manufacturers and dealers found that current
sales are being hampered by stringent financing terms. All respondents cited
a need for lower down payments and longer-term financing. Dealers in Houston,

who are familiar with the new Veterans Administration financing program for
mobile homes, indicate they feel the program will not significantly improve
sales. Another Houston dealer cites a general unwillingness to handle
Veterans Administration loans because of the large amount of paperwork and
the long lead time necessary for approval of loan applications.
The outlook for natural gas supplies in the District states this
winter is mixed. Louisiana, New Mexico, and Arizona may have curtailments
in natural gas supplies much larger than the estimated 22 percent cutback
that may be experienced nationwide. Curtailments in Texas and Oklahoma,
however, are likely to be smaller than the national average. A survey of
state utility agencies indicates that none of the states is expecting curtailments to significantly interfere with economic activity. Alternative
fuels, such as distillate and residual fuel oils, should be readily available
and can carry most industries for short periods of time.
Although higher production costs and increased farming and ranching
activity have increased the demand for credit, most country bankers in the
District report adequate funds available for agricultural loans. Deposits
at commercial banks have increased substantially in the past year, and lower
yields on alternative investment have released funds for farm and ranch credit.
Moreover, correspondent lending activity can be further increased as loan
demand at large urban banks is not growing as fast as it is at rural banks.
And country bankers are still selling substantial amounts of Federal funds.
However, a few agribankers, particularly in the large wheat producing areas
of Texas, report very high loan-to-deposit ratios. Repayment of loans has
slowed, and many loans have been extended as farmers have withheld wheat from
the market waiting for higher prices.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
Our directors continue to report moderate economic growth but undertones of growing pessimism are discernible. The trend in consumer spending
has been erratic resulting in uncertainty about the strength of holiday
season sales. Demand for basic metals such as steel and aluminum has
weakened more than could be ascribed to strike activity. The lumber and
plywood Industry is meeting expectations for a prosperous year, but there
is a heavy overhang of pulp causing a lowering of sights for that industry.
On the other hand, there has been a decided pickup

in sales of commercial

aircraft. Adverse weather and low water inventory in some areas have impeded
crop production, but the more widespread condition is one of over-supply with
selling prices, and consequently incomes, declining*.
Retailers in the District have become apprehensive over the recent
saw-toothed behavior of sales and are following a very cautious inventory
policy. It is generally believed that consumers are in the process of
adjusting their consumption patterns to more modest rates as opposed to the
higher growth rates of 1975 which were caused by recession-related, pent-up
demand. No unseasonal spurt in holiday spending is anticipated. Nondurable
goods sales, especially, are expected to be flat, as indicated by a declining
trend in new orders for apparel. Early data indicate that 1977 automobile
models have been well-received, but the strike at Ford Motor Co. made analysis
more difficult than usual. In agricultural areas, lower anticipated incomes
are expected to result in lower retail sales of all consumer goods.
New orders for aircraft have exceeded expectations this year and
manufacturers feel that the industry has turned a corner. Replacement demand

for commercial aircraft is expected to be heavy through 1981 leading one
large producer to consider introducing a whole new family of jets. At
Boeing, an order for 28 aircraft by United Airlines (largest aircraft order
since 1968) has raised earlier forecasts of 1976 sales by 70 percent in
dollar terms. The aerospace industry as a whole is leveling out and
improvement is expected next year. Government defense bids are now out
on 10 projects valued at $10 billion.
Demand for basic metals has slipped in recent months and is
reflected in shorter lead time on procurements, special discounts and lower
aluminum scrap prices. The rate of increase in the cost of purchased
materials is slowing up and indicating greater availability of supplies.
In contrast, the large overhang of copper inventory

has been reduced and

production is picking up. One director reports a definite lull in demand
over the past two months for steel and aluminum products as well as chemical
coatings, polyester and associated resin products that is not entirely
related to the automobile and rubber workers' strikes.
Within the forest products industry, activity in lumber and plywood
has been strong, meeting earlier expectations of a prosperous year, whereas,
forecasts for the paper industry have had to be scaled down. "The pulp
overhang in the world is the largest that it has ever been." Operating rates
have been flat to declining from the pace of the first half of 1976 and no
pickup

is expected over the next few quarters.
News from the agricultural front is uniformly gloomy. Prices are

low for both crops and cattle and one reporter states that, "This slump in
agriculture could last for a year or two," because of over-production in a
long list of commodities. The price of wheat declined by $1.00 a bushel

over the past month. Potatoes are being ploughed under because the price
has slipped to 90 cents per cwt. Farmers are finding this situation difficult to tinderstand in the face of the recent European drought.
Machinery and equipment * sales to agricultural areas are expected
to decline. Spurts in capital investment are usually made in years of high
income in order to take advantage of tax shelters in the form of fast
depreciation as well as the investment tax credit.
Erratic rainfall and low water inventories have been disruptive to
farmers all year. The content of sugar in the sugar beets is down because
of the weather. Heavy rain hampered harvesting of beans, caused the third
cutting of hay to be low in quality and destroyed approximately 50 percent
of the California raisin crop. Water restriction (15 percent in the San
Joaquin Valley) caused a great deal of crop diversion, such as from alfalfa
to cotton. All agree that the situation will worsen considerably in 1977
unless there is adequate rain and a heavy snow pack this winter.

