CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 12, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 20
Eighth District-St.Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 30
Eleventh District-Dallas page 33
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.]

This month's District reports suggest that the overall recovery
is continuing at about the same rate as during recent months.

Sales of

consumer goods remain generally strong throughout the country, although
there are scattered indications of some moderation of consumer demand.
Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating.

Several industrial

Districts report further increases in orders and shipments and lengthened
delivery schedules.

Conditions are particularly tight in the steel indus-

try. Despite the continued improvement of sales and output, most Districts
indicate that both retailers and manufacturers are following cautious
inventory policies.

Reports regarding the outlook for business fixed

investment continue to be mixed, but there are signs of increasing strength
in this sector in the industrial Midwest and Southeast. Most Districts
report further moderate increases in single-family home building but
continued weakness in multi-family unit construction. Agricultural conditions are generally favorable, with crop plantings either on or ahead
of schedule. Although consumer and farm loans are increasing in several
Districts, business loan demand remains stagnant throughout the country.
Consumer spending remains the strongest force sustaining the
recovery.

The reports of several Districts, including Boston, Richmond,

and St. Louis, suggest that consumer demand for big-ticket durable items
is now expanding rapidly. Automobile sales are strong throughout the
country. New car demand appears to be centered increasingly on large
domestic models.

Subcompact sales are sagging. Although retail sales

remain bouyant overall, there are scattered reports of weakness.

Philadelphia reports a recent slump in carpet sales.

Both Cleveland

and Chicago indicate that television sets are moving slowly, and Kansas
City reports sluggish sales of durable goods in some areas.
Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Manufacturers
surveyed by the Philadelphia and Richmond Banks indicated increases in
orders and shipments, and several Districts report lengthened delivery
schedules.

Increased appliance and automobile production has greatly

increased the demand for flat-rolled steel. Cleveland indicates that
steel producers in. the Fourth District are presently operating at about
90 percent of capacity compared to 70 percent earlier this year. Chicago
suggests that steel shortages might arise later in the year if capital
goods manufacturers increase their demand for steel.

The generally in-

creased demand for industrial goods has contributed to recent increases
in the prices of key industrial commodities.

Several Districts report

that businessmen expect an acceleration of industrial price increases as
the year progresses.
Despite the continued recovery of sales, inventory restocking is
proceeding cautiously in most areas at both the retail and manufacturing
levels.

Philadelphia, Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco indicate that

factory inventories have remained flat in recent weeks.

Some retailers

in the Richmond and Kansas City Districts reported stocks at higher than
desired levels.
Although the outlook for business capital spending remains uncertain, several Districts indicate favorable developments. Atlanta reports
numerous recent announcements of new plants to be constructed in Alabama
and Tennessee.

Cleveland reports a sharp upsurge in the demand for heavy-

duty trucks, bearings, and machine tools. Chicago suggests a growing

belief that margins of unused industrial capacity may have been overestimated.

In contrast, however, Boston reports little change in orders

for producers' durables.
Comments regarding residential construction follow the pattens of
recent months.

Construction of single-family housing continues to increase

at a moderate pace in most Districts, and the outlook in this sector is
generally favorable. Multi-family unit construction remains sluggish,
although St. Louis reports improved prospects for multi-family building
in the St. Louis metropolitan area.
Most Districts report favorable agricultural prospects. Chicago,
St. Louis, and Minneapolis indicate that crop plantings are on or ahead
of schedule in their Districts. Kansas City reports that recent rainfall
has broken the drought in that area and substantially improved winter
wheat crop prospects. Kansas City expects the high prospective level of
grain stocks to assist in holding retail food prices to their smallest
increase since 1972. Agricultural conditions in the Southeast are less
favorable than elsewhere. Atlanta reports that dry and cold weather has
damaged cotton crops in some areas.
While consumer and agricultural loan demand has increased in
some Districts, no District reports any increase in business loan demand.
Philadelphia and St. Louis report that prime business borrowers can obtain
money at rates below the announced prime rate.
thrift institutions have remained strong.

Inflows of funds into

Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis

report that thrifts are seeking to reduce these inflows by reducing rates
paid on longer-term savings certificates, and Cleveland indicates that
thrifts would like to reduce passbook rates. Mortgage rates have declined to the 8-1/2 - 8-3/4 level in recent weeks in several Districts.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
The New England Directors report that the recovery is secure,
although activity remains depressed in several major industries. Retail
sales have continued at the pace set during the last Christinas season,
despite a temporary softness in March. On the other hand, activity in
producers' goods industries remains depressed, and even though the national
data reveal an increase in machine tool orders, the First District reports
no such developments.

The Directors assess the pace of overall growth as

being moderate, and most expect the momentum of recovery to remain unchanged
throughout 1976.
A late Easter season and an unusual variance in the weather pattern
depressed March retail sales over most of New England. However, April was
a very active month for the region's retailers; most are reporting volumes
well ahead of their plans. Durable goods are showing the strongest performance at this time. To date, vendor performance is very good—except
for an occasional "hot item"—and there is no evidence of consumer goods
manufacturers operating anywhere near full capacity. Nevertheless, some
signs of increasing wholesale prices are beginning to emerge.

Retailers

report that inventory control remains a problem, due more to aggressive
marketing on the part of wholesalers rather than consumer resistance.
Manufacturers of producers' durables report that orders have
changed little in recent months.

Some machine tool suppliers state that

they have had more requests for quotations, but their order books do not
reflect this interest yet. Milling machines which tend to lead the market
are only offering a glimmer of improvement.
Oil field equipment sales are improving in foreign markets,
especially Algeria and Mexico, while domestic sales are diminishing,

particularly for drilling equipment. Turbine sales are improving for
utilities, but only military orders are maintaining the aviation markets.
Fastener sales are increasing for all industries except housing construction.
Bankers report that conditions have remained unchanged in the
last four months.

Business loans show no increases, and, although some

banks are fairly aggressively seeking new customers, there is no pressure
on commercial banks to protect established customer relationships.

Interest

rates to business have moved with the prime rate, but there have been no
major changes in mark-ups or compensating balances. Mortgage interest rates
have dropped somewhat in New England; the most common loan rates of surveyed
savings banks are 8-3/4 or 9 percent.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin were available
for comment this month. There was widespread agreement that (a) the
recovery is presently progressing satisfactorily, (b) the first-quarter
price performance was an aberration that cannot be expected to continue,
(c) monetary policy should proceed cautiously, discounting even very
large monthly changes in prices and monetary aggregates.
Eckstein has raised his real growth forecast for 1976 to 6.9 percent.
He expected the May and June wholesale price figures to be "a horror show"
but urged looking at these figures in a 6 to 12 month perspective. He
regarded the rapid monetary growth in April as just an averaging out of
previous low growth and nothing to get excited about.

He felt it is

appropriate to let short-term rates drift upward by 20 to 30 basis points
each quarter.
Eckstein and Solow both saw signs of a pickup in business fixed
investment.

Solow cautioned against letting short-term interest rates

rise much so early in this recovery. He felt the recent price behavior
was an aberration and that long-run targets must be based on an underlying

rate of inflation of about 5h percent. The appropriate posture for
monetary policy is "to stand upright, not to lean against the wind."
Recent tightening of Federal Reserve policy, in practice and in
goal, neither surprised nor distressed Samuelson. The economy is not now
at the stage that it needs additional stimulus. He added that this conclusion is not based on the pickup in monetary growth. On the contrary,
he pointed to previous below-target growth and warned against a stampede
to offset a temporary overshoot.

In a longer-run context, he urged

consideration of who pays the incremental political, social, and economic
costs of bleeding inflation

from the economic system by stagnating

production and prolonged periods of unemployment above 6h percent.
Tobin also mentioned asymmetric behavior in response to monetary
growth outside of the target range. He noted that the financial markets
were very edgy about the slight upward movement in the Federal funds rate.
He recommended holding the rate at its present level to make sure that
the investment boom in 1977 that we are counting on will really happen.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
The economy continues to recover smartly, according to Second
District Directors and other business leaders who were contacted recently.
Significant further growth in GNP is expected over the coming year;
consumer spending for the most part remains buoyant; residential construction
is beginning to recover in the District; and there continue to be expectations
of a turnaround in capital goods outlays. Nevertheless, some apprehensions
have been voiced about potential future shortages of steel and other metals.
Against this background, prices are expected to begin rising more rapidly
and forthcoming wage negotiations to result in substantial settlements.
All of the respondents expressing an opinion on the subject felt
that a brisk economic recovery would be sustained over the balance of the
year.

Several noted that the economy had performed better during the first

quarter than they had expected. Among others, the chairman of a multinational chemical corporation expected the upswing to continue to gather
strength from greater than anticipated consumer demand. A Director associated
with the automotive industry reported that, on the basis of recent domestic
auto sales, he had raised his expectations for real GNP growth for 1976 from
6 to 7 percent. The president of a large metal producing firm reported
that demand for metals was increasing somewhat faster than had been
expected earlier.
The latest survey of the Buffalo Purchasing Management Association
points to further significant improvement in the demand for locally
produced goods, with virtually all respondents reporting a steady or
increased flow of new orders, and nearly half reporting an improvement
in the volume of new orders, as compared to only 13 percent so reporting
a year ago.

As in previous months, consumer spending generally continued
to be characterized as strong. The Buffalo Branch Directors reported
that retail sales over the Easter shopping period had been "very strong,"
and good gains were also posted in suburban areas of the New York City
region.

Some slowing in early May in the rate of growth of department

store sales in the Buffalo area as compared to last year was noted, but
this was attributed in good part to the spurt in consumer outlays during
the comparable period last year tinder the impact of the tax rebates.

In

any event, this softening was not apparent in the Rochester area. Moreover, a number of respondents reported the demand for automobiles in upstate
New York continuing very strong, with some dealers having depleted inventories
of certain models. The retail sales picture in New York City, however, was
less favorable. April sales of large city department stores, notwithstanding
the later Easter this year, registered a disappointing advance of only
3.3 percent from the year-earlier level—less than the rise in general
merchandise prices.
While retail sales and the more recent rebuilding of business
inventories continued to provide the main thrust to the recovery, there
were further indications that the hitherto lagging capital investment and
residential construction sectors might be picking up. A financial economist
thus felt that even the 4 percent Increase in real business plant and
equipment spending in 1976 implied by the latest McGraw-Hill survey was
too low.

In his view, a rise of nearly 6 percent was probably more

appropriate.

Several other financial economists reiterated their

expectations that capital outlays would pick up as the recovery proceeded.
The residential construction picture continues to brighten in most parts
of the District, with the notable exception of New York City. An official

of a New York State thrift trade association reported that mortgage
money was in substantially greater availability than last fall, and
that even 90 percent mortgages were now being made in certain suburban
areas surrounding New York City and Buffalo. The Buffalo Branch Directors
reported that there was clear evidence of an
in western New York.

upswing in housing construction

The improvement has been particularly apparent in

prime suburban areas, but has also been evident in the low-to-moderate
priced residential sector. Apartment construction remains in the doldrums,
however, under the influence of high vacancy rates in some areas.
Regarding the price outlook, the official of the chemical concern
mentioned above expected the rate of increase in wholesale prices to
approach a 7-8 percent range by year-end, and expressed concern over the
prospects of shortages in steel and certain other metals. The latter
concern was also expressed by some other

respondents. A Director noted

the sharp increase in metals prices which he felt might reflect some
speculation, but also the fact that in his view profit margins remain
very low in most basic commodities. A Director associated with agriculture
stated that he was not as optimistic as the Department of Agriculture
regarding the 1976 grain harvest and that, in his opinion, higher grain
prices are in the offing.
Another Director expressed the view that it appeared unlikely that
the underlying rate of inflation could be kept down below 6 percent
given the present state of consumer demand, fiscal policies, and of wage
pressures.

In the latter context, a number of Directors expected fairly

strong wage demands from organized labor, with first-year settlements
ranging from 8 to 10 percent in union contracts and with non-union wage
increases lagging only slightly behind.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Economic activity in the Third District continues to expand.
The retail sector shows healthy gains in sales, and manufacturers report
increases in new orders and shipments although the increases are less
widespread than last month. At the same time, employment and the average
workweek in manufacturing show moderate gains while inventories in this
sector are unchanged.

The longer-term outlook in manufacturing is for

additional expansion. Bankers indicate that consumer loans are increasing
but business loans are sagging.

Businessmen continue to report rising

prices, and inflationary pressures are essentially the same as last month.
Manufacturers responding to this month's business outlook survey
report additional improvement in business over last month. Of the businessmen surveyed, one-half report a higher level of general business activity—
slightly fewer than last month.

Specific gains in new orders and shipments

are indicated, although the reported increases are not as widespread as
they were in April. One-third of the firms in the current survey report
increases in new orders and 4 out of 10 indicate higher levels of shipments.
Last month, by comparison, more than half of the respondents reported gains
in each of these categories. Manufacturing employment is another "plus"
this month.

The factory workweek is somewhat longer, and work forces are

higher at 17 percent of the businesses surveyed.

While this gain in

employment appears modest, the job picture is brighter than it has
been for quite some time. Only 4 percent of the respondents report employment
cutbacks since last month and this "net gain" of 13 percentage points is
the highest since October 1973. One major area showing no increase is
inventories which are basically unchanged from last month.
The outlook in manufacturing for the next two quarters is optimistic
with 8 out of 10 respondents projecting expansion. New orders and shipments

are expected to be higher by fall and increases in inventories and
employment are also projected. Fifty percent of those polled expect
to add to their inventories, 45 percent plan to hire additional workers
and 30 percent anticipate lengthening the average workweek.

In addition,

4 out of 10 respondents plan to hike their spending for plant and equipment—
about the same as in the three previous surveys.
On the price front, manufacturers report paying and receiving
higher prices this month, but there is no significant change in the
distribution of responses from last month. Forty-seven percent of the
respondents report paying more for their supplies currently and 19 percent
have raised the price tags for their finished products. The outlook is
for additional price increases in the next six months. Eighty percent of
those surveyed expect to be paying more for their inputs over the period
and 70 percent anticipate charging more for the products they sell.
Retail executives continue to report strong sales and the
outlook for the rest of this

year is optimistic. The majority of

retailers report that current sales are more than 10 percent above year-ago
levels; this is several percentage points higher than their forecasts for
this period. Reports are mixed, however, on the components of total sales
volume. One retailer notes that, "apparel carried the day" in the most
recent sales period while another labels apparel sales as "slightly
disappointing." A carpet manufacturer in the District indicates a
noticeable softening in orders from retailers since late February, and
merchants in the area confirm this slump although one mentions a slight
pickup recently. Area retailecs are optimistic about sales prospects
over the next several months.

One executive looks for a big lift in

the summer from bicentennial tourists.

Her store has already run several

bicentennial-related promotions which boosted floor traffic, and many
additional promotions of this type are planned through the summer. There
is general agreement among retailess that price increases are "modest"
and no recent attempt by suppliers to push through large price hikes
is reported.
Area bankers report that total loan volume continues to be soft.
Consumer loans are up but business loans continue to sag. Consumer credit
card loans are reported to be increasing, and one banker notes a strong
promotion of auto loans at his bank.

Commercial and industrial loans

are falling off with one banker noting a $35 million runoff in the last
month. All of the bankers surveyed attribute the weakness in business
loans to improved business liquidity but most expect pressure on operating
funds to intensify. As one banker put it, "I hear more and more talk that
increasing demand will require additions to inventories and this will
increase the demand for short-term financing."

The consensus among

bankers is that loan demand will pick up sometime in the third quarter
of this year.
At the same time, short-term interest rates are expected to climb
gradually from this point on. There are no reported plans to lower the
prime rate. One executive feels it would generate little additional loan
volume, but notes that loans at his bank might be made at less-than-prime
rates if customers requested such an arrangement.

By year-end the prime

rate is expected to be in the 7%-8 percent range with Fed funds trading
around 6^-7 percent.

In general, bankers in the District express satisfaction

with the pace of economic recovery. There is little concern at this time
about the danger of the economy overheating, and the anticipated rise in
interest rates through the end of 1976 is not expected to put a damper on
the expansion.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Recovery in the Fourth District is broadening. Manufacturers and
retailers note continued broadly based strength in consumer goods.

Steel

operations are improving rapidly, and capital goods orders are picking up
from 1975's depressed levels.

Sharp recovery in chemicals and plastics,

paperboard and containers, and certain types of steel products has been
accompanied by tightening supplies and a flurry of price increases.
Deposit flows into savings and loans continue to outpace mortgage demand.
Consumer spending continues strong except for small cars. One
Director noted continued strong consumer demand for household materials
for remodeling, and a banker Director described retail sales and instalment
lending as extremely good. Delinquencies are the lowest on record, repayments are strong, and consumers show no reluctance to incur debt. The
sharp rise in appliance production in recent months has been an important
factor in the recent surge in steel orders. Recovery in consumer goods,
however, is not without some weak spots. A major producer of TV tubes
reports that while orders have been picking up they are still well below
the peak of late 1973. Also, operations at the GMC assembly plant at
Lordstown, Ohio remain curtailed because of excessive inventories of Vegas.
The primary metals industry, which has lagged the overall recovery
is rebounding strongly.

Operating rates in steel, which late last year

and early this year hovered around 70 percent, are now at about 90 percent
of capacity. The surge in steel demand, however, is confined largely to
flat rolled products. Hedge buying against price increases, coupled with
strong demand from automotive and applicance producers, ballooned orders this
quarter, but some steel sources expect orders next quarter will subside.

One steel producer is allocating orders for some sheet steel because
of tight demand and curtailed output stemming from relining of blast
furnaces. Delivery time on flat roll products has lengthened from 1
month to 3 or 4 months. Demand for structural steel and plates and other
products consumed by capital goods producers remains relatively weak
and is not expected to pick up until the fourth quarter.

Orders for

aluminum also have been rising recently in response to higher demand
from automotive and packaging industries. The industry is operating at
about 75 percent of capacity, but steady improvement is expected throughout
the year.
The capital goods sector is showing signs of a comeback. A
variety of producers report a revival in orders from depressed levels
in early 1975. Heavy-duty truck orders spurted between the fourth
quarter 1975 trough and March 1976, although the March level was 60
percent of the peak in early 1975. Demand for bearings has increased in
recent weeks, reversing a declining trend in orders that lasted into the
early months of this year. One of the nation's largest producers of machine
tools reports orders in the first 4 months of 1976 rose 40 percent from
a year earlier and exceeded shipments for the first time in the last
18 months. An economist with a machine tool builder doubts the 13 percent
increase in capital spending projected in the McGraw-Hill survey. According
to him, time is running out for 1976 delivery. Additionally, the spring
survey in recent years has been about 5 to 7 percent above actual spending.
Tightening

supply conditions are noted by several nondurable goods

producers in the District, especially the paperboard, plastics and chemical
products, and glass containers industries. Operations have been boosted
to 90 percent of capacity or higher for these industries. Delivery schedules
have tightened, but shortages have not yet appeared. According to one

source, shortages are not likely to appear in paperboard and glass
containers until capacity reaches about 95 percent. Demand for plastics
has boosted operations in recent months close to the pre-recession peak.
A petrochemical producer reports that some of the industry's capacity
has been lost because of environmental restrictions.
A flurry of price increases has accompanied strengthening in
markets. Prices for flat roll steel products will rise in June and
apparently some bar mill products are likely to increase, according
to one steel economist.

Industry sources justify price increases because

of the high cost of additional capacity. A major bearings producer announces a large price increase effective May," and aluminum ingot prices are
scheduled to rise about 6 percent early in June.

Several nondurable

goods firms also report actual or anticipated price increases for their
products in order to finance additional capacity. A plastics producer
expects a 10 percent increase in polypropylene this fall to support its
new plant that will double capacity by late 1977. Another source speculates
that paperboard prices are likely to rise in the third quarter.
Effects of the rubber industry strike, according to an economist
with a major tire producer, may be less widespread than generally reported.
He said 35 to 40 percent of the industry is still affected by the strike.
He expects that the auto industry will attempt to adjust for the strike
by eliminating spare tires in new trucks and cars, accepting tires that
were previously considered blemished, upgrading tire quality, and
increasing imports wherever possible.
Savings and loans generally report deposit inflows are stronger
than loan demand. At least two large associations no longer offer
savings certificates yielding 1\ and 7-3/4 percent, and two others have
extended maturities on 7-3/4 percent certificates to 8 years. One

large association lengthened the maturity on 4 and 6 year certificates
to 10 years. As a result, net savings deposits have declined since
mid-April. Loans for multi-family housing remain weak, and mortgage
rates have eased to around

percent for a 70 percent loan although one

association with a variable rate mortgage lowered its rates to &z percent.
There is no indication of any reduction in the passbook rate, although
financial officers of several associations are eager for such action.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Our May survey of Fifth District business conditions shows April
to have been another month of widespread upward movement in the level of
business activity. Manufacturers surveyed report increased shipments and
new orders and larger backlogs of orders in April. Manufacturers' inventories
showed little change as more than one-fourth of the respondents continue to
view current levels as excessive. Employment continues to increase across
the District as indicated by our survey as well as by reports on employment
and unemployment in the individual states. District retailers have apparently
experienced a dramatic turnaround in their business. Most firms reported
increased sales and several characterized the increases as substantial.
Sales of big ticket items continued their relative improvement despite the
large increase in total sales. The latest available Information reveals no
significant recovery in business loan applications at District banks. Low
credit line utilization, generally below 30 percent, noted by several banks
illustrates the extent of weakness in short-term business lending. With
April's dry weather and below-freezing temperatures, small grains, springplanted crops, and fruit were damaged in wide areas of the District.
Replanting of some spring crops has been necessary.
Of the manufacturers responding to our May survey, over 40 percent
reported increased shipments in April, while nearly one-half experienced a
larger volume of new orders than in March.

Backlogs of orders apparently

increased somewhat, although fewer respondents reported such increases this
month than did so one month ago.

Inventories showed little change, a slight

increase in stocks of materials being balanced by a small reduction in finished
goods. Over one-half of the manufacturers now view current inventory levels

as about right, but those feeling current stocks are excessive continued
to outnumber those viewing them as inadequate by almost two to one.
Gains in shipments and new orders are evident in such industries
as textiles, apparel, primary metals, and furniture. While the situation
appears to have stabilized in some other industries, including chemicals,
responses do not yet suggest any significant improvement.

Non-electrical

machinery and equipment seems to have leveled off somewhat after some
improvement in March, but the electrical equipment group did show some
improvement after lagging in recent months.
Nearly one-third of the manufacturers surveyed report expanded
employment and longer workweeks in April. Prices also continued to rise
during the survey period.

Survey responses reveal dwindling dissatisfaction

with current plant and equipment capacity. Over three-fourths of the
respondents feel current capacity is about right. There remains virtually
no sentiment for altering current expansion plans. A substantial majority
of the manufacturers surveyed, however, expect continued improvement in
the general level of business activity, nationally, locally, and in their
respective firms, over the next six months.
The responses of retailers surveyed suggest substantial improvement
in business over the past month.

Several respondents specifically mentioned

the size of the month to month increase in sales calling it the "best ever"
or the "best in twenty years." One large chain store responded that
"everything is selling."

Sales of big ticket items relative to total

sales continued to increase despite the sizeable gains in total sales.
Seventy-five percent of our retail respondents also reported increases in
inventories in April. Meanwhile, twenty-five percent of the respondents
once again view current inventory levels as excessive. Over one-third,
however, feel the current number and size of outlets is now inadequate.

Employment by retailers rose in April as did employee compensation. Over
one-half of the respondents feel that level of sales in their firms will
continue to improve over the next six months. The others are apparently
satisfied with the current level and feel that while it can be sustained,
any further improvements are not likely.

In general, the retailers, like

the manufacturers, expect the general level of business activity to
continue to improve.
Of the District banks surveyed in late April none has experienced
any significant recovery in business loan applications, either short-term
or long-term. Weakness in short-term financing, however, is especially
evident in the larger national accounts. The outlook for improvement in
business loan demand is uncertain. Most banks are "hopeful" of a turnaround
in 3-6 months, and recovery is expected first in the short-term area.
Earnings from farm marketings during the first two months of 1976
ran slightly below a year ago in the District, compared with a gain of
about 10 percent nationally.

Farmland values rose further during the

period March 1975 to February 1976. Unlike the national advance which
was about the same as in the previous year, the increase among District
states was slower than recent year-to-year gains in Virginia and the
Carolinas but the highest on record in Maryland and the second highest
in West Virginia.
Reacting to market conditions, District farmers now intend to plant
more cotton, corn and other feed grains, but fewer soybeans, than they planned
in January. Compared with a year ago, April 1 intentions indicated sizeable
increases in plantings of corn and cotton but significant cuts in soybean
and flue-cured tobacco acreage.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Economic activity in the Southeast advanced again in April.
Capital investment plans advanced strongly in parts of the District.
Tourist trade and sales of larger automobiles again reflected the vigor
of consumer spending. A survey of Georgia purchasing agents revealed
an accelerating pace of business, tighter supplies of raw materials,
inventory building, and increasing costs.

Shortages have appeared in

some types of goods, and price increases have become more noticeable.
In agriculture, gains in planting due to dry conditions were offset by
cold weather damage. Decreases in rice acreage have resulted from low
prices and oversupplies, while cattle prices have risen.
Capital investment is on the increase in the Southeast.

In Tennessee,

Directors are optimistic about industrial development, on the basis of
numerous plant announcements during the first quarter of 1976. Alabama
accounts for the great majority of recently announced capital investment
projects in the region, including a $3.75-billion uranium enrichment facility,
as well as two large pulp and paper projects totaling $500 million. In
Louisiana, a $200-million electrical utility plant investment has been
postponed because the company's projections indicated inability to finance
the cost of the project. A sharp upturn has occurred in inquiries concerning
industrial location in the central Florida area, indicating a potential
for renewed growth.in the state which has suffered most severely from
declines in construction activity.
Strong tourist trade continues in the Southeast.

In Florida, Cypress

Gardens reports record attendance for the quarter ending April 30, the
sixth consecutive quarter in which attendance set a record. Tennessee
Directors indicate continuing growth in attendance at Opryland in Nashville

as well as strong gains in attendance at the Great Smoky Mountains National
Park.

Tourism is also booming in the Gulf Coast area of Mississippi. The

size of groups sent to conventions is rising after falling noticeably during
the recession. Another trend is the combination of business and vacation
travel.
A vignette reported by a Director from Louisiana epitomizes the
condition of the automobile market in the Southeast. The local Volkswagen
dealership has closed, while the Cadillac dealer expects demand to exceed
the supply of cars available.
A survey of purchasing agents in Georgia reveals continued strengthening and tightening in the region's economy. The proportion reporting
larger inventories of both raw materials and finished goods has risen
sharply over the last three months.

Sales and production increases have

become the rule rather than the exception over the same period. After some
acceleration in March, April data show a renewed slowing of average delivery
times. Price rises are reported by 80 percent of the sample, up from 70
percent in the two previous months.
Few shortages are reported, although several areas are potentially
troublesome.

Certain kinds of home furnishings are in tight supply because

previous suppliers are out of business. The same tendency is noted for
lumber mills. Retailers are concerned about possible fabric shortages and
are considering inventory building, although they are currently keeping
stocks in line. Fabric manufacturers are producing only for orders, and
their delivery lead times are lengthening except for polyester knit yarn.
Price increases are beginning for several types of merchandise,
including children's apparel and upholstered furniture. A department
store expects prices on its fall lines to rise by 6 percent. A clothing

manufacturer expects the overhang of polyester fibers to depress prices
further but sees energy and labor cost increases raising garment prices
slightly. An electronics manufacturer expects lower materials prices
due to technological changes to offset higher labor costs, resulting
in level or declining prices.
In southeastern agricultural industries, low rainfall in April has
advanced planting ahead of schedule, but dry and cold conditions have
retarded seed germination and plant development. Replanting of substantial
portions of the cotton crop is necessary in Tennessee and Mississippi.
Shortages of quality planting seed in some areas, as well as the lateness
of the replanted crop, may retard yields. Weak export demand for rice
has caused huge stock accumulations.

Prices have fallen nearly 50 percent

from the year-ago level, and growers are reducing planted acreages. Price
increases for beef cattle have brightened prospects for a long-awaited
return to profits for feeder calf producers. This development should
arrest the liquidation of cattle herds and, thereby, remove the depressing
effect of herd reduction on beef prices. Loans at banks in agricultural
areas have increased an average of 9 percent above year-ago levels.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
Business expectations continue to improve in the Seventh District.
The greatest immediate concern is the unresolved rubber strike, which could
drastically curtail motor vehicle output if it continues through the current
month.

Looking ahead, business and financial executives anticipate the

reappearance of shortages on a widening scale as the upswing continues,
and an acceleration of price inflation. The capital goods picture is
somewhat brighter. Retail sales are excellent on a broad front. Singlefamily home construction activity has increased sharply, but other
construction lags.

Some S&Ls are attempting to dampen the rapid inflow

of deposits. Demand for business loans at banks remains soft. Farmland
prices have increased very rapidly. Crop plantings are on schedule, or
ahead.
The rubber strike that started April 21 was expected to cause
serious trouble after about 30 days.

Some cars and trucks already are

being shipped without spare tires to extend supplies. The tire supply
situation varies by model and is much worse for trucks than for autos,
but all vehicle producers would be affected if the strike continues into
June.
New

orders have improved in most manufacturing industries. Order

backlogs either are rising or are declining less rapidly. More firms are
planning to strengthen inventory positions and various capital expenditure
programs are being reevaluated in the light of the more favorable outlook.
The fact that many executives remained skeptical of the durability of the
upturn until fairly recently means that decisions are only now being taken
that will promote further expansion. Partly for this reason, fears are
growing that margins of unused capacity have been overestimated, as in 1972.

Order lead times are lengthening gradually, and more companies
complain about a deterioration in "dependability."

Supplies of some items

are already inadequate, including various models of appliances, cars, trucks,
and motor homes.

In the latter case, output is limited by availability of

components with no improvement likely.

Steel is expected to be in short

supply in the fourth quarter.
Labor costs in many industries will rise 8 to 10 percent this year
and there are doubts that the improvement in worker productivity will be
sustained.

Costs of materials, including steel and major nonferrous

metals have increased recently, and are expected to rise further. Costs
of insurance are soaring—auto, homeowner, and medical policies by 20
percent or more this year. An oil executive says refinery construction
costs have doubled in the past three years, and may double again in another
five years. The rise in housing construction costs has been cut in half,
to about 5 percent, but may accelerate again.
Output of heavy trucks, highway trailers, and related components
has increased rapidly in the past two months. This uptrend is based not
on actual sales, which remain very slow, but on expectations of increased
sales, which one expert believes are about to "explode" as highway truck
tonnage approaches capacity.

This observer

projects heavy truck sales

at a new high for 1977.
Sales of light construction equipment associated with home building
have increased, but demand for heavy construction and earth-moving equipment
has remained at a low level all year. One very large company is using
this opportunity to build finished goods inventories in anticipation of
an eventual uptrend in sales.

Orders for machine tools and sales of used machine tools have
increased significantly, but order backlogs continue to decline, although
at a slower pace.

Sales of lift trucks and office furniture have improved.

Demand for farm equipment is excellent. Oil exploration activity is slipping somewhat. Electric utilities are moving ahead more vigorously on
new generating facilities as demand increases at a more normal pace.
A major Chicago-area steel company with

a strong market position

says its new orders have exceeded capacity since January 1 and that output
has been at capacity since early February. Promised delivery times have
doubled since year-end. Many users apparently are building steel inventories
again. A pickup in demand from the producer goods industries could mean
general shortages of steel late this year. Foreign producers are not
pushing sales here as much as in the past.
Retail sales for March and April probably should be considered
together because of seasonal adjustment problems. Merchants are generally
very pleased. Credit sales have increased relatively and collections are
favorable.

Except for subcompacts, car sales have been very strong. Motor

homes and other "RVS" are booming again and some observers expect a new
high for 1976. RV sales currently are limited by supplies. Except for
freezers, all major appliances are shoving large gains from last year.
Sales of TV sets remain slow but an uptrend is expected in the fall.
Japanese interests have acquired another U.S. TV producer, and the market
is very competitive.
Permits for single-family homes were double last year's level in
March in major centers, and this uptrend apparently has continued. Apartment permits are up somewhat, but remain far below earlier years. Some
S&Ls are limiting the extremely rapid inflows of deposits by restricting

the size of passbook accounts and CDs. Typical home loan rates have
moved down to the 8.5 to 8.75 percent range, and further easing of credit
is expected to be reflected in reduced down payments. The

Illinois usury

rate will revert to 8 percent at year end. This could cause problems if
an extension is not voted several months before the deadline.
Reports of 7th District bankers in our most recent land value
survey indicate that prices of good farmland rose about 7 percent on
average in the first quarter, to a level 27 percent above year-ago.
Reports were strongest from Illinois, but all sections of the District
showed gains.
Crop plantings are well along in the cornbelt. The picture in
Iowa is about normal, while plantings in Illinois and Indiana range from
normal to ahead of normal.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Reports from Eighth District businessmen indicate that economic
activity in the District is continuing on an upward course. Retailers
report sales gains for most items, and manufacturing firms report gains
in orders and generally improved profits. Home building continues to
expand, largely in the single-family type structures. Financial institutions
report rising deposits and an increasing proportion of assets allocated to
short-term liquid investments.

In the agricultural sector, the planting

of 1976 crops is well underway and substantially ahead of normal for this
time of year.
Consumer spending continues to grow at about the same rate as in
the past several months. Department store representatives again report
rising sales of wearing apparel items and big-ticket items, such as
appliances and automobile parts. Department stores are experiencing
improvement in their collection of outstanding accounts. Automobile
sales also made further gains in recent weeks.
The manufacturing sector, after making strong gains in the first
quarter of this year, has apparently maintained this upward momentum in
recent weeks. One apparel maker which experienced only a mild setback
in the recession period reports a complete recovery from the setback.
Another clothing manufacturer which suffered sharp losses during the
recession has experienced a 25 percent increase in fall bookings over a
year earlier. A representative of the paper and boxboard industry which
noted some sluggishness in sales last month, reports sales improvement in
recent weeks. An appliance manufacturer reports continued improvement in
sales and considers the outlook for future sales very good. Overall, the
chemical industry is experiencing increases in demand for most types of

products. Among chemicals showing strength are industrial chemicals,
plastics for automotive use, and most textile fibers. A sluggish demand,
however, was reported for chemicals used for manufacturing rubber and
polyester fibers. A major aircraft manufacturer has experienced some
recent pickup in demand for commercial aircraft in addition to increased
demand for defense-oriented aircraft.
Home construction continues on the upswing in most of the District,
although some slowdown in home sales was noted in St. Louis in the past
three weeks.

Housing permits issued in the first quarter of this year

in St. Louis County were at their highest level for this quarter since
1966. Housing industry representatives expect the St. Louis area housing
recovery to continue at least through the next twelve months. Although the
upturn so far has been primarily in construction of single-family houses,
prospects for increasing activity in the multi-family units appear to be
improving. Home construction in Memphis, which has also experienced a
strong upturn in single-family units, is currently working out of the
excess of multi-family units built in the previous boom period. A number
of such units previously started are now being completed. Although the
outlook for the homebuilding industry remains good for the rest of 1976,
some observers have expressed concern about the impact of rising home
prices on future sales.
Credit demand in the District has apparently strengthened in
recent weeks.

Both banks and savings and loan associations report increases

in loans outstanding.

Business loan demand at commercial banks, however, is

still sluggish, and reports continue to indicate that interest rates charged
to many prime business customers are actually somewhat below the reported
prime loan rate.

Savings and loan associations report further increases in

loan demand, reflecting the strengthening housing sector. Mortgage rates,

however, have generally declined about 1/4 of 1 percentage point in
the past month reflecting the highly liquid condition of these firms.
Commercial banks and savings and loan associations have realized
large increases in time and savings deposits in recent weeks.

Banks report

increases in time deposits of all types, including large certificates of
deposit.

Savings and loan associations in the St. Louis area report further

large gains in savings deposits for April, after registering the largest
quarterly increase on record in the first quarter of the year. They are
concerned, however, about the current reduction in profit margins as
mortgage rates continue to fall and rates paid on deposits generally
remain at the maximum permitted by the ceilings.

A few associations

are beginning to reduce the cost of funds purchased by either not offering
certain types of certificates or reducing the yields.
Farming operations are substantially ahead of schedule over most
of the District. Recent rain and cold weather, however, have presented
some problems.

Some replantings of field crops were necessary, and the

late season frost has damaged some crops, especially apples and peaches.
So far it is too early to determine whether substantial damage was
inflicted on field crops.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Ninth District Directors feel that the current economic recovery is
proceeding at a healthy pace.

Inventories are expanding at a moderate rate.

Lead times for filling orders are lengthening and some input prices are
increasing, but no firms are currently experiencing problems in obtaining
supplies. Consumer spending appears strong throughout the District.
Farmwork is progressing several days ahead of normal; topsoil moisture
conditions vary widely over the District.
Business inventories in the District are currently expanding, but
firms continue to exercise tight control over stocks, and most Directors
anticipate no sharp buildup in inventories in the immediate future. A
Director from a large manufacturing concern in the Twin Cities says that
his firm will be cautious in building inventories in coming months, and
he expects the firm's inventories to increase only moderately by the end
of 1976. The same Director feels that inventories are increasing in firms
which supply goods to the residential construction industry; but he says
that in capital goods industries neither shipments nor inventories appear
to have picked up. Despite "faint rumblings of an upturn in capital spending,"
he foresees no sharp advance before 1977.
A Director from the banking industry agrees that so far there
has been "no aggressive buildup" of inventories and adds that firms are
feeling no pressure to stock up in advance since orders are currently being
filled quickly. An executive from an agribusiness firm thinks that
inventory

increases will be held in check, feels that current inventory-

to-sales ratios are satisfactory, and says that firms may be able to
operate with smaller inventories than in the past because of improved
inventory control techniques. A Director from a rural North Dakota bank

says that inventories in his area never fell far during the recession
and says that firms are now increasing stocks.
Directors say that firms in the Ninth District are currently having
no problems in obtaining supplies, though lead times are Increasing. One
Director says that the lead times for steel and brass products have now
increased from about four weeks to six weeks, but he viewed this as a
return to a more normal lead time.

Severe supply bottlenecks are not

likely in 1976, according to the Directors.

But some Directors feel that

rising demand for steel, plastics, and paper products may push those
industries to capacity limits in 1977.
Directors say that prices of primary

inputs have increased in

recent weeks. One Director reports that a freezer manufacturer in his
area has recently experienced a "slightly more rapid" rate of increase in
raw materials prices and may consequently raise its own prices by the
year's end. Another Director says that the price increases for steel,
aluminum, copper, and paper products in the last sixty days have ranged
from about 5 to 15 percent; he expects prices of energy and plastics to
increase faster than the general rate of inflation in coming months. A
third Director said that prices of steel castings and ball bearings have
increased sharply; a Minneapolis Director expressed concern over rising
labor costs; but a Montana Director says that many farm input prices are
now lower than a year ago.
Directors agree that consumer spending is strong, and they see
no slowdown in the immediate future. At the same time, they stress that
the pace of consumer spending has not been immoderate.

For Instance,

one Director from a major upper midwest bank sees no consumer spending
spree and thinks that an "explosion" in consumer debt in coming months
is unlikely.

Spending is strong in rural areas, as has been true throughout
the recession.

Recently, sales and employment gains have been especially

brisk in the Billings area, where an expanding coal industry is bolstering
the local economy. Mining and drilling activity is also boosting the
economies of localities in North Dakota.
In the farm sector, fieldwork is several days ahead of normal.
Planting has made rapid progress in nearly all areas of Minnesota; small
grain seeding is nearly complete in some areas of the Red River Valley, and
corn in southern and western Minnesota is one-fourth planted.

Sugar beet

planting in North Dakota is three-fourths completed. Winter wheat
conditions in Montana are good to excellent.
Topsoil moisture is adequate over large parts of the District, though
local moisture conditions vary greatly. Moisture is excessive in some parts
of North Dakota, but is short across parts of Minnesota and South Dakota.
Moisture is adequate in all parts of Montana, and one Director says that
range conditions in that state are "tremendous."

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY
The buoyant nationwide auto sales picture is mirrored in reports
by Tenth District auto dealers, with larger domestic and specialty cars
selling very well, while softness is evident in the subcompact area.
District retailers contacted were somewhat restrained in their optimism
over current and prospective sales, but were, for the most part, quite
positive in their assessment of the sales picture. Widespread rainfall
across the Tenth District during the past 3 weeks has broken the drought
and substantially improved winter wheat crop prospects. With larger
grain supplies serving to encourage continued increases in livestock
production, food price increases may prove to be the smallest since
1972. Tenth District bankers contacted reported a slightly greater
than seasonal increase in total loans last month, but total deposits were
reported to be down during April, owing to a large decline in demand
deposits.
Reports from a number of Tenth District retailers indicate a
continued improvement in retail sales, and prospects, at least through the
summer, were rated as good. However, the nature of the sales gains varied
from place to place both in terms of composition and strength. Oklahoma
City reported overall strong suburban sales, but with weakness in the
durables goods sector. Denver, with a healthy resurgence in home
construction, reported good retail sales, particularly for large appliances,
furniture, carpeting and home improvement materials.

In both Omaha and

the Kansas City areas, strength in furniture sales was reported, but
overall sales results in these areas varied with generally more strength
evident in the Kansas City metropolitan area. None of the District
respondents reported any real difficulty in getting merchandise, while
a number of them indicated that their stocks were somewhat above desired
levels.

The auto sales picture in the Tenth District is very much like
that nationally.

Larger domestic cars and specialty cars are selling

very well and inventory levels of these models are well below what
dealers consider either normal or desirable.

In addition, intermediates

and vans are reported to be selling well and some inventory problems in
the intermediates are beginning to show or are anticipated.

Subcompact

sales are weak and inventories of these models are excessively high. In
the import sector, sales reports are mixed, and sales gains lag behind
those of domestic models.

Nonetheless, auto dealers generally express

optimism over the sales picture for the remainder of the year.
Widespread rainfall across the District during the past 3 weeks
has broken the drought and substantially improved winter wheat crop
prospects. The most recent crop report estimated that winter wheat production would be 1.46 billion bushels this year. The estimate for Kansas—
the leading wheat state—was increased 16 million bushels from the report
a month ago to 302.4 million bushels. Last year, production In Kansas was
350 million bushels.
The prospects for larger grain supplies—reflecting a buildup in
carry-over stocks and continued high production levels—should encourage
Increases in livestock production and help hold food prices to the
smallest annual increase since 1972. Total supplies for both feed grains
and wheat in 1976-77 will likely surpass year-ago levels. Furthermore,
pork output promises to be larger during the second half of 1976, and beef
supplies will likely continue high, given the renewed interest in feeding
programs.

The number of cattle and calves on feed in

the 23 major

states April 1 was 28 percent above last year's level; however, numbers
were still 12 percent below 1974. The District inventory was 30 percent

greater than a year ago. Although fed cattle marketings will likely post
substantial year-to-year increases for the remainder of 1976, sharp declines
in nonfed slaughter should add support to fed cattle prices this spring
and summer.
Tenth District bankers contacted during the monthly survey
reported a slightly greater than seasonal increase in total loans during
April.

Real estate loans, loans for securities, and agricultural loans

were the major contributors to that improvement.

Bankers also reported

a moderately improved demand for consumer loans. Auto loans, consumer
credit card loans, and home improvement loans generally were said to be
increasing.

In the Kansas City metropolitan area, bankers contacted

reported that most banks were offering automobile loans with maturities
up to 42 to 48 months.
be weak.

Business loan demand generally was reported to

Nonetheless, most bankers contacted thought the prime rate

would rise modestly during the rest of the year.
Total deposits were reported to be down during April. Demand
deposits showed a large decline, while time and savings deposits
showed an increase. All bankers contacted in the survey indicated they
were offering the new business savings accounts. Reports on the volume
of these accounts varied from very good to a leveling off after an
initial increase.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS
Eleventh District city bankers report loan demand is weaker than
expected. They blame this on an effort by businesses to repay loans, a
decline in drilling activity, and generally weaker consumer borrowing.
District agricultural loans, however, show some strength.
Total loans at large commercial banks rose sharply in January.
Since then, however, borrowers have been repaying their bank indebtedness.
This has reduced the volume of loans outstanding to December's level.
In particular, petroleum refiners have made substantial repayment of
loans after two years of unusually heavy borrowing.
Recently, loans to the petroleum industry have decreased. Houston
bankers report that a decline in drilling and a continuing slump in oil
production have resulted in fewer loans to finance drilling equipment,
oil tools, pipe, and other equipment related to energy production. And
bankers cite rumors of an oversupply of drilling pipe and aggressive
price discounting by sellers as evidence that weakness in drilling is
likely to persist.
Spokesmen for drilling supply firms differ in their outlook for
drilling activity this year.

Some believe drilling will be up slightly

from last year because of higher industry drilling budgets. Others feel
drilling will fall below last year's level, due in part to legislative
uncertainties and the rollback of new oil prices. But they also feel
that a lot of the drilling has been to further develop the flow from
existing discoveries, and producers have completed most of this kind of
work. Finally, a gas producer reports that a slight surplus of gas on
the intrastate market is discouraging deep gas exploration in west Texas.
Oil field pipe suppliers confirm bankers' fears that their
customers built inventories while pipe was still in relatively short

supply and drilling was strong. Now that drilling is off, these firms
seem anxious to reduce inventories.
Other business loan demand is also weak.

Because businesses are

experiencing slow growth in demand and face no immediate threat of strong
price increases, they are hesitant to build inventories.

In addition,

one banker reported that a few large customers have been utilizing the
commercial paper market quite heavily. And other customers are making
greater use of internal funds generated by higher profits. Many bankers
feel that the growth in profits could continue to depress loans unless
the demand for inventories picks up considerably.
The demand for consumer instalment loans at large banks in the
District is especially weak. Consumers have made net reductions in their
bank debt for three consecutive months, and bankers indicate renewed
caution by consumers despite more aggressive marketing of these loans.
Loan officers at small banks, however, have noted some pickup in automobile
loans and in the use of credit cards.
Largely because of higher production expenses and narrow profit
margins, demand for farm and ranch credit is strong according to a survey
of 230 agribankers in the Eleventh District. A number of factors have
added to production costs. Natural gas prices have skyrocketed, pushing
irrigation costs substantially higher. And higher prices for farm
machinery have increased equipment loans. With more cattle on feed than
a year ago, loans for feeding cattle have also increased.
Ample loanable funds are available at rural banks to meet the
increased demand.

Bankers are, however, cautiously evaluating agricultural

loans; 32 percent indicate they have increased collateral requirements.
The proportion of agribankers indicating more renewals and extensions than

usual has decreased from 47 percent in July 1975 to 27 percent in early
April, evidence that repayment of loans has improved. Higher livestock
prices have made possible increasing repayment of loans in Texas; but
in Louisiana, Oklahoma, and New Mexico repayments are sluggish because
crop sales have decreased substantially from a year earlier. With the
price received for rice depressed far below last year, the financial
condition of rice growers has deteriorated. And poor harvests for two
successive years have left many farmers in northern Louisiana financially
weakened.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
Our Directors report a continued expansion of the economy led by
strong consumer spending. Retail sales and new car purchases are good
in most areas of the District and consumer credit demand has increased.
Another strong sector is agriculture where prices have been steady and
an optimistic outlook prevails. Construction shows great variation from
region to region and overall its recovery has been slow. A major concern
is the high wage and fringe benefits sought by unions in current negotiations.

Bankers report high savings rates and strong loan demand by

consumers but a relatively weak demand for commercial and industrial loans.
Consumer spending is the strongest force in the economy. Our
Directors report generally good retail sales throughout the District.
Increases of 20 to 30 percent in sales over a year ago were reported in
some areas and this strength is expected to be maintained. Automobile
sales, especially for domestic cars, are also very good.

In Oregon, for

example, one domestic company experienced a 48 percent increase in sales
during April over a year ago. A shortage of inventory exists for the larger
models. Consumers are increasing their indebtedness and consumer lending
is up strongly at most banks. At a large Washington bank, instalment loan
totals for the first quarter of 1976 were up approximately 25 percent over
the previous year.

Auto loan increases were even higher for this same

Washington bank, and other banks report similar increases.
The agricultural outlook is good. Prices have been reasonably
steady with only limited declines in prices expected. Cattle prices are
up and an excellent year is predicted for such crops as cotton, rice, potatoes,
and fruits. However, there remains some uncertainty about the impact

of government intervention on farm exports which could depress certain
prices of certain crops such as wheat.
Heavy construction remains weak and architectural firms are
continuing to cut back on staff. Unemployment in the construction trades
remains high. Residential construction shows great regional variation.
It is described as being at "all-time high levels" in the Bakersfield
area, and sales of new homes are being made at record prices in Orange
County in Southern California. Prices of existing homes are continuing
to climb. These strong local markets are an exception and the modest
recovery in demand by the housing industry is reflected in slow growth
of orders experienced by lumber and plywood producers.
Inflation continues to worry some Directors, primarily because of
the wage increases being demanded by unions in current contract negotiations.
A large paper products manufacturer foresees a "very expansive settlement",
possibly 14 to 15 percent plus benefits. The effect of fringe benefit
improvement could be very costly especially when the funded liability for
greater pensions is considered.

On the other hand, another Director

reported that inflation is not likely to be important in the food industry.
Retail price wars occurring in some areas reflected recent declines in
food prices, but neither substantial increases nor decreases are expected
during the rest of this year.
Inventory accumulation does not appear to be a major source of
demand in this District. Finished inventory at a precision electronic
instruments company is unchanged since last August and other manufacturers
do not appear to be increasing inventories.

In fact, some indicate that

they are continuing policies aimed at reducing inventories.

Bankers have

experienced little increase in loan demand to finance higher inventories.

Directors noted some problems connected with environmental
issues. The recent abandonment of a large coal power plant in Kaiparowits
in southern Utah removed an important source of potential economic
stimulus for that region. Environmental regulations are also described
as causing delays in coal mining projects in Utah and construction
projects in Southern California. One Director noted the conflict in
the proposal for a large nuclear plant situated

in prime agricultural

land in the San Joaquin Valley in California rather than on the coastline.

In his view, agricultural land is as desirable a goal as preserving

the coastline of California.
Banks continue to gain deposits.

Savings at a large state-wide

California bank were up 25 to 30 percent over the last 12 months. Demand
for loans is strongest for consumer credit but it is quite variable in
the case of commercial and industrial loans. Although individual small
banks report good demand, the larger banks see little evidence that the
confidence level of business matches that of consumers. Commercial loans
remain weak; the loan demand is not there.

