CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

August 11, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 30
Eleventh District-Dallas page 33
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
This month's District reports suggest that the economic advance
has continued at about the moderate second-quarter rate.

Automobile sales

remain strong, but department store sales softened in July.
still generally optimistic about the sales outlook, however.

Retailers are
Manufacturing

activity appears to be expanding, albeit at a modest pace,and there are
indications that firms are beginning to revise capital spending plans upward.
Capacity appears ample for the time being.

While construction of single-

family residences continues to increase, building of multiple-family dwellings
remains very sluggish.

The agricultural situation is generally favorable,

although inadequate moisture may reduce crop production in some areas.

Commer-

cial bank lending to business continues to show little if any strength; loans
to consumers are still on an uptrend.
Readings on consumer spending are mixed.

Automobile sales remain

strong, with demand favoring large- and intermediate-size American cars, some
of which are in short supply.

Department store sales, on the other hand,

softened in July and generally have been below expected levels, although
Atlanta reports healthy gains stemming from expanding convention and tourist
trade.

While retailers for the most part remain optimistic, there are

indications that some have scaled back sales forecasts for the second half
of this year (Boston, Minneapolis, Kansas City).

There are also scattered

reports of heavier than desired inventories at the retail level, but serious
imbalances thus far have been avoided, in part because of cautious inventory
policies.
Manufacturing activity appears to be expanding at a moderate rate.
Increases in new orders and shipments are reported by Philadelphia, and
Chicago indicates that order backlogs for steel remain substantial.

Richmond

and St. Louis, however, report a leveling-off in manufacturing activity.
Cleveland indicates an easing of tight supplies of certain steel and chemical
products as a result of a slowing in orders.

While the rubber and coal strikes

have not had much impact as yet, the coal strike could affect steel output
because coke is already in short supply.

Further increases in industrial

materials prices are in the offing, although these may be of relatively modest
proportions (New York, San Francisco).
Capacity remains adequate in most sectors, and outright shortages
so far have not materialized.

Steel lead times have shortened recently, and

steel capacity is judged sufficient for the remainder of this year and most
of 1977.
capacity.

Similarly, chemicals and most capital goods industries have ample
There is concern about the future availability of a variety of

metal products and of natural gas, although in this regard Chicago and Dallas
indicate that a pickup in drilling of gas wells is expected once the new
ceiling prices on interstate natural gas shipments become effective.

Manu-

facturers continue to manage inventories cautiously, and changes in stocks
are generally small.

There are scattered reports of inventories above desired

levels, but others indicate that producers' inventories are lean.
The recovery in capital spending remains modest.

There are signs,

however, that firms are beginning to re\ise capital spending programs upward.

Chicago reports that plans previously shelved by automobile and steel companies are being revived; orders for transportation equipment have also
improved.

Atlanta indicates that capital spending plans have been raised by

chemicals and by textiles and related industries.

Moreover, export demand

for capital equipment is reported strong, with significant orders from the
USSR and from OPEC.
Some Districts report continued growth in home building, with
activity concentrated in construction of single-family units.
construction remains sluggish.

Apartment

Demand for mobile homes is very strong (Dallas).

Comments on nonresidential construction suggest that it is still weak
(Minneapolis, New York), although the possibility of some pickup in activity
is foreseen.

Mortgage funds are generally available, although St. Louis notes

some recent upward pressure on mortgage rates and the full effects of the
sale of the 8 percent Treasury note on savings flows are not yet apparent.
Business loans continue to show little if any growth, and bank
lending rates have tended to decline.

Kansas City reports, however, that

most of the District commercial banks contacted were slow to move to the
7 percent prime rate, with some repondents still posting a rate of 7 1/2 percent.

Consumer loans are generally rising moderately.

Loans to agribusinesses

and farmers are increasing.
The agricultural outlook is favorable for the most part.

St. Louis

reports that recent rains have improved yield prospects for some crops, and
Atlanta notes that a new irrigation system is enhancing yields in part of
Georgia.

Kansas City suggests that increases in cattle prices will be only

modest over the remainder of this year.

Inadequate moisture has caused con-

cern in some areas (Richmond, Chicago), while cotton acreage has been adversely
affected because of excessively wet weather.

FIRST DISTRICT—BOSTON

The directors of the First District report that business conditions
have changed little since last month's survey.

New orders for machine tools

are weak, and manufacturing capacity is generally redundant.

In one recent

development, retailers have become increasingly conservative in their outlook
since sales volume in July was disappointing.
The machine tool industry has yet to participate in the recovery.
The increased production of automobiles has generated some business for New
England firms, but new orders for even the most basic, inexpensive, and
versatile equipment have yet to encourage machine tool producers.

One director

speculates that potential customers are postponing purchases until after the
September machine tool show, where buyers may survey the entire range of
products.

Because capacity pressures are lacking, purchasers can afford the

delay.
New England directors continue to report that regional industrial
capacity is redundant.

Many firms have only recently resumed a second shift

in work schedules, and overtime work has not yet attained levels considered
normal.

The only exceptions to this general description are lumbering and

groundwood paper; both industries are receiving orders sufficient to utilize
capacity fully.
Retailers had hoped that the strength of June's sales volume was a
signal of better months to come.
below plan.

However, July's figures were slightly

As a result, retailers are concerned that June was a fluke in

an otherwise sluggish sales trend which has been developing since April.
Some stores are reappraising their fall plans and their inventory positions.
Although the stock of consumer items is not "excessive", some stores are
"heavy", and one local retailer finds no problem in stocking his bargain
basement with inventory procured from other stores.

Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin were available for
comments this month.

Eckstein expects a 5 percent increase in the consumer

price index and a 7 1/4 percent increase in compensation over the next
several quarters.

He termed the outlook "healthy", even though the forward

momentum since April has been related mainly to trend as cyclical gains have
ended.

The July increase in unemployment should have come as no surprise

since, on the basis of unemployment claims, labor markets have loosened
since the first quarter.

Tobin felt that the weakness in the stock market,

in combination with nearly level interest rates, may indicate that investors
are not taking continued increases in profits for granted any longer.
Samuelson and Tobin both criticized current concerns about capacity.
In a dynamic economy, one should expect to find a few scattered shortages
and relative price increases in those areas.

To run into no capacity problems

suggests our goals are overly cautious; to run into generalized shortages
would suggest our goals to be overly ambitious.

Bottlenecks could be found

even in 1934 by those who looked hard enough.
Eckstein takes exception to the M2 target range.
based on M2 growth of 10 3/4 percent.

His forecast is

Time deposits are expected to be

boosted by a high savings rate and a small gap between thrift deposit and
open market yields.
Samuelson believes our real growth targets should be not less than
6 percent.

In view of the recent slowdown, he finds no cost in lowering

interest rates now and raising rates later should the current weakness prove
to be an aberration or should the rate of monetary growth explode.
Tobin favors holding the current level of rates for a quarter or two,
even if it were to result in monetary growth above the Federal Reserve's
self-imposed targets.

He pointed out that there has been no strength in

nonconsumption final demand and that a continued recovery is contingent on
strength in private fixed investment.

The fear of shortages could be a

self-fulfilling prophecy if investment is discouraged long enough by a
stagnant economy and stringent monetary policy.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

The Second District economy continues to have difficulty gaining
momentum, according to District directors and business economists contacted
recently.

Regional retail sales apparently softened in July, with the weak-

ness heavily concentrated in apparel.

However, sizable inventory imbalances

were avoided, for the most part, largely as a result of cautious purchasing
policies.

Further improvement in home building appears uncertain, with high

prices and a backlog of unsold homes restraining construction of singlefamily units and few signs of any pickup in multiple-family residences.

Overall,

the regional economy still lags behind that of the nation, in large measure
because of the prolonged slump in activity in New York City.
Consumer spending in the Second District slowed in July.

Retail

sales in New York City were characterized as sluggish by department store
executives.

Directors from the Buffalo area reported that, aside from the auto

sector, July sales softened considerably from June and sales in the first few
days of August gave no indication of marked improvement.

The president of a

Rochester retail store indicated that the weakness was general throughout the
state.

An official of a trade publication felt that to a large extent the weak-

ness stemmed from a slowdown in spending on apparel, and that buyers appeared
to have become value conscious.

Despite this softness, the president of a

major nationwide retailer which specializes in apparel did not expect the slowdown to continue in coming months.

Some respondents noted a change in the mix

of consumer spending, as purchases of appliances apparently have held up.
Retailers appear to be very cautious in building inventories,
responding quickly to changes in expected sales growth.

As evidence of this,

virtually every analyst contacted cited the fact that large inventory buildups

did not accompany the sales slowdown.

Nevertheless, some imbalances remain

i n the composition of inventories—old spring and summer stock versus new
fall lines.

Directors of the Buffalo Branch reported that promotions and

markdowns had only limited success in moving merchandise.

A senior official

of a national retailer said his chain's markdowns would continue into August.
A business analyst reported that outright order cancellations were rare
but that many retailers appeared to be limiting or delaying ordering new
merchandise and were planning instead to reorder if demand proved sufficiently
strong.
Continuing problems with multifamily building were seen as limiting
prospects of a pickup in the rate of recovery of residential construction.
A senior economist of a major appliance manufacturer felt that home building
was in a bind created by an imbalance between personal income and the high
carrying and downpayment costs of a new home.

The large backlog of unsold

units was seen by another analyst as further restraining any near-term acceleration in activity.

One director reported some spotty pickup in housing

activity in central New York State.

Outside of residential activity, a

regional analyst thought that public construction spending in New York State
would remain at a standstill for the near term.

Commercial activity was seen

as possibly recovering modestly, with the building of shopping centers and
stores.
Overall, the regional economy continues to lag behind that of the
nation.

To a large extent, this is due to the failure of the New York City

economy to revive.

Over the first half of the year, estimates suggest that

the City accounted for almost nine out of every ten jobs lost in the State.
Total employment in New York City, seasonally adjusted, has continued to
decline.

To be sure, private employment appears to have stabilized, but at the

lowest level since record keeping began in 1950.

The rate of joblessness in

the City is some 3 percentage points above the national average.

Even this

wide differential disguises the depth of the metropolitan area's slump,
however, because a substantial reduction in the labor force has been an
important factor in holding down the unemployment rate.
In addition to the weakness of the City's economy, a commercial
bank economist felt that part of the economic sluggishness of the region
reflected the importance of capital goods production in upstate New York.
As a mature region with older, less efficient plants, the upstate region
responds to a revival in capital spending with a lag—reportedly moving ahead
with vigor only when national capital spending is well into an expansion.
As to the overall outlook for the national economy, a senior economist
of a financial firm was highly optimistic, expecting a long-lived recovery and
a sharp moderation in inflation.

On the other hand, another senior economist

expressed apprehension over the danger of a future pickup in real growth
with concomitant upward price pressures.

An economist of a major business

equipment producer looked for deceleration in real growth but anticipated a
favorable price performance.

With regard to industrial materials prices, the

president of a major metals firm felt that, while there would be further
increases, a relative "breather" was likely compared with recent previous
months.

A nonferrous metals economist viewed as likely an additional copper

price increase late in the year, with the possibility that the price of
aluminum ingots would rise early next year.

The Buffalo directors felt that,

with substantial agricultural production in prospect, price pressures in this
sector would be modest.

THIRD DISTRICT—PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District are improving, but the
pace of improvement is somewhat uneven.

Retail activity is mixed, while the

manufacturing sector continues to expand.

New orders, shipments, and employ-

ment are higher this month, while inventories in manufacturing are lower.

The

longer term outlook in both retailing and manufacturing is still optimisticbut less so than in previous months.
spread than in July.

Reports of higher prices are less wide-

There is brisk activity in the market for existing

housing but very little recovery in new construction.

Bankers report that

weakness in corporate loan demand is spurring requests by business borrowers
for concessions on loan terms.
District manufacturers, responding to the latest business outlook
survey.report a higher level of activity than last month.

One third of the

businessmen surveyed see an improvement in overall business conditions.
Increases in new orders are reported by two fifths of those polled, and a
similar proportion say that shipments have increased as well.
indicators showed any increase last month.

Neither of these

At the same time, work forces are

larger at 16 percent of the firms surveyed, while the average workweek is unchanged.

One key area showing no increase is inventories, which are slightly

lower this month after holding steady in July.
The outlook in manufacturing for the next six months is for further
expansion, although projections of gains are not so widespread as in previous
surveys.

Of the executives polled, three out of five look for better business

conditions over the next two quarters.

This is down from last month, when three

out of four respondents projected improvement six months out, and well below
the monthly average (four out of five)for the first sfeven months of this year.

Specific gains are expected in new orders, shipments, and employment, but for
each of these barometers the proportion of respondents anticipating increases
is substantially below the levels of the recent past.

In addition to expansion

in these categories, the average workweek and inventories are each expected
to increase over the period.

At the same time, 40 percent of the manufacturers

surveyed plan to hike their spending for plant and equipment, up somewhat from
last month.
With respect to prices, 46 percent of the respondents indicate that
they are paying higher prices for their supplies.
when 57 percent were reporting increases.

This is down from last month

At the same time, 27 percent report

price hikes for their finished products, about the same as in July.

By

February, roughly three out of four expect to be paying more for their inputs
and charging higher prices for the products they sell.

Retailers report only

slight price increases by suppliers and attribute this, in part, to the uncertainty about retail sales prospects down the road.
Reports on area retail activity are mixed.

Some merchants indicate

that current sales show little or no growth over the same period last year,
while others note increases of 9 to 10 percent.

Almost all of the retailers

contacted, including some with 9 to 10 percent gains, say that current sales
volumes are falling short of the levels they expected.
Major appliances and big-ticket furniture items are reported to be
particularly soft, while fashion accessories and recreational equipment are
singled out as strong sellers.

Merchants note that price markdowns on sea-

sonal items occurred earlier than usual this year, and they feel that these
have helped generate a sizable chunk of current sales. According to one
retailer, "we've reduced prices on seasonal items in the latest period in

hopes of avoiding bigger markdowns in the next period".

All of the retailers

contacted look for a strong September, but several are reconsidering their
prospects and buying plans for later in the year.

According to one merchant,

"we used to be cocky about the fall—now we're just confident".

Yet another

feels that, "if our December sales this year just equal last year's, we'll
have nothing to cry about".
The residential housing market in the area is reported to be very
active for existing housing, but only slight recovery is taking place in new
construction.

There are signs that the rental market in the area is tightening

somewhat, which may open the way for a few new multifamily units.

By and

large, however, the outlook is for no substantial increase in new construction
over the near term.

One mutual savings bank official notes that availability

of funds is good and that mortgage rates have declined recently.

This official

expects rates to decline further in the near future before moving upward by
late fall.

He even sees the possibility, although remote, of a drop in rates

paid on savings if short-term money market rates decline further.
Bankers in the District report that, while consumer loans are increasing, business loan volume remains weak.

Most banks are attempting to

attract consumer business through either merchandise promotions, lower rates,
or extended maturities.

The results, however, are "not as good as expected".

On the business side, there are no reported signs of any pickup in loan demand.
Several bankers do note slightly increased pressure from corporate customers
for concessions on loan terms.

More requests for fixed rates, as well as

early attempts to renegotiate terms on revolving credits, are reported.
the most part, bankers indicate that these requests have been denied.

For
Several

bankers feel, however, that, If business loan demand remains weak, they may
find it more difficult to deny such requests in the future.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND

Plant shutdowns and summer vacations have slowed economic activity
in the Fourth District.

Consumer spending for automobiles, recreation, home

remodeling, and new houses continues relatively strong, but sales of department store goods were soft again in July.
to be spotty.

Recovery in capital goods continues

Neither the rubber strike not the coal strike has disrupted

operations of their consumers.

Tightness in supplies of certain steel and

chemical products appears to have eased as a result of a recent slowing in
orders.

Several thrift institutions report some deposit losses as a result

of last week's 8 percent Treasury note but less than in previous periods of
comparable yield spreads.
Consumer spending continues to be selective and spotty.

Car sales,

recreation and amusement spending, and home improvement expenditures remain
strong.

Auto sales in July, especially of medium-size cars, held up relatively

well in the largest metropolitan centers of the District.

Home improvement

business continues to flourish according to banker directors and a director
associated with a building materials firm.

Another director reported new

attendance and spending records for amusement by consumers.

Some retailers

of department store goods complained that sales were again soft last month.
A financial officer with a large department store that caters to middle- and
upper-income earners reports that sportswear is selling well, accessories
are still selling better than a year earlier, but ready-to-wear apparel is
selling poorly.

Collections have not been a problem.

A financial officer

with a large discount chain describes sales of both hard and soft goods as
flat.
Consumer demand for single-family housing is strong, and directors
as well as officials with thrift institutions report brisk loan demand.

One

director expects new housing starts to average 1.5 million units in 1976 and
projects an increase to 1.7 million units in 1977.
units have boosted demand for mobile homes.

High costs of single-family

Construction of multifamily

dwellings remains weak, according to several mortgage lenders, although one
director noted that gradually improving vacancy rates are contributing to a
pickup in demand.
Capital goods are still marked by sluggish recovery and ample capacity.
Some producers do not expect to reach their pre-recession peak until 1978.
Sales of heavy-duty trucks and industrial lift trucks have been recovering,
but significant improvement is not expected until 1977.

One official expects

that the next peak for these capital goods is unlikely to be as high as the
1974 peak; even if it were, shortages are unlikely to appear because of recent
expansion in capacity for trucks, axels, and other material handling equipment.

An electronics and printing press firm reports both orders and backlogs

last month were at their highest volume in recent years.

Capacity for producing

printing equipment is judged to be adequate for the next few years because of
the large amount of unused capacity, but a shortage of capacity for semiconductors, radio- and TV-broadcasting equipment and other communication
equipment will require the firm to double its capital spending beginning
this year.
Financial officers and economists in the steel and chemical industries view their capacity as adequate to accommodate demand this year and
most of 1977, although spot shortages may surface later this year.

Steel

economists with major producers in the District report that orders and shipments slumped more than usual in July and August.

One economist expects a

strong rebound in the late summer and fall months and has revised his
estimates of shipments for 1976 slightly upward.

However, an economist with

another steel company has recently revised his forecast downward because

of continued sluggishness in capital goods and a lack of inventory buildup by
steel users.

Tightness in flat-rolled products has eased, although some

steel mills are apparently still informally allocating orders.

Coke is ex-

pected to be in tight supply in 1977 because of environmental standards that
are restricting production from some existing coke-oven facilities in the
District.
Chemical producers report that operating rates for their frims continue to climb moderately.

Output in July and August softened because of

plant shutdowns of customers.

PVC, polypropylene, and chlorine are among

products in tight supply, and some spot shortages can surface by the year-end.
Neither the rubber strike not the coal strike has hampered output
of users.

According to an economist with a major tire producer, the rubber

strike can continue for another few months without curtailing auto production.
He cited the sustained operations by nonstruck suppliers and small independent
tire producers who have been selling the bulk of their output directly to
auto producers rather than in the replacement market.

According to his

view, the replacement market will be affected more seriously than the original
equipment market, if the strike continues much longer.

The wildcat strike

in the coal industry, which has caused an estimated 10 million ton loss in
coal output, will have little if any effect on coal consumers because inventories were already well above the normal 65-day supply before the strike.
Metallurgical coal will be in tight supply because of restricted coal output,
but steel economists do not expect that supplies will hinder a rebound in
steel operations.
Financial officers with savings and loan associations commented that
the full extent of deposit losses resulting from last week1s 8 percent
Treasury note will not be known until the final payment date on August 16.
An official with one of the largest savings and loan

associations in the

District expects heavy withdrawals on that date.

Several small- and medium-

size associations detected no significant withdrawals of deposits, but they
noted that net deposit growth for the last several weeks has wavered between
losses and modest gains.
and loan

Despite some runoff in deposits, none of the savings

associations expect to curtail commitments or loans.

Liquidity is

still above minimum requirements, and deposit growth is expected to recover
beginning in September, although at rates below the rapid growth earlier in
1976.

FIFTH DISTRICT—RICHMOND

Responses to our latest survey of Fifth District manufacturers indicate that activity in July remained essentially stable for the second
consecutive month.

The pace of improvement appears to have slowed in the

second quarter, and since then there has been little change in the level of
manufacturers' shipments and some softening in the volume of new orders.
Backlogs of orders have declined in each of the last two months, while materials inventories have remained essentially unchanged.

Stocks of finished

goods leveled off in July, after rising in June, and inventories in general
seem to be somewhat above desired levels.

District retailers surveyed report

increased sales in July, but big-ticket items apparently did not figure in
this improvement.

Retail inventories showed relatively little change after

three months of widespread increases but remain above desired levels.

Both

manufacturing and retail respondents remain optimistic, expecting further
improvement in business conditions over the next six months.

Business loans

at large District banks have shown little, if any, growth in recent weeks.
Real estate loan volume remains essentially flat, while consumer lending continues to advance.

In the agricultural sector, drought threatens severe crop

losses in North Carolina's piedmont and western coastal plain.

Short soil-

moisture supplies have also caused crop conditions to deteriorate in many other
areas of the District.
Manufacturers' responses to our survey reveal a decline in backlogs
of orders during July, resulting from a slight decline in the volume of new
orders accompanied by a small increase in shipments.

Inventories of both

materials and finished goods were essentially unchanged from June, and over
one third of manufacturers feel current levels are too high.

Manufacturing

employment seems to have risen somewhat among respondents, although hours
worked per week declined slightly.

Most respondents report paying higher

prices in July, but reports of receiving higher prices were less common than
in recent months.
compensation.

One third of our respondents report increased employee

Thirty percent of the manufacturers responding to our survey

continue to view current plant and equipment as excessive, although one in
ten now considers them inadequate.

There continues to be little desire to

enlarge current expansion plans.
Retailers report increased sales in July, although sales of bigticket items apparently declined in relative terms.

Comments of retailers

suggest a more favorable outlook for fall linesbut continued slack in sales
of summer items.

The latter are reportedly selling only at reduced prices.

Inventories at retail showed little change last month and apparently remain
somewhat above desired levels.
front.

Prices, paid and received, rose across a broad

Retailers remain satisfied with the number and size of their outlets.
Business loan volume at large District banks has shown little, if

any, growth in recent weeks.
is also weak.

Seasonal demand for agriculture-related loans

The outlook of area bankers is mixed.

While some foresee no

immediate cyclical turnaround for business loans, others feel the situation is
poised for a turnaround in the third or fourth quarters.

One Maryland bank

reports a recent nominal increase in commercial lending, with some interest
reported in term borrowing to finance fixed investment.

According to a branch

director, however, "there are no signs of inventory accumulation, plant expansion, or other capital expenditures which are needed to spur demand".

For

the time being, loan volume remains below desired levels.
Real estate loan volume at District banks appears essentially flat,

although one Maryland bank reports a moderate increase, primarily in construction lending.

Consumer lending is still advancing, although at a

reduced rate compared with recent months.
to continue for the present time.

Area bankers expect this strength

The Federal Home Loan Bank in Atlanta

reports continued strong deposit inflows into District savings and loan
associations.
slowing.

The rate of net inflow, however, has shown recent signs of

The volume of mortgage loan commitments and closings at savings

and loan associations is exceptionally high but is expected to subside as
deposit inflows slow.
Higher prices than last year, heavier volume, lower but improving
quality of marketings, and a small reduction in the percentage of sales
placed under loan have characterized the 1976 flue-cured tobacco marketing
season thus far.
a year ago.

Average prices are currently running some 8 percent above

Receipts from farm marketings continue to run above a year

earlier, but the District increase remains well below that for the nation.
The relatively poor gain recorded in the District is due to a sharp decline
in crop receipts.
There is still no indication of any problems, real or potential,
arising from supply or capacity constraints.

Most respondents report no

problems in meeting orders and none in obtaining deliveries from key suppliers.
There remain several who expect some lengthening of lead time, but nothing
out of the ordinary.

Only in a few isolated cases are any difficulties being

encountered, and there seems to be no pattern of industry involvement.

In

one case, a manufacturer anticipates difficulty if there is no prompt resolution of the rubber workers' strike.

SIXTH DISTRICT—ATLANTA

Developments in the Southeast furnish evidence of continuing
economic growth.

Convention and tourist expenditures, spurred by the

opening of a new convention center, are expanding in the Atlanta area.

A

survey of District businessmen and bankers finds the outlook for shortages
unchanged.

Inventory policies remain cautious and fairly stable.

Plant and

equipment additions are concentrated in the District's capital-intensive
industries.

Bank loan demand is expected to remain slight to moderate.

supply shortages are foreseen in certain skilled trades.
foreseen for energy-related products.
and calf inventories are declining.

Labor

Rising prices are

In Southeastern agriculture, cattle

Application of a new irrigation tech-

nology is changing the crops grown in parts of Georgia.
Atlanta's economy is benefiting from expanding convention and tourist
trade.

Transient spending is a key explanation given for retail spending

gains at rates which exceed state and national advances.

Convention patronage

of hotels, restaurants, and retailers is expected to receive a major boost in
September, when about 20,000 persons will attend an apparel industry exhibition,
the first to be held in a large, new convention facility now nearing completion.
Another major development affecting retailing is the opening of a 1 million
square foot regional shopping mall which includes four major department stores.
A new survey of businessmen and bankers finds few changes in their
views concerning current and prospective shortages.

Natural gas, both as a

fuel and as a raw material, and tires are mentioned most frequently.

A

variety of metal products, including pipe, castings, forgings, alloy steel,
bearings, and fabricated pressure vessels, is also cited.

Some concern exists

about current and future availability of crossties, creosoted lumber, and
other lumber products.

Inventory policies remain cautious, but changes are slight.

Stock

reductions by wholesalers and retailers of furniture in Florida and major
appliances in Tennessee may reflect slowness in sales gains for these items.
Deliberate reductions in inventories by wholesalers of lumber, paper, and
steel are indicated, and excessive stocks of nylon, rayon, and wool are being
reduced.
Major current plant and equipment additions are concentrated in
capital-intensive industries, including chemicals, fabricated metals, paper,
and glass in Alabama and Tennessee and petrochemicals in Louisiana.

Increases

are also noticeable among several manufacturers of precision equipment.

Pro-

spective increases are centered in the chemicals, primary and fabricated
metals, pulp and paper, and building materials industries.

Upward revisions

in spending plans are reported in chemicals and in textiles and related
industries.

One source states that far more work on projects of all sizes

is going on in company engineering departments, compared with four months ago,
but that the number of these plans which will be translated into actual
additions is difficult to assess.

Despite considerable investment activity,

expected demand for bank loans in the next six to twelve months is fairly
evenly divided between "slight" or "moderate".

None of those surveyed expect

loan demand to be "substantial" or "strong".
Shortages of labor are expected to appear in certain skilled categories,
including machinists, toolmakers and diemakers, metal workers, welders, chemical
and apparel workers, nurses and medical technicians, and data processing
specialists.

These anticipated shortages closely parallel the industries in

which significant labor-force additions are expected to occur.
Major price increases are widely anticipated for fuels, including
natural gas, coal, petroleum products, and electric power.

Products for

which significant increases are expected include paper and paper products,
various metals, and any product using natural gas as a raw material, such
as chemical fertilizers.
Inventory numbers of cattle and calves in the southeastern states
showed a sharp decline from the previous year.

As of July 1, the District

drop amounted to 9 percent; Alabama's loss of 13 percent was the largest in
any District state.

Breeding herds are being reduced to the same degree as

the total cattle inventory.
Center pivot irrigation systems, visible in increasing numbers in
southwest Georgia, are producing marked changes in crop yield and type of
crops by alleviating the problems posed by sandy soils with poor water retention.

The center pivot device employs a "spoke" of twelve-inch pipe with

sprinklers attached which radiates from a water well.
on wheels driven by electric motors.
in presently existing systems.

The sprinkler travels

A radius as large as 1,500 feet is used

Even distribution of water and fertilizer is

achieved by gradual rotation of the sprinkler.

Remarkable increases in yields

of corn and peanuts have resulted from use of this device; vegetable farming,
an industry new to the area, has begun.

A capital investment of at least

$60,000 is required but, according to agricultural extension service studies,
is quickly recouped as a result of increased yields.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Reports from the Seventh District indicate that the expansion
will continue at a moderate pace through the year.

There is somewhat less

concern about shortages and "overheating" than a month or two ago, especially
in soft goods.

Nevertheless, prices are advancing on a broader front.

Fre-

quent comments indicate that strikes and vacation shutdowns are responsible
for an apparent "summer lull".

Evidence is accumulating that capital expendi-

ture programs are being revised upward.
in apartment construction remain poor.

Prospects for a substantial revival
Farmland prices have advanced sharply.

Despite reports of inadequate moisture in some areas, it is too early to assess
the impact on crop production.
Shortages and stringencies have not yet emerged except for items in
especially strong demand as "vans" and certain other vehicles.

In fact,

demands for chemicals, paperboard, apparel, and appliances have fallen short
of expectations, and some prices are soft.
since the spring.

Steel lead times have shortened

The coal strikes could cut steel output, if not settled soon,

because coke is already in short supply.

Natural gas will be a serious problem

if the winter is cold.
Inventory building continues on a cautious basis.

Field inventories

of some capital goods components and some finished goods are described as
"skinny" or "lean".

Some producers have attempted to get distributors to stock

up through liberal credit terms.
The July survey of the Milwaukee Purchasing Managers shows over
70 percent reporting paying higher prices for the third straight month, compared with only 1 or 2 percent reporting lower prices.

In July 1975, 20 per-

cent reported higher prices and 6 percent reported lower prices.

Many manu-

facturers will raise prices in the near future to offset higher costs of labor,

supplies, or services.
rise 6 to 10 percent.

For example, diesel engine prices are expected to
Insurance premiums will be boosted 10 to 20 percent.

Most utilities have applied for substantial rate increases.
Negotiations of the United Auto Workers with the motor vehicle
and farm equipment producers are expected to be resolved without a strike.
(A long rubber strike was expected.)

The auto workers have a rather favor-

able position relative to most other factory workers.

The union is said to

be pushing "job security" measures, including restrictions on subcontracting
and imports of major components.

The companies want a ceiling on health

care payments and effective penalties on absenteeism.

The settlement probably

will be in the area of 10 percent for the first year.
In the white-collar field, Chicago consulting firms expect
increases in compensation of 7 to 8 percent this year and next, slightly less
than last year.

The number of executive hirings is about 30 percent higher

this year, and salaries are up 8 percent or more.
Large general merchandise chains continue to report sales below
budgeted levels.

Apparel and fashion goods are the weakest items.

Among

the stronger items are microwave ovens and home-improvement supplies.

Credit

sales account for a larger share of total sales, and experience is more favorable.

Some types of motor vehicles are in short supply.

the full sticker price, are expected to exceed

Van sales, often at

500,000 this year and to rise

by the amount permitted by manufacturing capacity in 1977.
A steel company is not disturbed by reports of slow demand this
summer.

This firm's orders for October delivery are much stronger now than

they were at the same point in 1972, prior to the big upswing.
orders for steel are in line with optimistic sales projections.
improvement is noted in orders from equipment producers.

Auto companies'
A slight

Delivered prices of

imported steel have increased and are now equal to domestic prices.

Sales of some important chemicals declined in June and July and
were well below budgeted levels, although still above a year ago.

There are

even indications of a shift from inventory accumulation to liquidation.
Oil supplies are adequate, currently, and prices are stable, but
there is concern that new price and pollution regulations will cause problems.
If the announced rise in prices of interstate natural gas shipments becomes
effective, a pickup in drilling of new gas wells is expected.

Oil-well

drilling volume increased earlier this year but mainly in proven fields at
shallower depths.
Capital spending programs shelved by auto and steel companies in
1974 are being revived.
expansion.

Auto companies are spending for new products, not

Steel company projects are for replacement of obsolete facilities

(including pollution control) and to increase capacity of blast furnaces, coke
ovens, and rolling mills.

Orders for locomotives and freight cars have

increased from very low levels.

Various airlines are ordering new aircraft.

Higher fuel costs alone make it desirable to replace fifteen-year-old jets
with more efficient models.

Sales of trucks, trailers, farm equipment, and

lift trucks are at good levels.
remain slow.

Construction and mining equipment orders

Various companies report that export demand for capital equipment

is stronger than domestic demand.

Orders from OPEC nations (Organization of

Petroleum Exporting Countries) and the USSR for equipment for construction,
mining, and oil production are especially significant.
Rural bankers report District farmland prices at midyear to average
30 percent above a year ago—as much as 40 percent in some areas of Illinois
and Iowa.

Strong demand for farm production loans and equipment loans is

being accommodated by rural banks with ample funds.

EIGHTH DISTRICT—ST. LOUIS

Eighth District businessmen report that business activity is
generally good.

The pace of the recovery, however, has slowed somewhat in

the last two months.

Inventory demand has apparently slackened, and retailers

note some slowing in sales.

Also, manufacturing firms are experiencing some

leveling-off in sales, and recent increases in manufacturing employment have
been less than increases recorded earlier in the year.

Home building, which

made substantial gains earlier in the year, has tended to level off in recent
weeks.

Deposits at thrift institutions continue to increase but at a more

modest pace than earlier in the year, and mortgage interest rates have inched
up in recent weeks.

Despite the slower pace of the recovery, most District

businessmen remain optimistic and report a preference for this slower rate of
recovery rather than for more stimulative actions which lead to further
inflation.
The pace of consumer spending has apparently slowed somewhat
recently.

Some department store representatives noted that their sales were

essentially unchanged from June to July; however, they were substantially
above year-ago levels in both months.

July sales of air conditioners and

other consumer durables were reported to be good, but overall sales of such
items for the year to date have been somewhat less than anticipated.

The July

gains in big-ticket items were offset by reduced sales of nondurable items.
Automobile sales remain strong, though the rate of gain has stabilized.
Gains in manufacturing orders have decelerated somewhat in recent
weeks from the pace of early 1976.

A representative of the paints and coating

industry stated that orders have generally risen since the beginning of the
year, though a slowing in the growth rate is now apparent.

Manufacturers of

home construction items reported that sales, while above year-ago levels,
have not increased recently, reflecting the less than anticipated increase
in housing starts.

A major aircraft manufacturer reported a mild decline

in sales in the first half of the year, though the backlog of orders is
higher than a year ago.

Lower commercial aircraft deliveries were partially

offset by accelerating work on Government contracts.

A producer of conveyer

products for the foundry, sawmill, and rubber industries reports that new
orders are substantially
seen at this point.

behind 1975 and 1974 and that no recovery is fore-

On the other hand, a representative of a major chemical

firm reported that sales have continued up at a moderate rate among most
product lines.
sector.

Perhaps the most optimistic prospects are in the automobile

A spokesman for this industry in the St. Louis area was generally

optimistic about the sales prospects for the new-model year.

Reflecting this

optimism, two plants have announced major increases in employment and planned
output.

Overall, employment in the District has increased less than seasonally

in recent months.

Manufacturing employment has continued to make some gains

in several areas of the District, but the increases were more than offset by
declines in the nonmanufacturing sector.

Unemployment rates, however, continue

downward in most of the District and are generally below the United States
unemployment rate.

Some nonmetropolitan areas reported virtual full employment.

Growth of home construction has slowed recently.

New home sales

in the St. Louis area are reported to have been fairly steady in recent months,
though not spectacular.
near a standstill.

Multifamily construction in the St. Louis area remains

Several commercial and industrial projects are under way

in various parts of the District, but one contractor reports a lack of new
projects coming on stream.
The slower rate of deposit growth reported earlier at savings and
loan associations has continued in recent weeks.

Offerings of attractive

yields on Treasury bonds probably are drawing some funds from thrift institutions.

The deceleration in the growth of thrift deposits has encouraged some

savings and loan associations to make their certificates of deposit (CDs)
more attractive by reducing the maturity of CDs for a given yield.

This

policy is a reversal of actions earlier this year, which tended to reduce
the attractiveness of CDs.

Mortgage lenders report some upward pressures on

mortgage interest rates in the past month.
8 3/4 percent in the St. Louis area.

The dominant rate is now at

Business loan demand at commercial

banks remains sluggish, according to St. Louis bank representatives, and bank
lending rates have tended to decline.
Crop yields have generally improved as a result of scattered rainfall
in recent weeks.

In some areas, particularly in Missouri, corn and soybean

crops have been severely damaged by drought conditions.

Reports from several

other areas, however, indicate that crops are in excellent condition.

Recent

rains in some areas have enhanced yield prospects, especially of late plantings.
Cotton yield prospects, however, remain poor, reflecting earlier adverse
weather conditions.

NINTH DISTRICT—MINNEAPOLIS

Although bank directors in early August were generally favorable
about the District's economy, other sources indicated some concern about
the economy's performance.

Many directors were optimistic about consumer

spending for their areas, and District retail sales held up quite well, but
an actual resurgence in consumer spending had not occurred.

Also, our

latest agricultural credit conditions survey indicated a weakening in farm
earnings and a cutback in farm spending.

Several directors reported a

considerable amount of residential construction in their areas.

Apartment

construction and nonresidential construction, however, were not strong
throughout the District.

Looking toward fall, directors looked for economic

policies—particularly those regarding agriculture—to play an important role
in the Presidential campaign.
Although many directors reported favorable retail sales gains in
recent weeks and were encouraged about the future, other information indicated
that no resurgence in consumer spending had taken place.

A director whose

firm is a major producer of consumer goods stated that food and soft goods
sales revived in June and July and expected business to be good this fall.
Economists for two major retailers headquartered in the Minneapolis-St. Paul
area were not so optimistic.

They reported that, since their firms' sales

had yet to revive, their outlook for the second half of this year was weakening.
One economist said that he had not made a downward revision of his sales forecasts for the last half of 1976 but had less confidence in them than earlier.
The other stated that his firm had forecast a 10 percent sales increase for
the second half of 1976 but was currently anticipating only a 5 to 6 percent
gain.

And both firms adopted a more cautious position on inventories than

they had earlier this year.

The results of our latest agricultural credit conditions survey,
taken in late July, indicated that weakened farm earnings had tended to
dampen agricultural spending.

Many agricultural bankers appraised farm

earnings as being somewhat worse in July than they had reported in April,
and 51 percent of those surveyed reported recent farm earnings lower than
a year before.

In assessing the prospects for the next three months,

bankers were slightly more pessimistic—55 percent expected lower farm
earnings than last year.
The present crimp on earnings seems to stem largely from low grain
prices, the continued withholding of 1975 crops from the market, and
unprofitable cattle operations.

Expectations that earnings could worsen

have been generated by inadequate rainfall in much of the District's crop
regions.
As might be expected from their assessment of farm earnings, agricultural bankers reported cutbacks in spending by farmers.

Forty-one percent

of the bankers responded that recent spending was lower than at the same time
last year, and 48 percent expected spending in the coming three months to
continue lower than a year before.

These figures are substantial revisions

of their responses in April, when only 31 percent reported low spending and
25 percent expected more low spending for the next quarter.
Most directors reported quite strong residential construction
activity but mostly in just the single-family market.

A director whose firm

is a major producer of temperature controls cited information indicating that
single-family construction was much stronger in the Ninth District than in
the nation.

He expected that strength to increase in the third quarter.

With

regard to apartment building, he mentioned a national association of home
builders survey, which found a rather sharp second-quarter recovery in multifamily construction that was expected to gain momentum during the remainder

of 1976 and into 1977.

Also, a recent Twin Cities metropolitan area apart-

ment survey reported that vacancy rates had declined to quite a low level,
a usual sign that a pickup is due.

However, many observers felt that rental

rates were not high enough to justify new apartment construction in the
District.
Reports from directors on building activity in their respective
areas showed nonresidential construction weaker than residential construction.
However, the director whose firm manufactures temperature controls believed
nonresidential construction had begun to recover and should be very strong
by 1977, up 10 to 15 percent in constant terms.
Directors agreed that economic policies would be a major part in
this year's Presidential campaign.

One director thought that policies

regarding inflation would be important to either side because of the apparent
voter concern in that area.

Another expressed concern that spending

promises made during the campaign could generate inflationary expectations.
A matter of concern to many directors is the particular role of
agricultural policies in this year's campaign.

A Montana director said that

recent supply and demand conditions point toward a weakening in wheat prices—a
weakening which would benefit the Democrat's argument for reimposition of
price supports.

That director also expected criticism of the Ford Administra-

tion for imposing agricultural export embargoes which are associated with
falling prices.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Consumer spending has settled down in District department stores
but not in domestic new-car dealer showrooms, where full-size luxury models
are nearly sold out and where orders for new models are already strong.

Chain

store managers, despite their lackluster summer sales, expect good business
in the months ahead, report slightly heavy inventories, and foresee fairly
stable prices for their merchandise.

The outlook for food prices, meanwhile,

is very uncertain, given the mixture of offsetting forces affecting farm prices.
Banks report some increase in agricultural loans but none in business loans.
Car buying continues to give moderate growth to consumer loans.

Despite the

current weakness, most bankers expect the prime rate to rise but not by much.
Reports vary, but the rate of growth of retail sales by District
department stores apparently has slowed considerably this summer, and projections for fall and winter have been revised downward in many cases.

July

sales by some stores in Kansas City and Denver were strong, but in Wichita,
Oklahoma City, and Omaha, business was sluggish.

These mixed reports contrast

sharply with the uniformly exuberant responses received this spring, so that
some slowing in retail trade can be inferred.

Department store officials

say they are not pessimistic, just reconciled to a good year instead of a
great one.

Several noted that sales last fall and winter were exceptionally

strong, and that they are now hoping to do as well after once "wishfully
thinking" that they could do better.

Most store managers say that their

current inventories are a little heavy, although they expect to be "clean
and in good shape" by fall, implying some liquidation soon.

The prices paid

for merchandise by retail outlets have been holding the line, and store
managers doubt if they will have to raise prices at retail very much in the
next six months to a year.

Big American cars are the hottest summer item in new-car dealer
lots throughout the District.

Intermediate sizes are selling well, too,

with compacts and subcompacts attracting the least interest.

Luxury-car

dealers report exceptionally good sales and complain of inadequate inventories
of full-size models.

The same story is heard from dealers in the lower priced

domestic makes, although they note some recent up-tick in sales of compacts,
perhaps due to the lack of selection in the larger models.

Stripped-down

versions are the exceptions, optional equipment the rule, with many of the
sportier versions sold "loaded".

Foreign-car dealers report little traffic,

with "no shortages of cars, just customers'".

Domestic dealers are optimistic

about the new-model year, while foreign-car dealers are hopeful.
After remaining unchanged for the month ended July 15, farm prices
have turned weaker, with the declines for hogs and wheat being particularly
significant.

The outlook for farm prices for the rest of 1976 is clouded

by uncertainties arising from the weather, total demand, and recent reports
on livestock inventories.

Cattle prices are currently much lower than anti-

cipated earlier, reflecting vigorous flows of marketings from both the
feedlots and the pastures.

The July 1 inventory of cattle, which was down

5 percent from a year ago, points to a substantial reduction in cattle numbers
for 1976 as a whole.

However, the 17 percent increase in the number of cattle

on feed as of July 1, with some concentration in the heavier weights, suggests
that total slaughter will remain relatively large through at least the
remainder of the year.
period ahead.

This implies only modest price increases in the

Assuming a continuation of these trends, however, beef supplies

in 1977 will likely be curtailed, perhaps significantly, and prices will
probably rise.
effect, however.

Larger supplies of pork and poultry would have a dampening

Another element in the cattle picture hinges on the size of the
1976 corn crop and the cost of feed.

Due to the prospects for a low carry-

over of grain this fall, feed prices will likely remain relatively high until
a bumper crop is assured.

If grain prices remain relatively high, placements

of cattle in feedlots will likely taper off, which will ultimately reduce
beef output and increase prices.

A big crop, however, would have the opposite

effect.
Among District banks contacted, business loan demand did not
increase in July relative to its level in June.

Several banks do report

increases in loans to agribusinesses and to farmers for financing current
operations and for storing grain.

Most of this increase in loans is being

generated by overlines from correspondent banks.

Some banks also report more

inquiries about real estate construction financing, although few of these have
been translated into actual loans.

Consumer loan growth has been moderate,

with car sales being the strongest area of gain.
Most of the banks contacted have been slow to move down to the
7 percent prime rate, with some still posting a rate of 7 1/2 percent.
Despite the current weakness in the rate, the majority of bankers in our
survey expect the prime rate to rise by the year-end, although to no more than
an 8 percent level.

One banker, however, predicts that the rate will fall

below the present level.
size of future increases:

Two important factors are viewed as limiting the
the slow pace of economic recovery in areas other

than consumer spending, and the weak loan demand at New York City banks.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
After slowing last spring, economic growth in the District appears
to be progressing at a slightly faster pace.

The decline in total employment

may have ended, and home building and drilling activity are strong.
turing output, however, continues to sag.

Manufac-

This month's survey included banks,

savings and loan associations, mobile-home manufacturers and dealers, and
natural gas producers.

Major city banks report slow growth in loan demand,

but rural banks indicate that demand for agricultural loans is strong.
Mortgage markets are tightening as demand for housing continues to grow.

Sales

of mobile homes are up, but financing is unavailable for most prospective
buyers.

The recent Federal Power Commission (FPC) order to raise interstate

gas prices is expected to bring increased drilling, especially in offshore
areas.
The growth in loan demand at major District banks is lackluster,
although some bankers point to some recent improvements that may lead to a
significantly higher level of demand by the year-end.

Petroleum loans were

reported to be strong, and several bankers reported "a slight trend" toward
inventory building.

Reactions to inquiries on consumer loan demand were mixed.

Consumer instalment loans and use of credit cards range from record levels to
"only modest", and an increase in loan participations was reported by member
banks of multibank holding companies located in Houston.
Agricultural bankers generally report demand for farm and ranch
credit is strong.

Farm machinery loans have increased because of higher prices

for tractors, machinery, and equipment.

And, as a result of large grain

harvests, crop storage loans have risen, but loan demand for feeding cattle
has weakened with fewer placements of cattle on feed.

A consensus of agricultural bankers in irrigated farming areas
indicates that the demand for crop-operating loans is up sharply, largely
due to increased costs.

A banker in the Texas Panhandle area, for example,

reported that crop production costs were up nearly a third from 1975 on
most irrigated farm operations.

High natural gas prices have substantially

increased the energy costs for pumping water.

In the intensive irrigation

farming area around Pecos, one banker indicated that natural gas prices
paid by producers are up 500 percent from a year earlier.

And, coupled with

higher prices for other inputs, irrigation farming has become expensive and
risky.

Bankers, therefore, are taking a close look at the repayment capacity

of irrigation farmers.
Adequate funds, however, are available in the District for extending
agricultural credit.

And half of the agricultural bankers are seeking new

farm and ranch loan accounts, even though loan demand has risen.

Rural banks

also report a strong growth in deposits from a year earlier.
Demand for mortgage loans at savings and loan associations in
major District cities is strong, with one savings and loan association in
Houston describing the market as the biggest in history.

Loan applications

for single-family homes priced from $40,000 to $50,000 are most numerous.
In Houston, there is a strong market for town houses, as renters are finding
it cheaper to buy than to pay escalating rents.
There appears to be no oversupply of single-family homes.

In

Houston, there is an acute shortage of improved building sites, and skilled
building tradesmen are in short supply.

Part of the shortage of lots is

attributed to an average six-month delay of red tape necessary to meet the
Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD's) standards in developing
raw land.

After slowing in the second quarter, the growth in savings deposits
expanded in July.

One savings and loan association expected the rate of

inflow of savings to slow for the remainder of the year, however, to about
half the rate of growth experienced in the first half of the year.

The growth

in savings is now largely due to purchases of four-year 7 1/2 percent term
certificates, followed by six-year 7 3/4 percent certificates and passbook
accounts.

Four months ago, passbook accounts led the growth in savings deposits.
A survey of mobile-home manufacturers and dealers indicated a

"fantastic" demand for this type of housing.

Sales are currently being

supported by people who cannot qualify to buy single-family homes.

The

number of lenders has declined because many lost money on the "easy" financing
terms they offered a few years ago, and those still in the market are much
more selective in the loans they grant.
be "gold plated" to be granted a loan.

One manufacturer stated a buyer must
According to one dealer in El Paso,

sales could increase 1,000 percent if more financing were available.

However,

high insurance costs—as much as $80 per month for a $10,000 mobile home—have
dampened sales in Gulf Coast areas.
Despite a court-issued stay of the FPC's recent order raising the
ceiling prices on natural gas sold in interstate markets, a number of Texas
gas producers expect the FPC to win a quick termination of the stay, even if
the case is appealed to the Supreme Court.

Once the new ceiling prices

become effective, producers with contracts that allow price adjustments will
file for higher prices.

Drilling activity in the District—already fairly

strong—should quicken, especially in Federal offshore areas of the Gulf
where the greatest potential for significant new finds is believed to be.
deep-drilling rigs in west Texas should also benefit from higher prices.

Idled
Gas

explorers say they will now look more closely at prospective fields that were
judged to be unprofitable at current interstate price levels.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO

Our directors report a continued gradual improvement in business,
with price pressure moderate compared with recent experience.

Newly nego-

tiated wage packages are averaging gains of approximately 10 percent, but
industries in their second or third year of contract life are averaging less.
Although some commodity prices—such as aluminum scrap and natural gas—have
risen quite sharply, most are showing a decelerated rate of increase, and
some (residual fuels and nitrogen fertilizer) have actually declined.

Con-

struction of single-family residences has picked up, but multidwelling building
remains sluggish, due to the gap between prevailing rent structures and
building costs.
The annual wage bill increase in 1976 for newly negotiated contracts
is averaging about 10 percent.

In many cases this represents a considerable

scaling-down of the unions' original demands.

For industries in their second

or third year of a contract, gains have been far less.

One director reports

that "increases are continuing, but on the whole seem fairly moderate by
standards of the recent past".
Materials prices appear to be strengthening but, except in isolated
cases, increases have not been dramatic.

Since the recovery began in

September of last year, a large manufacturer reports that scrap aluminum prices
have risen from 14 cents per pound to 30 cents per pound; basic costs of pig
aluminum and sheet increased an average of 15 percent, the same as the raw
materials costs for basic resins (polyester, epoxies, etc.); and steel products are also up about 15 percent over the same time frame.

Paper products

sold to the dairy industry have increased 6 to 7 percent in price since the
first of the year.

Motor gasoline has increased about 15 percent during 1976;

residual fuels are down 20 to 25 percent, and the price of the remaining
components of a barrel of crude are about the same as in January.

Current

quotes for nitrogen fertilizer average around $130 a ton, down from a 1975
cost range of $210 to $230 a ton.

Lumber costs are up about 10 percent, and

copper, which is still being sold from stockpiles, is starting to increase.
Energy costs, especially for natural gas, continue to rise more rapidly than
other costs.
Interest in plant expansion is still minimal, although the president
of a large manufacturing firm in California commented that,"with production of
steel approaching 90 percent of 'optimum' capacity, we expect a continued,
steady—though slower than mid-1974—increase in capital spending".
New housing construction in the Twelfth District is concentrated in
single-family units, and the market is strengthening.

Nevertheless, a pro-

ducer of aluminum siding reports that a 70 percent proportion of its recent
surge in sales was for existing home improvement rather than for new construction,
There continues to be a very strong resale market for single-family dwellings
based on profit taking and upgrading.
Over the first half of 1976, there has been only slight improvement
in apartment construction, and the main reason cited is the disparity between
current rent scales and construction costs (craft wages).

One bank in Oregon

calculates that rental fees of 29 to 32 cents per square foot are needed to
finance new construction, whereas current rentals are said to support only a
23 to 25 cents per square foot level.
In southern California, vacancy rates are down and rents are
reported to have increased sufficiently to have sparked some interest in
apartment construction, but the market tone remains sluggish.

On the other

hand, a strengthening trend toward building more duplexes and "fourplexes"
has been noted.

One reporter comments that passage of the tax reform bill

with the Kennedy-Haskell amendment would eliminate multiple-dwelling investment
as a tax shelter and further reduce construction levels.
Many farmers and ranchers are experiencing a very trying 1976.

The

farmers who sold crops immediately after harvesting have made a profit, but
those who placed their crops in storage have been facing a continually
declining schedule of prices and, in many cases, will have to sell at a loss.
The optimism about higher cattle prices is beginning to diminish.
Because of heavy losses taken this year on fattened cattle, the prospect is
for a poor feeder cattle market this fall.

