CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 16, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 13
Fifth District-Richmond page 18
Sixth District-Atlanta page 22
Seventh District-Chicago page 26
Eighth District-St. Louis page 30
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 33
Tenth District-Kansas City page 37
Eleventh District-Dallas page 41
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 46

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.]
Continuing expansion at uneven rates characterizes this month's
economic reports.

Although capacity utilization is high in several major in-

dustries, shortages of raw materials, components, and finished goods remain
the exception.

The pace of consumer spending slackened somewhat in most areas

in late April and May.
tions of this tendency.

However, opinion varies widely concerning the implicaA positive outlook persists but is heavily tempered

by caution in inventory building and capacity expansion.

Price behavior

appears fairly normal for a cyclical expansion; increases are primarily in
sectors where spot shortages or a need to adjust to rising costs exist.
Demand for business loans is flat or increasing slightly.

Adverse weather

conditions have affected yields of several major crops.
Major industries report generally high capacity utilization rates.
Yet, capacity is regarded as adequate for the next 6 to 12 months in almost
all industries.

Shortages are expected to be temporary in most cases or

confined to a relatively limited sector affected by unique conditions.

With

some exceptions, and a caveat concerning comparability of reports, high utilization rates are found in paper (90 to 100 percent), wood products, steel (80
to 90 percent), textiles (85 to 100 percent), apparel, chemicals (80 to 100
percent), oil refining (85 to 90 percent), and automobiles (80 to 100 percent).
Low utilization rates are confined to furniture, aluminum, machine tools, and
agricultural chemicals.
In each industry, however, a more meaningful impression is obtained
by differentiating between particular products.

In the steel industry, for

example, flat-rolled steel used in consumer durable goods is in fairly tight

supply, as are foundry products such as castings.

Abundant capacity and

supplies exist of other products used for capital goods and heavy construction.
Current shortages are few, across the board, and generally reflect
special conditions.

Foundry products, for example, are frequently mentioned

as an area of potential shortages.

Both Chicago and Kansas City note that

closing of foundries because of EPA regulations is reducing capacity in this
industry.

Other facilities which are similarly affected are coke ovens and

forging operations.

Several responses indicate that coke supplies are a

potential raw material problem for steel producers.
The primary current bottleneck in most Districts is the supply of
natural gas to users on interruptible contracts.

Uncertainty concerning

natural gas supplies is widespread and has resulted in substantial capital
investment in stand-by energy systems.

Concern also exists about the re-

liability of natural gas liquids used as feedstocks in chemical processes.
Slackening consumer spending, beginning in about mid-April, is noted
in a number of reports.

In most areas, durable goods sales, especially auto-

mobiles, remain strong; nondurables, particularly apparel and department store
sales, have weakened.

Explanations include cool weather, smaller tax refunds,

a shift from nondurable to durable purchases, as well as a return to a sustainable growth rate.

Boston reports some retailers are cutting back on future

commitments, while Philadelphia expects such action to follow, should the
present tendency be confirmed.

Dallas reports that the fall apparel market,

held in May, was weak for women's and some men's clothing lines.

Richmond and

Philadelphia note continued optimism among most retailers; Cleveland finds
that some remain positive, but one director fears a spending decline serious
enough to "trigger a double-bottom recession."
notes an excessive level of retail inventories.

Each of these three Districts

The inventory condition of manufacturers varies greatly.

Dallas

finds factory inventories manageable, and Kansas City notes attempts by many
firms to retain a lean inventory position.

Philadelphia finds a decline in

inventories of manufacturers for the first time since January, but Chicago
reports cautious inventory building.

One-third of the manufacturers in the

Richmond District report an excessive inventory level, with most others indicating satisfaction with their condition.
Capital spending remains static.
for machine tools.

Boston finds a disappointing demand

Chicago notes an improvement in capital goods orders but

expects no uptrend until late in 1976.

Cleveland expects little gain in the

strength of fixed investment during the second half.

An exception exists in

the case of capital investment in agriculture, where strength is noted by
Minneapolis and Chicago.

New York, Chicago, Kansas City, and Cleveland find

environmental regulations to be a source of uncertainty and a major disincentive to capacity expansion.
Price behavior is consistent with a normal cyclical pattern.

Spot

shortages have caused sporadic price increases, as in newsprint; but in cases
such as heavy crude oil, chemical fertilizer, and carpet yarn, oversupplies
are causing price shading.

Prices are generally expected to behave normally

within the context of a cyclical recovery.
Loan demand continues to increase slowly.

Business loans have

"inched up," according to St. Louis, Richmond, and Kansas City but have not
increased in Philadelphia.

Gains in consumer loans are widespread.

reports moderating savings inflows.
rebuild certificates of deposit.

St. Louis

Kansas City finds some banks beginning to

Minneapolis reports that the recent drought will almost certainly
curtail crop yields in Minnesota and has now spread westward into the Dakotas.
The main impact is expected on prices of barley, oats, flax, and durum wheat.
San Francisco reports weak demand, low prices, and surpluses of beans, potatoes, and wheat.

However, a possible beef shortage is foreseen for late 1976.

Richmond notes a sharp decline in the winter wheat crop and freeze damage to
the peach crop.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The New England directors reported a "pause in the recovery."
Although they did not anticipate a growth recession in 1976, they continued
to monitor with concern housing and new machine tool orders for signs of
recovery.

Retail sales were also sluggish in the weeks following Easter.

Except for shortages reported by lumber suppliers, regional productive
capacity is generally excessive.
For the past several months, requests for quotations have been more
numerous in the machine tool industry.
in orders has not materialized.

However, the expected improvement

The machine tool suppliers have been main-

taining relatively high operating rates by filling order backlogs, but a
continued lack of new sales would entail significant layoffs in the second
half of the year.

One director, who has been observing the very gradual

increase in orders for short-lead tools, was hopeful that quotations will
begin to generate new business.
Retailers have become uncertain about the outlook for their trade.
Believing that the economy is fundamentally sound, they were surprised that
"business is falling off against expectations."

In fact, a director comments

that retailers are becoming considerably more conservative and that "typical
retailer stocks are way too high."

Even though this weaker sales experience

may be the product of recent seasonal distortions, our director reports that
merchandisers are cutting back on future commitments.
Industrial capacity is generally more than adequate in relation to
sales throughout the region.

Normal operation rates are based on the

assumption that overtime is modest and that one and one-half or two shifts

of personnel are employed each day.

Although Increased sales will now

require more hiring (productivity gains have been fully exploited), new
orders have a "long-long way to go" to absorb existing space and equipment
in most industries.

Directors typically asserted that capacity utilization

is about 80 percent.
Lumber suppliers were the major exception to this rule of excess
capacity.

Sawmills are fully employed, as are the existing kilns, and yet

the suppliers cannot meet the demand for dry lumber.

Although many machine

tooling firms are operating at normal capacity, they vary order backlogs
rather than production schedules in response to changing demands; at this
time, the backlogs are small.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin were available for comment this month.

All noted the weaknesses in the current data—for the

first time in several months forecasts are being revised downward.

In addi-

tion to the weakness in retail sales, the Commerce Department's survey of
capital spending suggested that the first quarter figures will be revised
downward and that the year as a whole will not be as strong as in the
McGraw-Hill survey or the previous forecasts.

The next DRI forecast will

show business fixed investment rising only about 4 percent in real terms.
According to Eckstein, the recent data show the upside risk has diminished
while the downside risk remains slight; they confirm that this recovery is
a "modest" one and there is no danger of a "runaway boom."
All agreed that the Federal funds rate should be held at its present
5 1/2-percent level.

To Samuelson, prudent policy is to stand pat until we

see whether the weakening is a minor aberration in a strong general pattern.
To Eckstein, the economy should be allowed to follow its own dynamic, with

no stimulus or restraint from monetary policy:
policy "as uninteresting as possible."

He recommended a monetary

While Tobin was willing to accept

the current level of short-term rates, he opposed the recent rise because
it was apparently based not on the state of the economy but on monetary
growth in excess of the targets.
Uncertainty about the demand for money is too great at present to
base financial policy rigidly on aggregate targets.

He favors symmetric

repetition of the flexibility with respect to the targets that was shown
earlier, when money growth fell short of the targets.

In that instance,

the Chairman eloquently and correctly explained that the deviation from the
target was temporary and based upon the performance of velocity.

The same

point can be made in the present context—deviations from the target range
need not indicate that the Fed has "joined the inflationists."

It can mean

that, given the expected path of velocity, above-target growth will be associated with conditions in the financial markets which are conducive to a
revival in fixed investment in 1977.

By then, the fiscal stimulus to con-

sumption and the inventory rebound will have ended and strong fixed investment will be needed to sustain the recovery toward full employment.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Overall capacity constraints are not expected to materialize this
year or early next year, according to Second District business leaders,
directors, and industrial analysts.

Current production rates are below most

industries' capabilities, and the few shortages that exist appear limited to
isolated product lines.
run outlook, however.

Respondents appear less sanguine about the longerOne after another, they complained of the disincen-

tives to investment caused by environmental and safety legislation.

Conse-

quently, little outright addition to capacity is foreseen, and many observers
are apprehensive over bottlenecks and shortages emerging toward the close of
1977.
While on the whole, substantial plant capacity remains to meet
increased production, high utilization rates in some industries—notably
paper, steel, and textiles—suggest that some capacity problems could develop
within the coming year.

A senior official of a trade association expected

full capacity utilization in the paper industry to be reached by mid-1977.
In this official's view, high utilization rates were already building inflationary pressures.

The chief economist of a major paper producer felt

certain lines, especially newsprint, were already at capacity but expected
production to stabilize as inventory building subsided.

One director felt

there were clear indications of possible steel shortages, largely owing to
tightness in foundry capacity.

An industry analyst of a leading securities

firm, however, discounted the current evidence.

He emphasized that while

production was tight for steel products associated with automobiles, substantial slack existed elsewhere.

He argued that since auto production is

unlikely to accelerate, steel capacity should remain adequate.

Textile

industry respondents generally felt that capacity utilization, while high,
would not reach its upper limit in the near term.
In the wake of the severe bottlenecks created by shortages a few
years ago, everyone surveyed appeared to be sensitized to signs of developing shortages.

On the whole, business leaders and industrial economists

reported that raw materials are currently plentiful, and they generally did
not anticipate near-term shortages.

The few exceptions cited—some chemi-

cals, such as chlorine and possibly cotton fibers—were not viewed as likely
to create significant bottlenecks.

The Buffalo Branch directors generally

discounted the risk of a reemergence of shortages of industrial materials in
the foreseeable future.

In their view, the lengthening of lead times for

steel and for certain chemical and paper products was attributable to an
unwillingness on the part of firms in those industries to activate marginal
facilities and to rehire marginally productive workers until the upward
trend of orders became more pronounced.
An official of a major auto manufacturer and other observers felt
that, barring an exceptionally long walkout, the rubber workers' strike
would not substantially impinge new car production.

Inventories were ex-

pected to hold through the end of July, as auto manufacturers have acted to
conserve their stockpiles, and tire production has not been cut as drastically as originally estimated.

Moreover, due to the model-year changeover,

auto plants will be idle for two to three weeks over the summer.

Thus, our

respondents did not expect auto production to be seriously affected before
the end of July.

One, however, did mention the likelihood of short supplies

of some types of truck tires before then.

On the energy front, supplies look ample, except for natural gas.
The chairman of a major oil firm emphasized that shortages of natural gas
were likely if the winter were severe.

His fears were echoed by a major

industrial user of natural gas who recognized the likelihood of service
interruptions that would curtail production in the winter.
prices were seen as rising rapidly.

Natural gas

The president of a major international

oil firm felt that minor production problems could be created because of the
changing mix of sour-sweet crude (high-low sulfur content crude) resulting
from increased imports.

Spot gasoline shortages were expected by the senior

economist of a petroleum firm, but he felt they would be temporary and
localized.

Over the longer term, the chairman of a major coal mining firm

felt price pressures in his industry would intensify as a consequence of
safety and environmental mandates.
Concerns over the impact of environmental legislation on capacity
growth dominated the discussion of the longer-run outlook for capacity
utilization.

Although respondents felt that real capital spending would

increase, they discounted the potential impact on capacity, citing requirements for increased "unproductive" spending on pollution abatement and
safety equipment.

This legislation was also viewed as blunting the incen-

tives for increasing capital investment.

In addition, uncertainty over

constantly changing environmental laws and regulations was viewed by the
vice president of a diversified chemical firm as hampering effective planning of long-term expansion projects and raising the riskiness of investments.

In the textile industry, one company analyst felt that additions to

productive capacity would decline 5 to 10 percent in the coming year.

The

Buffalo Branch directors stressed additional influences prompting businessmen

to approach plant and equipment investment with caution and reluctance.

In

this regard, they mentioned fears of a possible resurgence of inflation and
lack of confidence in government.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions in the Third District are improving but at
an uneven pace.

Retail activity has softened, while the manufacturing

sector continues to expand.

Increases are reported in new orders, ship-

ments, and employment, while inventories in manufacturing are lower.
The longer-term outlook both in retailing and manufacturing remains optimistic.

Bankers report that consumer loans are inching up but see no

signs yet of any pickup in business borrowing.

Businessmen indicate that

prices continue to rise, but inflationary pressures are about the same as
last month.

Major manufacturers in the District report no current bottle-

necks in production and expect no significant problems within the next
12 months.
District manufacturers, responding to the latest business outlook
survey, report a higher level of economic activity than last month.

Close

to one-half of the businessmen surveyed see an improvement in general business conditions.

Specifically, 38 percent of the respondents indicate

gains in new orders and 36 percent note increases in shipments.

This is

similar to the proportions reporting increases last month but below the
gains reported in March and April.

Employment in manufacturing shows

additional improvement this month.

The factory workweek is longer for

the fourth month in a row, and work forces are rising at 17 percent of the
businesses surveyed.

The proportion of firms indicating fewer jobs dropped

from 16 percent in March to only 2 percent in the latest survey.

At the

same time, inventory levels declined this month for the first time since
January.

The outlook in manufacturing for the next six months is for

further expansion.

Of the executives polled, 79 percent look for an

improved business climate by December.
ployment as well:

Further gains are expected for em-

One-fourth of the respondents project a longer work-

week and four out of ten expect to hire additional employees.

At the same

time, 43 percent of the manufacturers surveyed anticipate increases in
inventories.

This is down somewhat from last month, when 53 percent were

projecting gains six months out.
tures are off slightly as well.

Plans for increases in capital expendiThirty-four percent of the respondents

in the current survey plan to hike their spending for plant and equipment,
compared to 46 percent last month.
On the price front, manufacturers report paying and receiving
higher prices, but there is little change in the distribution of responses
from last month.

Forty-nine percent of those surveyed report paying more

for their inputs, and 17 percent are charging more for their finished
products.

By December, 87 percent expect to be paying more for supplies

and 72 percent anticipate higher prices for the products they sell.

In

the retail sector, prices are currently reported to be increasing
"moderately."
Area retailers report a slowdown in sales but continue to be
optimistic for the rest of this year.

Merchants are unanimous in labeling

retail activity as "disappointing" in the latest sales period.

Reported

sales volumes range from 2 percent above to 4 percent below the same period
last year.

Most of the retailers note that the whole spectrum of wearing

apparel was especially weak.

One merchant notes additional weakness in

draperies, housewares, and major appliances.
for this softening in sales:

Several reasons are offered

a stretch of unseasonably cold weather, the

necessity for consumers to begin paying for instalment purchases made in
the first quarter, and the absence of a boost to spendable income like that
provided by the tax rebate last year.

Despite current sales performance,

retailers continue to be optimistic for the remainder of 1976.

However,

as one executive put it, "If the next sales period turns out to be as disappointing as the current one, we'll have to adjust our sights for the
fall."
Bankers in the District report that loan volume continues to be
soft.

Consumer loans are moving up slightly, while business loans are

characterized as "flat."

Bankers are unanimous in citing high levels of

corporate liquidity and a very cautious approach to building inventories
as reasons for soft business loan demand.

There is general agreement that

loan volume will be higher by year-end, but bankers are uncertain about
the timing and degree of the pickup.

The consensus is for a mild increase

in the third quarter and for "somewhat more strength" in the final quarter
of the year.
Interest rates are expected to move upward gradually.

The majority

of bankers contacted anticipate a prime rate of 8 percent by the end of
this year, with one seeing the possibility of 8 1/2 percent.

None of the

financial executives contacted feel that the anticipated rise in interest
rates through the first quarter of 1977 will hamper economic expansion.
However, several are concerned that the recovery in housing may be slowed
if long-term rates continue to move up.
The question of capacity utilization and bottlenecks in production was explored with executives in the food, apparel, chemical, petroleum, steel, nonelectrical machinery, and electrical machinery industries.

Estimates of present capacity utilization by these businessmen range from
55 percent at one steel company to 95 percent at a firm in the apparel
industry.

However, not many of the firms contacted report current rates

close to these extremes.

Most of the reported current operating rates lie

within the 70-85-percent range.

In general, capacity utilization is now

about 20 percentage points above levels recorded in the first and second
quarters of 1975.
Manufacturers report that they are presently experiencing no
constraints on production.

There are no reported problems with raw ma-

terials, labor, or fuel requirements.

There are scattered reports of large

price increases for some raw materials, but these are not considered to
be hampering production.

For example, one clothing manufacturer notes that

piece cloth prices are now 160 percent above two years ago, but he adds that
this is causing him no problems.

In addition, a producer of nonelectrical

machinery reports that cotton imported from the Far East costs twice as
much today as it did a year ago.

However, he is still ordering with rela-

tively short lead times for delivery.

In 1973 and 1974, this businessman

was ordering cotton from the Far East a year ahead of the desired delivery
time, whereas now he is ordering only three months out.

At the same time,

some manufacturers report an improvement in their supply picture.

A

producer of canned foods indicates that it is easier to obtain tinplate
now than it was in 1974, and a chemical manufacturer notes an improvement
in natural gas supplies.

According to this executive, "We were under the

threat of a natural gas shortage in the fall of 1975, but we've been
informed that supplies will be adequate at least through this winter."

For the longer term, most oi the manufacturers contacted feel
that they can meet anticipated i^ureases in demand.

The clothing manu-

facturer, whose firm is running at 95 percent of capacity, has recently enlarged an existing plant by 50 percent and, along with subcontracting,
expects to be able to meet customers' needs through the fall.

All of the

manufacturers contacted project higher operating rates by year-end, but
there are no concrete expectations of plant and equipment constraints
within the next 9-12 months.

There is more uncertainty about the second

half of 1977, however, and some executives see the "possibility" of running
into capacity constraints by late 1977.

Nevertheless, those who see such

a threat are not expecting a return to the severe conditions of 1974.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Economists who attended the June meeting of the Fourth District
Round Table at this Bank forecast more improvement in output, prices, and
employment in 1976 than they did at a similar meeting last March.

Several

retailers and directors remain optimistic and have not yet lowered their
sales forecasts, although another month of declining sales may bring about
this result.

Reports on key industries in the District suggest ample capa-

city for most industries during 1976 and 1977, but supplies have been
tightening in steel, rubber, and chemicals.
Economists who attended the recent meeting at this Bank raised
their forecasts of output and lowered their estimates of inflation and
unemployment in 1976.

The median forecast of real GNP for 1976 was re-

vised to 6.6 percent from 6.2 percent in March, the GNP price deflator
was revised to 5.3 percent from 6.0 percent, and the unemployment rate
was lowered to 7.3 percent from 7.6 percent.

The median forecast of the

group also showed considerable slowing in the rate of recovery from the
first quarter.

Recovery in business fixed investment during the second

half of the year is still not expected to be much stronger than during the
first half.

Some members were skeptical over projected gains in personal

consumption expenditures because of the recent drop in retail sales.

How-

ever, all eight economists who submitted auto sales forecasts raised their
estimates for the March meeting, with the median forecast at 10.3 million
units for 1976.
Retailers still appear optimistic that sales will rebound despite
the drop since April.

A director with a national retail chain headquartered

in the District commented that retail inventories are huge.

He fears a

continued drop in consumer spending may trigger a double bottom recession,
such as in 1957-1958.

An economist with a retail chain reported its sales

have declined for the last seven weeks, an unusually long period.

Declines

were largely in apparel and appliances, but sales of carpeting, draperies,
and housewares were sustained through May.

He speculates that abnormal

weather and smaller tax refunds in 1976 compared to 1975 account for the
unexpected decline in sales.
goods remain optimistic.

Other retailers and producers of consumer

A director associated with home remodeling and

modernization materials commented that demand is still strong and that
its plants in Ohio are still operating seven days a week for the first
time in five years.

Another director reported his company's consumer

business is still good, that capacity will be increased about 15 percent
this year, and that it is advancing its planned expansion for plastic
housewares from next year to this.

The chairman of a large department

store commented that sales leveled off to a rational and sustainable
level.

Finally, a major discount chain reported that sales in the last

two weeks picked up, following a decline that began in mid-April.

It

expects the pickup to continue, although at a less vigorous rate than in
the first four months of 1976.
Manufacturing capacity is expected to be ample to accommodate projected increases in output during 1976 and 1977, according to reports from
directors, financial officers, and economists in the District.

Shortages,

such as experienced during 1973 and 1974, are not likely to surface,
although tight supplies will again mark some key industries, especially
steel, rubber, and chemicals.

Metalworking industries, which recently

were operating at an estimated 75 percent of capacity, are not expected
to reach the October 1973 peak for another two and one-half years, according to an economist associated with a major durable goods producer.
Steel is one industry where supplies have tightened, lead times
have lengthened, and operations have rebounded close to desired levels of
capacity.

Steel operations, which rose from 80 percent utilization in the

first quarter of 1976 to 90 percent in May, are expected to hover around
90 percent by year-end, according to several steel economists.

The indus-

try should have about 159 million tons of capacity available by the end
of this year, compared with 153 million tons in 1975.

Flat-roll products

are in very tight supply, but structural steel, plates, and line pipe are
in ample supply.

Steel economists expect supply conditions for a broad

range of products to tighten by early 1977, as the industry operates close
to capacity.

One economist expects steel shipments at 105 million tons

in 1977, compared with 110 million tons of finished steel capacity.

A

director who is a raw material supplier to the steel industry states that
capacity limitations in steel stem from tight supplies of raw materials,
such as ore, and that steel producers will sharply step up expansion of
mining and materials facilities.

A director with a steel company agrees

that capacity problems in steel lie in basic raw materials.
Tire producers are likely to operate at capacity for 12 to 15
months after a labor settlement in the rubber industry, according to an
economist with a major tire producer.

Operations last quarter were at

about 90 percent of capacity, in contrast to a recent low of 65 to 70
percent in the first quarter of 1975.

Prior to the strike, spot shortages

of truck tires and radial tires for passenger cars surfaced.

The industry

has adequate capacity for passenger car tires until 1980, but capacity for
truck tires is reported to be tight.
Petrochemical producers in the District expect adequate capacity
of feedstocks to produce chemicals for 1976 and 1977.

Demand for petro-

chemicals in 1976 will approach or surpass record levels of 1973 and 1974,
and supplies are expected to be adequate to meet demand.
plastics has rebounded sharply over the past year.

Demand for

Polyvinyl chloride

sales in 1976 are estimated at about 10 percent below peak levels in 1974.
Plastics producers were operating at about 80 percent of capacity last
quarter and expect to be in an 80- to 85-percent range during 1977.

One

industry economist noted that capacity for polyvinyl chloride rose about
30 percent between January 1974 and January 1976, but effective capacity
rose only 20 percent because of OSHA restrictions.

Analysts expect that

the industry has adequate capacity through 1978.
Sources associated with energy producers in the District—oil and
coal—foresee little problem meeting anticipated demands for their products
over the near term.

An oil economist commented that there are no shortages

of oil but expressed concern about the increasing U. S. dependence on
foreign sources of crude oil.

His estimates show crude oil demand is likely

to increase 5.5 percent from last year (7 percent if growth in the economy
exceeds the standard forecast).

The industry can accommodate an 8-percent

increase in gasoline demand in 1976, but supplies, although adequate, will
tighten, especially for lead-free gasoline.

Refineries are operating at

86 percent of capacity and should remain in the high 80's for the balance
of 1976.

Crude capacity by year-end 1976 will be increased about 1 million

barrels from the end of 1972, but not much additional capacity is scheduled

for 1977.

For the longer term, capacity expansion plans are uncertain

because of high costs of refining crude oil and stringent Federal regulations
that have had the effect of reducing rig activity in the U. S. in recent
months.

Capacity for producing coal is more than ample, at least for the

short run.

The industry is now operating at about 10 percent below its

desired rate.

Capacity is expected to increase from 740 million tons in

1976 to 880 million tons in 1981, with half of the growth to come from
low sulfur coal in western states.

This predicted growth in capacity

assumes that the industry can meet environmental standards.
Other industries for which capacity appears to be more than ample
are aluminum, automotive, and metalworking.

An economist with a major

aluminum producer reports that its projections indicate output is not
likely to reach capacity before 1979 or 1980, if then.

Operations by year-

end are expected at about 84 percent, compared with 80 percent currently.
The only bottlenecks that may surface are in sheet rolling capacity and
in melting capacity, the latter due to OSHA and pollution controls.

Simi-

larly, the auto industry is currently operating at about 80 to 85 percent
of capacity, about 10 percent below optimum levels.

Finally, there is

ample capacity in metalworking industries, according to an economist associated with the industry.

Utilization is projected to be 80 to 85

percent of capacity in 1976 and 1977.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Responses to our June survey of Fifth District Business Conditions
suggest a leveling off of the rate of. recovery.

Compared to recent months,

fewer manufacturers reported improvement in such areas as shipments and volume of new orders.

Whether because of these developments or not, respondents'

expectations for the next six months appear less optimistic than in previous
months, particularly with regard to the level of production in their respective firms.

Retail sales seem to have shown little change in May, an obvious

departure from the rather rapid rate of improvement experienced earlier this
year.

Employment in the Fifth District continues to follow the trends set

in the first quarter, as sizable monthly gains remain the rule.

Neither cur-

rent capacity nor availability of supplies and materials appears to present
immediate problems.

What supply problems have arisen were apparently related

to differential rates of recovery which caused some supply channels to be
drained.

Such problems have already begun to subside.
Of the manufacturers responding to our latest survey, fewer reported

increases in shipments, orders, and backlogs than did so in the two previous
months.

Backlogs of orders, in fact, seem to have shown little change in May.

Inventories of materials held steady, while stocks of finished goods apparently
grew somewhat.

Most manufacturers responding to the survey report current in-

ventory levels "about right" to "too high," with nearly one-third reporting the
latter.

Employment and weekly hours were also expanded somewhat, although

these changes were less widespread than a month ago.

Reports of price in-

creases were more common than last month, with one-half of our respondents
paying higher prices this month.

Although nearly three-fourths of the

manufacturers surveyed view current plant and equipment capacity as about
right, over 20 percent continue to feel it excessive.
The performance of several key industries has permitted relatively
rapid recovery, at least in terms of employment, in most areas of the District.
Textile manufacturers, in particular, have experienced great improvement
in the level of business activity and remain among the more bullish Fifth
District industries.

This very rapid return to high levels of production

in the textile industry apparently caused some short-term shortages, particularly of machinery and equipment.

Recent contacts with industry people,

however, support the view that these problems are largely past.

Other

than some normal lengthening of delivery times, our contacts in the industry foresee no immediate symptoms of capacity or supply constraints.

The

apparel industry, heavily dependent on the textile mills, is apparently experiencing some lengthening of delivery times and some spot shortages.

They

seem, however, to view these problems as transitional, related to rapidly
increasing rates of production and capacity utilization.
The furniture industry experienced little change in May, as new
orders, shipments, and backlogs were essentially flat.

Respondents expect,

at worst, some lengthening of delivery times over the next six months.

There

is no indication of more than some isolated lengthening of lead time in the
paper and paper products lines.

Lengthening lead times in some lines and

more aggressive selling, suggesting weak sales in others, seem to typify
the situation.
Among primary metals producers and users, no problems are currently being experienced nor are any anticipated in the immediate future.
Contacts with industry personnel turned up several comments about capacity

limitations and possible difficulties developing as early as the fourth
quarter; but even in these cases, no serious problems are expected.

As in

other industries, there has been some extension of lead time and may be
more, but this is apparently not viewed as serious either by producers or
users.

Producers of electrical equipment and supplies report some delays in

obtaining supplies, particularly electrical components, but here again the
problems are not considered serious.
So far as potential supply bottlenecks are concerned, the major
uncertainty among District producers is with regard to the availability of
energy, particularly electricity and natural gas, over the coming months.
The failure of projected shortages to develop so far has eased some of
the concern but perhaps intensified the uncertainty, particularly among industries heavily dependent on these types of energy.
Retailers responding to our latest survey report a relatively flat
month in May.

There was little change reported in sales and sales of big-

ticket items.

Relative total sales held steady.

Inventory increases were

reported by most retailers, and a majority now view current inventory levels
as excessive.

Prices, including employee compensation, continued to rise,

but this too was less common than in recent months.

Retailers remain es-

sentially optimistic, although not to the extent noted in the first quarter.
Despite the rather flat performance in May, retailers expressed little disappointment.

They seemed resigned to the fact that sales could not possibly

continue to grow at recent rates.

Unit sales remain well above year-ago

levels, despite unusual weather and higher prices.

Specific comments from

survey respondents suggest that sales are firm at all price points but that
the consumer retains an eye for quality.

In the banking sector, business lending at large Fifth District
banks has declined about 2 percent so far this year.

In a mid-May survey,

one-half of the respondents reported no change in the strength of business
loan demand over the past three months.

One-third reported demand moder-

ately stronger, while one-sixth reported it weaker.

Respondents expect loan

demand to be unchanged to moderately stronger during the current quarter.
District farmers' cash income from farm marketings during the first
quarter of 1976 was up about 2 percent over the same period in 1975, compared with a 10-percent gain nationally.

Smaller acreage and weather-

reduced yields per acre have combined to cut the winter wheat crop 23 percent below a year ago—a much sharper decline than that forecast for the
nation.

Spring freeze damage reduced 1976 peach prospects sharply in all

District states except South Carolina.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

The southeastern economy continues to expand, although the advance
remains uneven." Capacity utilization rates are high in most major industries.
Yet manufacturers report no unusual shortages or bottlenecks of raw materials,
with the exception of natural gas.

Consumer spending remains strong in some

areas but has weakened in others.

Florida's phosphate industry began layoffs;

the continuing rubber strike also reduced employment.
Consumer spending in the Southeast has become ambivalent.

Autos and

trucks are selling well throughout the District, and mobile home sales are
strong in some places.
several areas.

Sales of soft goods, however, have leveled off in

This development may reflect a weakening of business activity

or simply a growing emphasis by consumers on durable goods purchases.
Florida's phosphate industry has begun layoffs because export demand
and domestic fertilizer sales are low.
have reduced fertilizer applications.
year high.

High prices and the Midwest drought
Phosphate inventories are at a five-

Two companies have laid off 350 workers, while a third has idled

1,000 of 1,300 workers.

The ongoing rubber strike has reduced employment in

Alabama.
The shortage which primarily concerns southeastern industries is
natural gas.

There is little worry about the supply of electric power, al-

though in some areas the cost of electricity is uncertain because natural gas
curtailment necessitates substitution of more costly fuels.

In one area of

the District, gas cutoff to customers with interruptible service is expected
for 320 days in 1976 compared to 50 days in 1974; there is concern that this
makes the locality unattractive to manufacturers seeking plant locations.

Many companies report programs for energy conservation and installation of
stand-by energy systems, so their major worry is the impact of a gas shortage
on costs rather than continuity of production.

However, these programs

absorb capital which might otherwise be used to enlarge production capacity.
Three automobile assembly plants in the Atlanta area, which manufacture intermediate- and full-size cars as well as light trucks, report production at record levels.

Yet, with the obvious exception of tires, no supply

problems are reported.

A small tiremaker expects the current strike-induced

shortage to persist because of the difficulty of replenishing rapidly depleting inventories while meeting new vehicle production requirements, as well as
seasonally high replacement demand.

Mobile home manufacturers are still

operating with significant excess capacity, and no raw material shortages are
occurring.
A major steel producer estimates industry operations at 80 to 90
percent of capacity but reports no shortages.

Lead times are increasing on

flat-rolled steel used in consumer products, and some talk is heard of allocations in late 1976.

Steel grades used for capital goods manufacturing and

heavy construction are in abundant supply.

A large distributor of metal

products notes an excess of goods and states that shortages of flat-rolled
steel caused by increased automobile output have been relieved by production
adjustments.

This source foresees no serious stringencies until the capital

goods and heavy construction industries resume higher operating levels.
Among companies using metal products, a manufacturer of school buses
and a distributor which stocks over 90,000 automobile replacement parts find
no unusual supply problems.

Other steel users have current shortages of some

steel products or are expecting them.

Some firms are building inventories in

anticipation of shortages and higher prices.

In nonferrous metals, shortages

are reported for aluminum sheets and aluminum plates used for printing.
Large chemical companies are utilizing 90 to 100 percent of capacity;
this level is expected to continue.
reported or expected.

No shortages other than natural gas are

Most firms are constructing sizable additions to

capacity.
Textile mills are now operating at 85 to 100 percent of capacity,
based on three daily work shifts.
rently under construction.

New capacity for denim production is cur-

Prospects for cotton prices have caused some

worry in view of crop forecasts and strong foreign demand, but no raw material
bottlenecks are reported or foreseen.

In apparel, present levels of produc-

tion vary but are expected to reach full capacity use by year-end.
being increased by hiring rather than by plant expansion.

Output is

The only evidence

of shortages is longer lead times for synthetic and spun yarn fabrics.

Some

reports suggest that retailers' and manufacturers' reluctance to build inventories may result in an influx of last-minute orders for fall goods which will
be impossible to fill.
In the carpet industry, unused capacity is abundant and should not be
exhausted in 1976.

Plant investment is primarily in the form of product line

changes and additions to distribution facilities, although one latex manufacturing plant is being built.

Transportation is adequate, but truck carrier

costs are a major source of price increases.

Overcapacity among fiber pro-

ducers has recently led to some price reductions.
Paper producers' capacity use has risen sharply during the past year
and is approaching full utilization; it is expected to remain high.

Price

increases and some shortages have recently occurred for newsprint; cardboard

containers have also been reported in short supply.

Some producers regard

restriction of timber cutting in national forests as a potential threat to
raw material supplies.

No reports of pulpwood or chemicals shortages have

been received.
Wood products companies present a contrasting picture.

A manufac-

turer of pine and paper chemicals, with capacity usage at 75 percent, finds
no raw material problems.

But a lumber exporter is experiencing bottlenecks

in raw materials and finished goods, which he expects to continue for the remainder of the year despite operating levels well below capacity.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The uptrend continues in the Seventh District.

The rubber strike

that began April 21 has had much less impact than had been expected.

Retail

sales appear to have softened somewhat in the past six weeks, but retailers
do not appear to be particularly disturbed.
cautiously.

Inventory building is proceeding

Orders for capital goods are generally improved, but the picture

is mixed and no pronounced uptrend, overall, is anticipated until late this
year.

Order lead times have lengthened, but significant shortages and bottle-

necks are not yet evident.
to single-family homes.

The improvement in real estate is still confined

Some observers are hopeful that the general inflation

rate can be held at 5 percent or less, but those who fear an acceleration in
price inflation are probably more numerous.
Tire inventories at all levels proved to be much larger than almost
anyone had estimated.

Shipping vehicles without spares has conserved supplies.

Also, the industry has been operating at a higher rate during the strike than
had been thought possible.

Supervisors and the clerical staff are operating

most of the tire plants that are on strike—in one case at 35 percent of
capacity.
Some of the slowing in sales of general merchandise in May is attributed to cool weather.

Consumer attitudes are improved.

credit freely and are paying bills more promptly.
not as strong as had been expected.

They are using

Demand for appliances is

One observer now expects sales of appli-

ances to be up 10 to 12 percent this year, rather than the 15- to 20-percent
gain expected earlier.
appliances.

Strength in auto sales may be adversely affecting

Orders for furniture are sharply above last year, and factory

backlogs are up about 40 percent.

The boom in sales of RV's continues, and

boating equipment also is very strong.

Airlines traffic is up 13 percent

from last year's depressed period, and a gain of 10.5 percent is now expected
for the year—up from 8 percent forecasted earlier.
Inquiries concerning shortages and bottlenecks revealed few immediate
problems.

Much depends on how rapidly inventories are increased which could

cause lead times to lengthen markedly and possibly bring back double ordering.
Most producers of capital goods and components have increased capacity significantly since 1973.

Castings and forgings may become short again but only if

capital spending accelerates.
Restrictions imposed by regulations of EPA, state and local bodies,
and private legal actions have hampered expansion of capacity.

A large share

of capital spending is channeled into environmental and safety facilities.
Many foundries, forging operations, and coke ovens have been closed down and
others will be.

Restrictions have been placed on start-ups of oil refineries

which take three to four years from go-ahead to completion and electric
utility plants which have even longer lead times.

Some new coke ovens, which

meet operating rules, are not producing efficiently.

Restrictions on operat-

ing rates hold down output at nuclear power plants—usually the lowest cost
units.
Steel may prove to be the major limiting factor on industrial production again.
and in 1977.

Steel is expected to be in tight supply in the fourth quarter
Shipments from U. S. mills probably are limited to 100 million

tons this year and 105 to 108 million next year.
can be counted upon to supplement supplies.

At present, foreign suppliers

The potential bottlenecks in

steel production are availability of coke and high-grade ore pellets.
ous steel companies slowed expansion programs during the recession.

Vari-

Oil would soon be a serious problem in case of any interruption of
supplies from abroad, which now account for over 40 percent of domestic
supplies.

A 5-percent increase in OPEC prices is expected by year-end.

Spot

shortages of gasoline are expected this summer, particularly of lead-free
gasoline which is highly susceptible to contamination and must be produced
and distributed with great care.

Oil refineries are operating at 89 percent

of capacity, currently, and 92 percent (by this measure) is considered to be
the practical maximum.
Most industries interviewed thought that capacity is adequate except
for special developments such as long strikes.

Nevertheless, purchasing

managers are continually checking primary and secondary sources as to future
availability.

Most observers believe that price/wage controls were a major

factor causing the shortage in 1973-1974 and would be again if reinstated.
Tightness in supplies develop from time to time in such industries
as paper and wood products when Canadian supplies are interrupted by strikes.
Lumber prices, for example, spurted recently.

Other problems develop when

older, higher-cost facilities are reactivated.
The trucking industry is estimated to be operating at 91 percent of
capacity and is expected to be at 95 percent by year-end.

Retail sales of

heavy trucks improved recently and are expected to go much higher.

Orders

for major truck components are up sharply, and a producer of diesel engines
is operating at virtual capacity.
Orders for bearings, controls, electric motors, and other components
have increased significantly, partly to restock dealers.
ment is also higher.

Demand for replace-

None of these industries have immediate capacity problems

and do not expect any for this year.

Sales of farm equipment are excellent

but not so ebullient as two or three years ago.

Small construction equipment

sales are up, but large earthmoving equipment remains depressed.
rates of most machine-tool producers are well below capacity.

Operating

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Business activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District continues
upward, according to reports of area, businessmen.

Consumer demand remains

strong, especially for automobiles and other durable goods.
activity, though still somewhat below capacity, is improving.

Manufacturing
Increased

operating ratios for manufacturing firms have so far had little impact
on prices.

Financial institutions report some increase in interest rates

as loan demands inch up.

Savings flows into thrift institutions continue

to increase but at a more moderate rate than in the first quarter of the
year.
Retail sales continued to register overall gains in recent weeks,
but department store representatives report that increases in sales have
not been as large as expected.

Sales increased in May at only about one-

half the expected rate of gain.

Analysts point out that comparisons with

year-ago sales may be biased by the expenditures associated with the tax
rebates last year.

In addition, the slower rate of growth in department

store sales may reflect the rising consumer preference for automobiles
and other durable goods.

Appliance and automobile sales are reported to

have been excellent in recent weeks.
This month's interviews with manufacturing firms were conducted
with special emphasis on current operations as a percent of normal capacity and the pressures that rising operating levels have had on prices.
In general, firms are reported to be operating somewhat below normal
capacity.

Lack of demand is the reason most often given for this less-

than-capacity level of output.

But demand is continuing to increase and

excess capacity is declining.

A steel representative reports current

utilization is slightly over 80 percent of capacity.

Price increases for

steel products, which go into effect this month, were reported to be necessary to cover capital costs.

A major feed and food processor reported

operations in this sector to be about 70 to 75 percent of capacity, with
upward pressures on prices not expected until at least 90 percent of capacity is attained.

A manufacturer of welding equipment is operating cur-

rently at 90 percent of capacity on some items while at full capacity on
others.

A representative of this firm noted that raw material prices are

increasing rapidly and that his firm's prices will be increased soon.

An

auto assembly plant in the St. Louis area has plans to operate at full
capacity for the first time since 1974 by adding a second shift this fall.
A manufacturer of electric motors for appliances also reported operating
at virtual capacity in recent months.
Representatives of a few industries reported a shortage of capacity at the present time, and large price increases for products of these
industries are expected.

A distributor of hydraulic equipment parts noted

that a seller's market has developed for these products.

Capacity has not

been increased substantially in this industry during the past few years,
and rising demands have resulted in order backlogs up to six months.

Some

products used in the oil and gas industry were also reported to be in
short supply, though price increases for these products have so far been
moderate.

However, increases in basic raw material costs for this industry

are expected to contribute to price increases in the near future.
Interest rates are beginning to inch up again, according to reports
from area bankers and thrift institution officials.

The most prevalent

mortgage rate in St. Louis is still 8 1/2 percent on an 80-percent loan,
but 8 3/4 percent is becoming increasingly common.

One savings and loan

representative predicted that 8 3/4 percent would become the dominant
rate within another month.

The pressure for mortgage rates to rise locally

is said to reflect higher-yielding investment opportunities in national
markets rather than any sharp upturn in local mortgage demand.

Business

loan demand at commercial banks has inched up in recent weeks, according
to representatives of larger banks.

Gains in volume of real estate, con-

sumer instalment, and agricultural loans were registered in May.

One bank

predicted an increase in loan demand through the summer, with an accompanying increase in rates charged.
Statistics for the St. Louis area show no growth of savings deposits at savings and loan associations in April, but reports indicate
some increase in May.

Reports from other areas also indicate savings de-

posits continue to make gains but at a reduced rate from earlier in the
year.

Minor changes in rates offered on deposits at several savings and

loan associations were noted in recent weeks.

Minimum amounts for long-

term certificates at some associations were raised from $1,000 to $10,000
or more, and the rates paid were reduced by one-fourth of one percent.
The recent tendency for mortgage rates to rise is expected to forestall
further rate reductions on deposits.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Capacity bottlenecks are not currently a major problem in the
Ninth District economy; and in general, capacity problems are not expected
to arise in 1976, though there are exceptions.
is still excess capacity.

In most industries, there

In other industries, such as coal and taconite,

firms are responding to demand pressures by adding to capacity.

Lead

times for some products such as brass and steel continue to lengthen, but
these longer lead times are not seen as evidence of capacity bottlenecks.
Industrial raw materials prices are up, but the increases have been modest.
Gasoline prices have also increased, but supplies are ample.
energy supplies appear adequate for the rest of 1976.

Overall

Drought conditions

in the District have worsened in the last month; some farming regions are
now in critical need of rainfall, and farm prices are rising.
There is more evidence of underutilized capacity than of supply
bottlenecks in the Ninth District economy.

A copper plant in upper

Michigan is now running at 50 percent of capacity and is expected to be
at 75 percent of capacity by year's end.

A paper mill in the same area

has recently expanded its plant and is operating below its new capacity.
A representative from a major food processing concern says he is unaware
of any capacity problems in this region's key industries.

A director from

a major manufacturing firm which buys inputs from national markets says
that his firm's operations have not been hindered by capacity problems
among suppliers.
Only about 1 in 7 of the 175 firms responding to this Bank's May
survey of District manufacturers says that existing plant and equipment

is inadequate in light of current backlogs and prospective sales over the
next year.

Nearly half of those firms are in food processing; for several

of the firms, capital outlays would be used to update and improve existing
facilities rather than to increase capacity.

In the paper industry, con-

sidered by some to be a likely bottleneck in the coming month, most survey
respondents say that capacity is adequate to meet anticipated sales over
the near term.
Purchasing agents report only scattered problems in obtaining
inputs.

One exception is that electronic firms say integrated circuits

are currently in short supply; suppliers reportedly have a 90-day backlog
of orders, and only orders from preferred accounts are being accepted.
Capacity of circuit suppliers is reportedly being expanded, but the increased supply will not come on line in the near term.
Another exception is a manufacturer of steel castings who says
that heavy demand from the District's expanding taconite industry is pressing
on his firm's supply capabilities.

Smaller orders are not being accepted,

and the firm is taking on only those customers who show promise of developing into major accounts.

The firm is considering construction of a new

foundry, which would come on line in 1979.

The foundry would be constructed

in Duluth or northern Wisconsin, and its primary purpose would be to meet
the rising needs of the taconite industry on the Minnesota iron range.
Except for integrated circuits and castings, most inputs are in adequate supply.

A manufacturer of heavy construction equipment says that

lead times are lengthening.

But he feels that the longer leads are due

to the low inventories being held by suppliers rather than to limits on
productive capacity.

A producer of paper products says that his firm has

integrated vertically to guard against a recurrence of the supply problems
of 1973 and 1974; he sees no supply problems developing for his firm over
the near term.
Productive capacity is growing in the region's primary industries.
Capital inputs in the farm sector have been substantially upgraded in
recent years.

Coal production is also increasing.

Finally, six taconite

projects now under way on the iron range will boost capacity 60 percent
by 1979.

Two of those projects should be in operation by the end of 1976.
Prices of industrial raw materials have edged upward in recent

weeks, but the increases have not been sharp, and directors expect that
any increases over the summer months will be moderate.

In the farm sector,

prices of feed inputs have also been rising; one director, for instance,
says that soybean meal prices in his area are up substantially since April.
Gasoline prices in the region are up, with the increases generally
ranging from one cent to three cents per gallon.

Nonetheless, gasoline

remains in ample supply, as do all petroleum products.

The purchasing

agent of a major regional corporation says that there are currently gluts
of heavy fuel oil and, consequently, considerable price cutting.

Overall

energy supplies in the region are seen as adequate into 1977, unless the
coming winter is unexpectedly harsh.
The crop situation in the District has worsened since the last
Red Book report.

Normal crop yields are now very unlikely in Minnesota.

Corn and soybeans are making some progress but remain under great stress,
and a shortfall in hay production has sent livestock producers scrambling
for existing supplies.

In addition, drought conditions have spread

westward in the District and large areas of the Dakotas are now in need

of additional rain.

The anticipated shortfall in production can be

expected to have the greatest impact on prices of barley, oats, flax, and
durum wheat, products for which this area is the major supplier.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District businesses reported no indication of impending shortages and stressed their intention to avoid an overbuying spree like that
which preceded the recent recession.

Similar positive results were obtained

in a survey of major agribusiness firms.

These optimistic findings contrast

markedly with results reported in a national survey of purchasing managers.
On the financial front, business loan demand has increased slightly and some
banks have reported that they have begun to rebuild their CD levels.
Contrary to the results reported in a recent national survey of
purchasing managers, Tenth District purchasing managers, executives, and
business economists do not anticipate the approach of capacity constraint
problems, shortages, or major price increases.

The only potential problem

areas mentioned were those of iron castings and uranium.

On the other hand,

several important observations were repeated by a number of respondents.
For example, an economist for a major building materials manufacturer expressed serious doubts as to the development of capacity shortages in the
national economy.

Noting that while some industries were tighter than

others, this was due both to cyclical factors and to customers being encouraged to buy (or even to overbuy) in the first quarter by promotions, price
breaks, or announced price increases.

In his view, these promotions explain

the first quarter GNP inventory changes.

In the unlikely event that second

quarter inventory changes are also strong, he would consider this grounds for
concern.

Similarly, an energy economist pictured an oscillating inventory

picture, with overliquidation in 1975 yielding strong compensating first
quarter data, a situation unlikely to be repeated.

The major consensus, however, held by a broad range of purchasers
and producers of aluminum, steel, paper, wood, textiles, plastics, and
various petroleum products was that overbuying was not anticipated and that
they themselves would not participate in it.

One packaging executive ex-

pressed a "quiet optimism that things are moving along with strength and
stability."

A major paper purchaser noted "much resistance to stockpiling"

because of the recent experience and saw no evidence of any attempt to hedge
against future shortages.

A large plastics and textile purchaser was firm

in stating "We're not overbuying, we're playing it lean."

Similarly, a major

steel user stressed that "Nobody is really going out to buy just anything
they can get" as was the case a few years ago.
body was trying "to run as lean as possible."

Instead, he felt that everyIn line with these beliefs,

it was generally felt that price increases would fall in the 5- to 8-percent
range in 1976.
The one area where near term concern was expressed was in iron
and steel castings.

If the economy continues to pick up, the possibility

of a severe castings shortage by mid-1977 was noted.

Currently, customers

of foundries serving automobile manufacturers are on allocation.

The major

reason for this impending problem, stressed the respondent, was the tremendous impact on foundry costs introduced by EPA and OSHA regulations.

According

to this source, this factor has led to 20-30 small foundry closings a year
and to a significant cancellation of new facilities by existing foundries.
Also because of EPA, a paper products manufacturer indicated there is a
possibility of tightness in the supply of paper in 1-2 years.

Likewise,

many other manufacturers complained about EPA and OSHA regulations and
costs.

A longer-term problem was said to exist in uranium production,
where the low price in the early 1970's discouraged exploration and, though
the price has risen significantly, the 8-year lead time points to a possible
capacity crunch in the late 1970's.
Two other comments by respondents were noteworthy.

Three producers,

one of nylon textiles (supplied by DuPont), one of polyethylene resin (supplied by Exxon), and one of steel, suggested that artificial scarcities
and rumors of shortages might have been introduced by the suppliers themselves rather than being due to excess demand.

Finally, a large secondary

manufacturer of aluminum from scrap stressed that, while processing capacity
is ample in his industry, scrap is somewhat short.

This situation is being

aggravated, he contends, by export of scrap and a "ridiculous Senate bill
to give tax credit for building unneeded recycling capacity which will only
increase demand for and drive up the price of scrap already in short supply."
Conditions in the agribusiness complex tend to mirror these developments in the rest of the economy rather closely.

The inventory situation

here is being scrutinized very carefully to avoid the problems encountered
two years ago.

Reporting firms indicated that they are either keeping inven-

tories at minimum levels or are instituting tight controls.

However, a few

firms mentioned that they have done some hedge-buying recently on steel
products in anticipation of impending price increases, but the quantities
involved were not excessive.

For the moment, very few firms are encountering

difficulties in procuring raw materials.

Lead times are reported as "normal"

in most cases, although there is some evidence that lead times are beginning
to lengthen for steel, paper, and a few plastics.

However, no one seemed to

be overly concerned about input shortages in the foreseeable future.

The

reports on capacity utilization were mixed.

Feed manufacturers did not

seem to be pressing against capacity limits at all, and the same thing was
generally true for agricultural chemicals.
under 70 percent.

Utilization rates were typically

However, a few agribusiness firms were operating at "full

bore" and had plans to expand capacity.

Included in this group were a large

farm supply cooperative, a farm equipment facility that assembles combines,
and a firm manufacturing on-farm storage buildings.

Virtually all agri-

business firms in the survey reported price increases for both raw materials
and manufactured products, though again, generally in the 5— to 8—percent
range.
Tenth District banks contacted for the June survey reported small
increases in business loan demand over the last month.

In most cases,

demands were made by local rather than national accounts.

Industries men-

tioned as showing increased loan demand varied—manufacturers, retailers,
energy-related businesses, and agribusinesses were all mentioned.

One bank

said that participation in smaller banks' loans was an important factor.
Real estate loans are still weak, although interest does seem to be picking
up in commercial projects.

Consumer instalment loans have been either steady

or increasing slightly, with credit card sales holding up better than auto
or other consumer loans.
Negotiable certificates of deposit were run off during the month
of May, reflecting the slowness of business loan demand and continued inflows in savings deposits.

However, most banks reported that their CD

levels had reached their low point, and several reported they were rebuilding
their CD levels.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Despite a steady decline in mining output since November 1973,
industrial production in Texas has recovered to a level near the prerecession peak.

Manufacturing output has more than made up for the ground

lost during the recession.

The recovery in output, however, has largely

been centered in the production of nondurable goods.

Output of chemicals,

oil refining, and apparel has fully recovered, while paper production has
been slower in recovering.

In durable goods production, which has not fully

recovered, the strongest industries are fabricated metals and nonelectrical
machinery.

The weakest continues to be primary metals.

This month's survey found no production bottlenecks of consequence,
and factory inventories were at manageable levels.

Manufacturers look to

improved business conditions but at the same time remain reluctant in most
industries to expand production capacity beyond what they now have or what
is currently under construction.

Their major concern is the future strength

of the recovery, but also important are future environmental guidelines that
will affect business decisions.
Output by the chemical industry in Texas has surpassed the 1974
prerecession high, and new production records will likely be set for
some items this year.

Supplies of such basic chemicals as ethylene,

propylene, butadiene, benzene, toluene, and xylene are readily available.
No production bottlenecks are anticipated by the industry as output rises,
but a couple of potential problems are being monitored.

Plants dependent

upon natural gas liquids for feedstocks may have to look harder for their
inputs by year-end, and the rubber workers' strike and a delayed recovery

in the market for rubber products are slowing the output of butadiene.

A

firming in chemical prices has improved prospects for industry profits, and
plans are made to expand capacity in a number of areas.

A chemical engi-

neering consulting firm notes, however, that plant expansions could be
hampered by shortages of castings.
Inventories of agricultural chemicals are high, and production has
been cut until stocks are reduced to more manageable levels.

A major pro-

ducer states that ammonia, potash, and phosphate are now selling near producers' costs.

With inventories high, the Texas-based company has closed

down one of its phosphate plants in Florida.

Prices for agricultural

chemicals are expected to remain weak, and only if there is a significant
increase in fertilizer exports would prices move up.
Apparel production in Texas has recovered to the prerecession
level of output.

Most plants are operating at 100 percent of capacity, and

many firms have given as much as 20 to 25 percent of their current business
to apparel contractors.

The busiest firms have experienced two- to four-

week delays in receiving the more popular piece goods.

But some signs of

softening in the apparel market have been noted recently.

The fall market

for women's clothing, held in Dallas in May, was rated as only "fair" compared to earlier markets that were "hot."

And although the sales of men's

slacks continued strong, demand for leisure jackets has weakened.

Apparel

manufacturers are not planning significant increases in plant capacity this
year.
Paper production appears to be the weakest industry in nondurable
goods manufacturing in Texas.

A major producer, however, states business

is relatively good, as the rate of capacity utilization has increased to

85 percent from a low of 70 percent.
and linerboard.

There are shortages of Kraft paper

Raw materials costs are going up at a 10-percent annual

rate, but some softening in prices is expected this year.

Plant expan-

sions are likely in some segments of the industry, but everyone seems to
be hedging their positions until future economic conditions can be more
clearly ascertained.
Production of color television sets should continue to increase
rapidly.

In light of current demand projections, a major manufacturer

plans to increase production of subassemblies by one-third at its border
plant in Cuidad Juarez, Mexico.

Employment at the plant stands at 3,800

workers, up from a recession low of 2,400.

The higher level of production

would mean a 10-percent increase in the number of workers on the first
shift and a doubling of the second shift.

No production bottlenecks are

anticipated, but some deterioration in the quality of ceramic capacitors
purchased from far eastern suppliers has been noted.

The failure rate of

these components is expected to decline, however, after foreign manufacturers adjust to higher production levels.
Production of primary metals is running a little above the recession low.

Most metal plants are running 75 to 80 percent of capacity, but

there is more strength in steel tubing used in drilling.

The weak con-

struction market continues to hold down production of steel, aluminum, and
copper.

Structural steel firms are concerned that no new highway construc-

tion contracts are being let in Texas, and one aluminum smelter has remained
idle since last summer due to high energy costs.
are seen in this industry.

Few additions to capacity

A couple of new energy-efficient steel and

aluminum plants are coming on-stream to replace older plants, and a large

diameter steel pipe mill is to be constructed by 1978.

Other investment

outlays planned are to meet the EPA's 1978 standards, which in the case of
one copper plant will exceed the value of its present facilities.
tial bottleneck is the future market for scrap steel.

A poten-

World demand for

scrap is soft, but should it firm before construction activity recovers,
scrap prices could rise to unprofitable levels for some structural steel
manufacturers.
Despite a sharp four-month decline in the number of active drilling
rigs, the outlook for drilling remains optimistic.

One major equipment sup-

plier feels that, with the exception of last year, total activity in 1976
could be at the highest level since 1962.

Output of oil field equipment is

holding up, although current production of oil rigs is coming largely from
the backlog of unfilled orders.

Because of the slack in new orders, pro-

duction could be affected by next year.

Demand is strong, however, for

such items as handling equipment, high pressure valves, and "fishing" tools.
The oil field equipment industry has no plans to increase capacity and, like
the mining sector, is waiting for Congress to outline a national energy
policy which would determine much of the future course of production.
A survey of the transportation equipment industry found a wide
range of capacity utilization rates among major segments of the industry.
The District's only auto assembly plant—a producer of intermediate-size
cars—is running a six-day week.

That workweek was established in February

by an expanded overtime schedule that required hiring few new employees.
The only bottleneck being experienced is a shortage of tires which requires
new production units to be delivered without spares.

A helicopter manu-

facturer is experiencing a slackening in nonmilitary sales and, as a result,

has permitted its work force to decline 4 percent through attrition.

Air-

craft sales are expected to firm by year-end, but no additions to capacity
are planned.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

According to our directors, operating rates are generally well
below capacity at the present time and, except for natural gas, they foresee
few supply shortages until mid-1977.

New plant construction appears to be

at a standstill, and there are only a few instances of modernization.

The

supply situation, however, is being monitored carefully, especially by steel
and aluminum users.

There is some concern that an upsurge in construction

expenditures, added to a vigorous automobile market, would be sufficient to
create supply shortages.
With continued real growth around 5 percent for the remainder of
1976, there is evidence that the chemical and pulp and paper industries will
begin to experience some capacity and raw materials shortages by year-end
1976 or early 1977.

No significant shortages are anticipated in agricultural

commodities, except perhaps in beef, which might be in short supply by yearend.

The textile and apparel industries are in a situation of excess supply.
The current situation in the basic steel industry continues to be

one of excess capacity.

However, here, more than in most industries, fabri-

cators are reporting high operating rates and this is expected to put pressure on the steel industry by year-end.

It is anticipated that shortages

will be confined to certain product lines, such as wire, plate, and reinforcing bars, creating temporary bottlenecks but that a general resurgence
of construction demand on top of a strong automobile year could cause heavy
price pressure by mid-1977.
Demand for aluminum is very strong and is expected to increase 30
percent over 1975 to the 1974 level.

Most of the increased demand is from

the transportation industry, which is seeking both to reduce vehicle weights
and increase vehicle mileage.

No shortage of aluminum is anticipated until

the second half of 1977.
The copper industry continues to operate at low rates.

The market

has been depressed but should receive some stimulus from a more active
construction industry.
The forest products industry as a whole appears to have ample
capacity for supplying demand currently.

Looking first at solid wood prod-

ucts, domestic softwood lumber and plywood mills are currently running at
about 90 percent of capacity.

Lumber imports from Canada are down and could

readily respond to any dramatic pickup in U. S. softwood lumber consumption,
although the housing outlook makes such a pickup appear unlikely.

Although

softwood plywood is not imported from Canada, modest additions to domestic
capacity are planned for servicing anticipated demand increases.
For pulp and paper, world pulp mill operating rates are depressed
at about the 80-percent level and a large overhang of pulp inventory exists.
Domestically, including the western states, paper and paperboard mills are
currently running at about 92 percent of capacity, with enough new capacity
planned to keep most of the markets in balance over the near term.

The seg-

ment of the pulp and paper industry with the tightest supply situation
currently is in publication papers.
Production in this segment is sold out several months in advance,
and rationing is taking place.

The reasons behind this situation appear to

be the combination of resurging demand and attempts by customers to rapidly
replenish their below-normal inventory levels.

It is possible that once in-

ventories are replenished, the call on production will moderate.
the other segments of the industry appear to have this problem.

None of

Operating rates in the aircraft industry continue to be quite low.
Parts suppliers report that a recent increase in demand has already turned
soft.
Potato processing plants are not running at full capacity and have
no plans for plant expansion.

Farming acreage is at an all-time high.

There is a surplus supply of beans, potatoes, and wheat.
and prices are low for these products.
will be in short supply by year-end.

Demand is weak,

There is some evidence that beef

