CONFIDENTIAL

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 15, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY
page i
First
page
1 3
SecondDistrict-Boston
District-New
York
page
Third
District-Philadelphia
page
6
Fourth
District-Cleveland
page
Fifth
District-Richmond
page
139
Sixth District-Atlanta
page
16
Seventh
District-Chicago
page
19
Eighth
District-St. Louis page
Ninth District-Kansas
District-Minneapolis
page22
25
Tenth
City
page
28
Eleventh
District-Dallas
page
31
Twelfth District-San
Francisco
page 34

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]

Continued moderation in the pace of economic activity highlights reports
from most Districts.

Several Districts report spurts in retail sales in August,

but few report signs of strengthening in manufacturing and housing.

The recovery

in capital goods continues at a gradual and uneven pace, and the outlook does not
suggest substantial acceleration in the short-term.

Concern over possible shortages

and bottlenecks appears to have diminished with the slower rate of recovery.
Business loan demand remains weak, and there is little indication of much revival
for the next several months.

Drought, especially in the corn belt, has reduced

harvest prospects for corn, soybeans and cotton, suggesting possible upward price
pressures for those crops and for cattle.
Most Districts report a spurt in consumer sales in August.

The pickup

reported in most areas was mixed, but New York was especially encouraged by
"substantial momentum in recent weeks" across all product lines.

New car sales

were strong across the nation, but other big-ticket items and the tourist trade
moved well only in some Districts.

The outlook for consumer spending for the

rest of the year ranged from continued steady improvement in Philadelphia,
Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco to little change in Richmond.
Manufacturing activity continues to improve gradually and unevenly.

Further

strengthening is noted in Philadelphia, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis; but
Cleveland reports declines in steel, Atlanta and St. Louis declines in paper,
and Dallas reports slower growth in chemicals.

Philadelphia's most recent survey

of manufacturers showed that two-thirds of the respondents expect continued gains
in manufacturing over the next 6 months, and Minneapolis reports its latest survey
showed manufacturers expect substantial gains in sales for the next three quarters.

Reports on residential construction suggest fairly strong demand for singlefamily housing.

St. Louis notes that low vacancy rates for apartments in St. Louis

and Little Rock spurred plans for new apartment projects.
tive program doubled condominium sales in Memphis.

A special sales incen-

San Francisco reports a rise

in home building in Southern California and Utah has stimulated lumber sales
production.
Despite the moderated pace of recovery, businessmen are still optimistic over
prospects.

Cleveland, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Kansas City all indicate little

fear exists that the recovery will prematurely peak.

Nevertheless, inventory and

capital spending plans of business appear to be cautious.

Richmond reports that

some manufacturers still view their inventories as higher than desired.
Philadelphia's survey shows manufacturers plan little addition to inventories for
the next 6 months.

There is still some liquidation of stocks, including copper,

linerboard and corrugated paper, electrical machinery, and sheet steel.
There is still little indication of a surge in capital spending.

Ample

capacity and projections of only moderate growth in demand over the next year or
so are among factors that are dampening spending,
recovery is spotty.

For capital goods producers,

Perhaps most encouraging reports are those from Chicago and

Cleveland, where sizable increases in machine tool business occurred in the last
few months.
rigs.

Recent increases were also noted for heavy-duty trucks and drilling

However, both Chicago and Cleveland comment that demand for machinery,

such as cranes, construction machinery, and mine shovels, is still weak.
Concern over shortages appears to have diminished.

Tightness in steel

products virtually disappeared with the sharp drop in demand for flat-rolled
products, which some producers were informally allocating a few months ago.

Spot

shortages may appear for a limited number of products, such as special castings,
snow tires, and some chemical products, but District reports suggest no widespread
bottlenecks or shortages are now apparent or in prospect.

Business loan demand remains weak and the outlook suggests little to moderate
recovery over the next several months.

Boston and San Francisco cite the lack of

inventory building, the inability to recover return on investment, and the availability of funds from other sources among reasons for the continued sluggishnesss.
Drought in several parts of the country has reduced yield estimates for com,
soybeans, and cotton, according to reports from St. Louis, Kansas City, and
Minneapolis.

However, Kansas City reports the corn harvest is still expected to

slightly exceed the record 1975 harvest.

Sharp declines in supplies of soybeans

from 1975 will likely cause upward price pressures, but the outlook for c o m prices
remains uncertain.

Minneapolis, San Francisco, and Richmond report wheat, fruit

crops, and flue-cured tobacco harvests are expected to range from good to
excellent.

FIRST DISTRICT - Boston

Most New England directors report that little has changed from last month.
However, some retailers have become increasingly anxious about their disappointing
sales volumes.

Some machine tool manufacturers and parts suppliers, on the other

hand, are pleased to see the first signs of a recovery in new orders.

Except for

lumber suppliers, the directors have noticed no indications of inadequate capacity
in the industries with which they are familiar.
According to the banking directors, loan demand remains very weak throughout
most of the region.

Not only are businesses avoiding building inventory stocks

and the attendant short-term debt, but commerce has not justified a notable
expansion of fixed assets on the part of regional industries.

Consequently, the

banks are not under pressure, and one director comments that, "The Board of
Governors will be pleased:

it looks like they can get through the elections

without making any waves."

In fact, one large bank in Connecticut is forecasting

only a 10 percent increase of commercial loans over the next 16 months.
The retailers are not of one mind this month.

Many report that sales were

"good" in August, while others were disappointed by low volumes.

The optimists

are anticipating rewarding fall and Christmas seasons, while the pessimists are
considering more aggressive promotional strategies in the fourth quarter.
Retailers believe they are failing to maintain their share of discretionary
personal income.
Machine tool manufacturers are also receiving divergent signals.
that August's level of new orders is very encouraging.

Some report

Others are worried.

Of

course, firms supplying the motor transport industries are well appointed with
orders, but machine tool manufacturers who supply other industries tend to be less
excited.

In one recent development, new orders for drilling rigs have increased

significantly after the nationwide gas price announcement.

All of our academic correspondents—Professors Eckstein, Houthakker,
Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin—were available for comment this month.

All had

similar assessments of the state of the economy—the economy is muddling along
at only about the same rate as in the second quarter, although no prospect of
a downturn is in sight.

Houthakker and Tobin each regard the slowdown as

vindication of the views they had previously expressed—that moderate monetary
growth targets go along with a moderate recovery.
their preferred policy response.

These academicians differed in

In view of the progress so far against inflation

and the lack of progress in reducing unemployment, Houthakker feels that there is
room for a slightly higher rate of monetary growth.

To insure continuing progress

in reducing inflation, Houthakker favors a long-term monetary target of about 5
percent.

Eckstein, Solow, and Tobin did not welcome the pause in activity.

The

prospect of continuing growth at approximately the trend rate certainly rules out
the desirability of tightening.

Due to the vagaries of money demand, each favored

a policy of stabilizing short-term rates at their present levels.

Samuelson was

also concerned by real growth far short of socially desirable target rates for
this stage in the expansion.

He feared the combination of relatively loose fiscal

and tight monetary policy would stifle the capital formation needed in the basic
industries.

If money demand has been weak due to the pause in the recovery,

stable rates actually starve the economic system.

Samuelson preferred downward

pressure on rates now; he would be fully prepared to reverse course subsequently,
if the economic data start to come in strong.

SECOND DISTRICT - New York

Scattered signs of pickup in the pace of business activity in the Second
District were reported by directors and businessmen who were contacted recently.
In early September, there appears to have been a substantial rebound in New York
City's retail sales.

The strength of this improvement was so pronounced that

merchants expected its momentum to carry through the remainder of the month.
Other sectors of the region's economy appear much less buoyant and continue to
lag behind the nation's recovery.

In the view of respondents, inventory investment

appears unlikely to be stepped up significantly; and while capital spending is
increasing, it has gathered little momentum in this District.

The financial

scene reflects these developments, with loan demand showing few signs of reviving.
Retail sales in and around New York City appear to have gained substantial
momentum in recent weeks.

Executives of several leading department stores

reported a surge in consumer buying activity that began with the Labor Day weekend.
One department store official characterized sales as "tremendous," and other
respondents felt that sales gains were substantial and well above typical holiday
and back-to-school buying.

The pickup was large enough that a vice president of

a national retailer observed that New York sales, which had been lagging the rest
of the nation, had now caught up to the nation.

The pickup in buying cut across

all product lines, but smaller kitchen and personal care appliances were pointed
to as leading the advance in one department store.
In the view of at least some merchants, Sunday openings have been an
important factor in adding further impetus to the recovery in consumer buying.
Major department stores in New York City and the metroplitan area last month began
to open their doors on Sundays, and Sunday openings appear to be gaining acceptance
among retailers.

Most retailers were convinced that Sunday hours have added

substantially to total sales rather than merely redistributing daily sales within

the week.

In addition to providing a shopping day to those who work on

Saturday, merchants noted that heads of households were more likely to shop on
Sunday, thus increasing the likelihood of big-ticket or credit buying.

Whatever

the cause of the acceleration in consumer activity, most retailers expected the
momentum to carry through the month.
Directors of the Buffalo Branch were less sure of the upturn in consumer
spending and were generally gloomy over prospects of the fall selling season.

The

reluctance of consumers to spend was attributed to a lack of sufficient confidence
as well as continued concern about job security.

The president of a Buffalo

department store chain reported August sales were below a year ago; however, at
the same time, the chief executive of a major Rochester retail firm stated that
conditions had improved.
With respect to the outlook for business fixed investment spending, Second
District directors reported little evidence of a step-up in capital spending
plans.

The chairman of a multinational oil company observed that the percentage

increase in petroleum industry spending would exceed the rate of price increases.
One executive in the electrical construction business reported a shift from
governmental to private spending as limited evidence of a revival of capital
spending plans in Western New York.
Capital goods production in the District continues to lag, however.

Most

producers report some pickup in new orders, but business remains below their
earlier expectations.

The corporate treasurer of an industrial machinery

producer termed the overall recovery of new orders "spotty."

One machinery

equipment manufacturer felt that part of the flatness of his order book was due
to buyers holding back orders until after the September machinery show in Chicago.
New orders at a tractor and crane manufacturer had edged up slightly since early
summer, but the backlog at this firm has been almost completely eroded.

A major

steel maker located in Western New York reported that demand for structural

steel continued to languish.

He explained that the operating rate of his firm's

upstate plant had held near the company's average due to the strong
flat-rolled products.

demand for

While some of the sluggishness in capital goods production

in the region is due to the sluggish recovery in national business spending, a
bank economist emphasized the maturity of the region in this connection.

As a

result, this analyst felt that the region's capital goods industries could be
expected to lag behind the national recovery in investment goods demand.
Business inventories by and large appeared to be in relatively good balance
with sales. Most of our directors viewed the early summer increases in inventories
largely as the result of weaker than expected sales, but none felt that the
increases were excessive.

Buffalo directors observed that overall inventory levels

were somewhat low in relation to sales and expected moderate stock building over
the balance of the year.

Retail respondents appeared to be relatively satisfied

with their sales-inventory balance but reiterated that tight controls were being
held on inventories.

One electrical machinery manufacturer, however, reported

that inventories were high and that his firm was in the process of working them
down.
Second District bankers saw little evidence of a recovery in business loan
demand as yet in New York City, although some recovery was observed in some
outlying areas.

For example, one director noted signs of a sustained recovery

in business loan demand in the Binghamton area.

Most of the Second District

bankers contacted outside of New York City expected loan demand to strengthen
during the next several months, but a majority of the New York City bankers
foresaw flat loan demand for some time to come.

THIRD DISTRICT - Philadelphia

Economic activity in the Third District is expanding, but at an uneven clip.
While performance in the retail sector is mixed, conditions in manufacturing
continue to improve gradually.

Gains are reported in new orders and shipments,

while work forces and inventories in manufacturing are unchanged.
outlook both in retailing and manufacturing remains optimistic.

The longer-term
Bankers report

that business borrowing is still weak and expect this to continue in the near term.
Businessmen indicate that prices are still rising, but no substantial change in
inflationary pressures is evident.

Major manufacturers in the District report

that production capacity is adequate to meet current requirements and expect to be
able to meet customers' demands in the foreseeable future.
Manufacturers responding to this month's business outlook survey report that
business is better than in August.

Four out of ten executives surveyed indicate

improvement in overall business conditions compared to three out of ten last month.
New orders and shipments are higher; and inventories, which declined last month,
are reported to be unchanged from a month ago.

In terms of employment, the factory

workweek is fractionally longer this month, while work forces are at the same level
as in August.

This is the first time since March that no growth has been recorded

in the number of employees in manufacturing.
Despite the current pause in the national economy, the outlook in area manufacturing for the next 6 months is optimistic.

Of the businessmen surveyed, two

out of three project a higher level of economic activity by next March.
are anticipated in new orders, shipments and employment.

Increases

At the same time, higher

levels of spending for plant and equipment are projected by 40 percent of those
surveyed--roughly the same proportion of respondents as last month.

No additional

investment is planned in inventories, which are expected to be virtually unchanged
from present levels.

Retailers in the area paint a mixed picture with sales ranging from 16
percent above, to a level slightly below, the same period last year.
merchandise lines are cited as particularly strong or weak.

No specific

The majority of

retailers feel that "things are looking up" compared to the lull of a few months
ago, but they view this improvement as gradual and below the forecasts they made
earlier in the year.

The outlook for the near term is for an improved sales

picture, although no big surge in buying is expected until late in the year.

One

merchant anticipates a boost in sales after the election, and another looks for a
loosening of purse strings for big-ticket items around the holidays.

If this

occurs on top of normal gift buying, this retailer feels that the fourth quarter
will be fairly strong.

However, he's doubtful that it will show any substantial

improvement over the last quarter of 1975.
On the inflation front, manufacturers report paying and receiving higher
prices this month.

One-half of the executives in the current survey report paying

more for their inputs, and one-third indicate charging higher prices for outputs.
Over the next half year, 84 percent expect to be paying more for their supplies
and 75 percent anticipate higher prices for their finished products.

At the same

time, retailers report that the hesitancy in consumer demand is helping to moderate
the upward movements in the prices they pay for supplies.
Bankers in the region report that loan volume remains basically flat.
Consumer loans are level or up somewhat, but there are no signs yet of any recovery
m

business borrowing.

At the same time, retail savings deposits are rising,

although most bankers feel that the increase has been disappointing in the face of
the softness in short-term interest rates available elsewhere in the market.
Down the road, bankers are looking for the lull in business loan demand to
continue.

According to one executive, "We don't expect volume to improve before

yearend, at the earliest."

Another sees the possibility of the weakness continuing

through the first quarter of 1977.

The outlook for interest rates is for little

change over the rest of 1976; and for 1977, forecasts of the prime rate call for
an average of about 7 1/2 percent.

This is down from a few months ago when a

prime of 8 percent was considered possible by yearend 1976.
The question of production capacity was examined with executives in the food,
apparel, chemical, petroleum, steel, nonelectrical machinery, and electrical
machinery industries.

For all of these industries, except chemicals, business is

reported to be the same as, or better than, in June.

Nevertheless, no major

supply bottlenecks are reported, and any increased pressure on production capacity
seems to be minimal.
Compared to a few months ago, operating rates in food, apparel, and petroleum
are unchanged (90-95 percent).

In chemicals, an executive of one large company

notes that utilization in some fiber operations is down to 70 percent from 90
percent in early spring.

At the same time, a major steel producer notes that one

plant manufacturing rails is running near capacity, but another producing structural
shapes still has plenty of slack.
the same as in June.

Conditions at both of these plants are about

Two industries that report declining excess capacity are

electrical and nonelectrical machinery.

But in both of these industries, such

reductions in unused resources appear to be slight.

Operating rates are put

around 85 percent—at most, only a few percentage points above June levels.
Delivery times are lengthening in these industries, but not "significantly"
according to the executives contacted.
For the longer term, manufacturers expect capacity utilization to rise
somewhat, but none of the officials contacted foresees substantial problems in
meeting customers1 demands over the next 6 months.

FOURTH DISTRICT - Cleveland

Recovery in the Fourth District, as in the nation, continues at the moderated
pace of the past few months.

Directors, financial officers and economists, although

somewhat more skeptical than they were a few months ago, are still generally
optimistic that recovery will be sustained into 1977.

Skepticism in part reflects

erratic behavior in consumer spending, modest revival in capital goods and some
scaling down in steel orders and output.
Directors and financial officers appear somewhat apprehensive over prospects
for the economy, but economists expect recovery in real GNP to continue at a rate
of 4 1/2 to 5 1/2 percent during 1977.
healthy" to moderate.

Directors view the recovery as from "very

They expect errors in projections to be on the downside.

Economists appear less concerned that recovery will slow further from the pace of
recent months.

Except for an economist associated with a retail chain, there is

little fear that the recovery will peak in 1977.

Economists view recent weaknesses

in retail sales and steel as transitory and the slower pace of output in recent
months as typical for the second year of the recovery.
Erratic behavior of consumer spending is one of the key uncertainties
expressed by some of the directors and economists in the District.

Shifting in

consumer spending from autos and apparel to services, travel and food was cited
by some respondents to explain recent consumer behavior.

Sales of food, meat,

laundry and persoanl care items did not slump in recent months, according to
directors and economists associated with food processing and consumer goods
manufacturers.

Home remodeling continues very strong, according to a director

with a major producer of those products.

Another director and manufacturer of

consumer housewares expected retail sales to remain stable in the months ahead.
Most of the concern and uncertainty comes from retailers of department store
goods.

An economist with a national department store chain noted that apparel

sales did not pickup in August and expressed concern that the slump in real
GAF sales has been caused by a continued squeeze on consumer purchasing power.
A director with a national retail chain noted that the slowdown in retail sales
has been widespread and has caused an unanticipated buildup in inventories.
Recovery in capital goods continues to be gradual and spotty, and comments
from directors and economists with these producers tend to reflect different
patterns in timing and magnitude of recovery in their respective industries.
Orders for machine-cutting tools rose about 70 percent so far this year compared
with the same period last year, but backlogs are still not rising, according to
one major tool producer.

Orders for another large tool builder were up sharply

in July and August, to a level nearly double their average for the first half of
1976; but this volume is still about 75 percent of their desired operating rate.
A major supplier to heavy-duty truck producers notes its orders have gains strength
since the trough early this year.

Orders rose 10 percent in recent months,

largely because inventory liquidation of heavy-duty trucks is finally over and
inventories are back to a normal level. A major bearing producer and supplier to
capital goods firms notes its orders from railroad and construction machinery firms
bottomed out in recent months, but there is yet no evidence of an upturn.

The

decline in orders for some type of construction machinery, such as wheel loaders
and bulldozers bottomed out last spring, and demand is "just limping along,"
according to one economist.

Demand is expected to improve gradually during the

balance of this year but is not expected to recover to previous peaks during this
business expansion.

Another official with a capital goods firm that produces

hydraulic excavators and cranes also sees little prospect for any significant
improvement over the next year because of high inventories held by distributors,
lack of funds for sanitation, waterworks and other public construction, and
squeezed profit margins that prevent contractors from purchasing new construction

machinery.

Bids for heavy construction work are still running below a year-ago,

and contractors are frequently bidding below engineer costs in order to get
business.
The recent slide in steel output has reduced utilization of capacity to
nearly 85 percent of capacity, compared with the second quarter average of close
to 90 percent.

Steel producers have lowered their estimates of output for the

balance of this year to an 80-85 percent of capacity range.

Demand for hot-rolled

steel products, which some producers were informally allocating last quarter, has
softened; one economist commented that the psychology of steel buyers shifted
rapidly from fear of shortage to fear of excess inventories.

Rescinding of a

schedule of price increases on October 1, price hedging that ballooned orders for
hot-rolled products last quarter, and lagging revival in captial goods are among
reasons cited for scaling down of projections for steel production next quarter.
On the other hand, steel economists were not apprehensive that the overall recovery
would soon peak, and still expect real growth in 1977 at about 4 1/2 to 5 1/2
percent.

One economist expects the industry to operate at 90 to 95 percent of

capacity during the first half of 1977 but commented that shortages of steel are
unlikely.
Production in the rubber industry is expected to reach about 75 percent of
capacity in the first month of resumption in work, 90 percent in the second month
and 100 percent in the third month, according to an economist with a major tire
producer.

Therefore, spot shortages may appear, especially for snow tires.

Manufacturers generally seem to express less concern over shortages than they
did a few months ago when the pace of recovery was more rapid.

Capacity for a

variety of capital goods appears more than ample at least through 1977, although
some spot shortages, such as castings, can develop as machinery production
approaches higher utilization rates.

Some chemical products, including polyvinyl

chloride, polyproplene, and chlorine, now in tight supply, could be in short
supply by yearend if demand continues to strengthen as much as it has in recent
months.
A small sample of savings and loan associations in the District shows savings
inflows during August slowed, and mortgage lending and mortgage terms were
relatively unchanged from July.

Liquidity of associations was somewhat lower than

in July, as some S£Ls stepped up borrowing from FHLBB, partly because deposit flows
during the summer months were less than needed to meet commitments.

FIFTH DISTRICT - Richmond

Judging from our latest survey of Fifth District business conditions, the
level of activity among manufacturers showed little change in the past month.
The level of shipments, in fact, has remained essentially unchanged since June,
while the volume of new orders has registered minimal declines in each of the past
3 months.

Backlogs of orders and finished goods inventories are down somewhat

from July, and stocks of materials are reported to have risen slightly since then.
Manufacturing inventories remain somewhat above desired levels as does current
plant and equipment capacity.

Retailers apparently experienced some improvement

in sales during August, but at least one respondent attributes this to heavy price
markdowns.

Sales of big-ticket items continue to lag relative to total sales.

Demand for bank loans remains soft.

In the agricultural sector, dry weather for

the past several weeks has damaged pastures and most major crops in wide areas of
the District.
Survey responses of District manufacturers exhibit much the same pattern as
in the past 2 months, suggesting a stable level of shipments, some weakness in the
volume of new orders, and a small decline in order backlogs.

Some accumulation of

materials inventories in August is indicated, but over one-third of the respondents
report reduced stocks of finished goods.

Thirty-seven percent of the manufacturers

still feel current inventory levels are higher than desired.

Current plant and

equipment capacity remains somewhat above desired levels, but there seems to be
little sentiment for altering current expansion plans.
Manufacturing employment continues to rise, although more slowly than in the
second quarter.

Hours worked per week also increased slightly in August.

Prices,

including employee compensation, remain under some upward pressure as nearly onehalf of the manufacturers report increases.

Respondents remain essentially

optimistic as most expect further improvement in the level of business activity

nationally, locally, and within their respective firms over the next 6 months.
Most of the retailers surveyed report increased sales during the latest month,
but sales of big-ticket items failed, once again, to keep pace.

Despite this

apparent improvement in sales, comments of respondents retain a somewhat negative
tone.

One respondent attributed sales increases solely to heavy discounts.

Another cites a lack of consumer confidence, unemployment, and rising prices as
adverse factors.
Inventories at retail apparently grew over the past month and remain above
desired levels.

Nearly one-third of our respondents, however, view their current

number and size of outlets as inadequate.

Prices generally continue to rise as

three-fourths of the retailers reported paying and nearly as many reported
receiving higher prices this month.

Most of the retailers responding to the survey

expect little or no change in the level of activity, nationally or locally, over
the next 6 months, although over one-third expect sales in their own firms to
improve over that time period.
There continues to be no indication of any serious problems arising from supply
or capacity constraints.

In most industries surveyed, there are no problems at all

while dthets are experiencing no worse than minor lengthening of lead times.

There

are some isolated cases, principally in the area of building materials, where the
performance of key suppliers is hampering the operation of individual firms.

Such

cases are rare; and if there has been any recent change in the outlook of District
manufacturers regarding supplies and capacity, it has been toward optimism.
Commercial and industrial loans have shown no signs of recovery in recent
weeks, except for the expected seasonal strength from local agriculture related
companies.

There has been some increase in loans made to durable goods manufac-

turers, but loans to retailers have been flat and those to wholesalers have
declined.

More than half the respondents to our August survey of changes in bank

lending practices have indicated that they expect moderate recovery in business

loan volume in coming months.

Consumer loans continue to follow their recent

pattern of advance, showing steady if unspectacular increases.
estate loans has been negligible.

Growth in real

Agricultural loans remain strong.

Very poor pasture conditions in Virginia are forcing farmers to step up the
sale of livestock and increase early feeding.

With a continued upswing in quality

and grade prices in recent weeks, the general average price for flue-cured tobacco
is now running 14 percent above a year ago.
value of gross sales is up 36 percent.

Sales volume has been heavy, and the

District farm income during the first half

of 1976 recorded a 3 percent increase over a year earlier compared with a 14 percent gain nationally.

SIXTH DISTRICT - Atlanta

Uneven gains continue in the Southeast; the geographic areas of greatest
relative strength and weakness remain unchanged.
late summer, following earlier weakness.

Retail sales strengthened in

The improved financial position of

consumers is evident in reports of lower delinquency rates.
been disappointing, except in Tennessee.

Tourist activity has

Production increases are noted in the

carpet, furniture, and apparel industries, but paper, consumer durables, and
construction-related manufacturing are experiencing cutbacks.

Several mining

operations have been plagued by layoffs and strikes, but new construction and
mining projects create a more promising outlook.
In South Florida, the economy is described as generally healthy but not
robust.

Pockets of recession remain in real estate.

However, a general sideward

movement is viewed for the most part as a seasonal slowdown.

In Central Florida,

a slowing of the expansion is attributed to weak tourist activity; again, a
lateral movement is perceived.
slow but steady progress.

In contrast, Louisiana directors note continuing

Ongoing improvement is also noted in Alabama.

A steady

rate of expansion continues in Tennessee.
Mixed feelings are expressed concerning this summer's retail sales in South
Florida.

Disagreement exists as to whether sales have exceeded or simply equaled

those of a year ago.

Only slight gains have occurred in Central Florida, but

larger advances are anticipated in the fall.
strength.

Auto sales are a key area of

In Louisiana, soft goods sales have been weak, and retailers are

entering the fall season with caution.
sizable gains in merchandising.

However, reports from Mississippi indicate

Again, automobiles are a bright spot.

Alabama

retailers report that weakness during most of the summer was followed by sales
gains from late July through early September.
healthy.

Inventory levels are reportedly

Tennessee retailers cite a similar sales pattern; with early weakness

followed by acceleration in late summer, they remain cautious but optimistic.
Auto sales continue to set records.
Strength is apparent in the do-it-yourself home improvement market.

A

building materials supplier reports strong sales, and lenders cite gains in home
improvement loans.

Loans are also being made for car repairs as an alternative

to new car purchases.

Delinquency rates have declined sharply.

Much of Florida's weakness in retail sales is attributed to a slowdown in
tourist traffic.

Occupancy rates in South Florida have declined.

This slowing is

attributed to the attractiveness of bicentennial observations in other tourist
centers.

A good winter season is expected, now that this unique seasonal influence

has dissipated.

Tourist trade has also been disappointing in Central Florida.

attraction notes an 11-percent decline in traffic during July.

One

As a result,

services employment in the restaurant and lodging industries has declined.

Reports

from Tennessee suggest that the tourist industry remains a bright spot. The
opening in early September of the Georgia World Congress Center for a major apparel
trade show boosted hotel occupancy and tourist-related business in Atlanta.
Industrial developments include an increase to four shifts at a Georgia carpet
factory.

Several Southeastern producers of linerboard and corrugated paper are

reducing production because customers are cutting their inventories.

A major

supplier of metal products notes unusually large stockpiles of copper goods.
Manufacturers of furniture and apparel are increasing their output.

Lumber demand

continues to be strong, with most grades selling at record high prices.
aluminum manufacturer reports operations at maximum capacity.

An

Two comments

reminiscent of 1975 find a Tennessee manufacturer of appliance timers cutting
production and an industrial lighting manufacturer experiencing a slowdown in
orders.

Layoffs in Florida's phosphate industry continue to boost that State's
unemployment rate.
dismissed.

Over the past 3 months, more than 1,000 workers have been

A Tennessee director reports layoffs resulting from Federal

environmental regulations which caused several strip mines to be closed. Most
Alabama coal mining operations were shut down by wildcat strikes which began in
mid-July; over 2,000 workers have been idled.

An economy move by a major electric

utility in Florida has laid off 615 construction workers and 250 office personnel.
Employment in Tennessee will receive a major impetus over the next 4 years.

Thirty

thousand new jobs are expected to result from large Federal construction projects
in the energy, defense, and metals industries.
also begun in Tennessee.

A major zinc mining project has

Additional mines and ore processing facilities to be

opened at the site will employ between 600 and 700 persons.
also expanding existing zinc operations in this area.

Other companies are

A Louisiana shipyard has

received a Navy contract to construct two ships; 520 men will be employed for 46
months.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - Chicago

The gradual improvement in general economic activity continues in the
Seventh District.

However, final sales of some items—e.g., apparel, household

appliances, and medium and heavy trucks—have not matched expectations.
are generally "in good shape," although on the low side in some cases.

Inventories
Fears that

shortages would develop late this year or early next year have diminished.
Attitudes of business executives and most consumers remain cautious, with an eye
either to possible shortfalls from forecasts, or possible adverse political
developments.

Capital expenditures appear to be gaining strength, overall, but

very gradually.

Credit is in good supply in all sectors.

revival in nonresidential construction.

There are some signs of

Forecasts of interest rate increases are

more moderate as loan demand from both the business and consumer sectors has been
less than expected.
Many business executives, who report demand for their products to be far less
robust than in 1973 and early 1974, emphasize that they look back upon the chaotic
multiple-ordering and gray markets of that period with horror.

Distortions,

partly caused by price controls, made accurate readings of the underlying strength
of their markets impossible.

Businesses are attempting to keep tight control on

costs relating to capital expenditures, purchase commitments, and use of labor.
Some say that "the financial people are in control today," rather than the sales
people who made the big decisions in the last boom.
Lead times have lengthened further on average, despite margins of unused
capacity.

Cancellation of the scheduled October 1 steel price boost reflects

buyer resistance and their reluctance to build inventories.

Except for a few

items such as special castings, there are no reports of current shortages. The
130-day tire strike, apparently, did not affect vehicle output at all, but supplies
of snow tires may be tight this winter.

Relatively easy supply situations do not

necessarily mean stable or declining pfices.

Producers have raised prices of

rubber products substantially, although "quietly."

In another example, paper

prices are expected to average 5 to 7 percent higher this year, followed by
another 6 percent rise in 1977, despite ample capacity.
Large retailers indicate that sales were stronger in most departments in
August.

Apparel and fashion goods sales continue below forecasts, however.

Retailers' inventories are judged to be fairly well-balanced because of cautious
ordering policies.

Sales are expected to rise further in the months ahead.

Sales of major appliances are below expectations with freezers far below last
years

Sales of "built-ins" going to individual remodeling projects as well as to

new construction are quite strong.
Retailers and other suppliers of consumer wants comment that luxury products
are in strongest demand, a phenomenon noted throughout the recession.

Airline

travel measured by passenger miles has been about 10 percent above last year in
recent months with all of the gain in pleasure travel.

Flights to Hawaii are

virtually filled.
Sales of autos and other vehicles to consumers have continued at an
excellent pace.

As many dealers exhausted their supplies of large cars, sales

of small cars, including imports, were stimulated.

Some small cars have been sold

at cut-rate prices, especially certain 1975 models still on hand after two years,
inventories of new models are less ample than a year ago and production is being
pushed hard with Saturday work typical.

General Motors is anxious to "get a

reading" on public acceptance of its new lines of lighter, shorter "big cars."
Chicago area sales will be watched as a bellwether for the nation.
Light truck sales have been at record levels for some months with a large
share going to consumers.
remained slow.

Sales of medium (10,000 to 26,000 pounds), have

Sales of heavy trucks have increased, but not as much as expected,

and advanced production schedules may have to be pared back.

A producer of diesel

engines is operating at all-time high levels, and wonders if orders for truck
engines will be maintained.

Meanwhile, sales of diesels for construction equip-

ment and industrial uses have not increased significantly.
Most producers of equipment report that demand has improved, but very gradually
and the picture is "spotty."

In general, it is the "early movers"—smaller equip-

ment and cbmponents such as controls and smaller electric motors—that have showed
the largest gains with the "laggers," including most types of heavy equipment,
still slow.

A producer of heavy industrial cranes and large mining shovels reports

that order backlogs are eroding rapidly and production may be reduced from current
record levels in the months ahead.

Machine tool builders have been pleased with

recent increases in orders and expect substantial additional orders to be placed
during or after the 10-day biennial machine tool show now being held in Chicago
(September 10-17).
Stocks of all types of petroleum products are ample.

One forecast of the

rise in total sales this year has been reduced from 6 to 4.5 percent, mostly
because vacation driving has been less than anticipated.

A "normal" winter or

worse could mean some problems with availability of fuel oil, and, also, further
curtailments of natural gas.

OPEC nations are now expected to increase crude oil

prices by 15 percent at yearend, double the rise expected earlier, mainly because
of stronger than expected demand outside the U. S.
Lead times on cold-rolled steel and galvanized sheets have been cut by half
since late spring.

One forecast of steel shipments for 1976 has been reduced from

98 to 96 million tons because user inventories are not being increased as expected,
not because consumption is less than expected.

Local analysts point to a change

in steel order patterns with "reservation planning" by large users over a longer
horizon.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - St, Louis

Economic recovery in the Eighth District continues, but at a slower pace than
in the first half of the year.

Despite the moderation in growth, businessmen

generally continue to be optimistic about future business prospects.

Gains in

retail sales have been unevenly distributed, reflecting both the nature of the
recovery and unusual weather conditions.

Manufacturing activity continues to move

up moderately for a number of major products, such as chemicals, paper, and home
furnishings.

Capital goods equipment orders are beginning to increase.

Home-

building activity is mixed, with single-family home construction generally quite
strong, whereas multi-family activity remains at a low level.

On the agricultural

side, lack of rain over recent weeks has reduced substantially expected crop yields
in many parts of the District.
Retail sales have remained on a relatively high plateau over the summer months.
Retailers report new fall software items are currently selling fairly well.

Sales

of certain big-ticket items, such as air conditioners and lawn mowers, were
reported to have been sluggish over the summer months as a result of unusually
dry and relatively cool weather.

Automobile sales, on the other hand, continue

strong, particularly among the full-size models.
Manufacturing activity continues to make gains, but at a slower pace in the
past few months than earlier in the year.

A large paper manufacturer noted that

orders slowed in the summer months, but in the last 2 weeks some increased
strength in orders has occurred.

Appliance manufacturing has also been at a

reduced pace in recent months which was largely attributed to a drop off in
inventory demand.

A representative of the chemical industry reports that most

chemicals and plastic products are registering increases in orders, although
demand for certain fiber products is weak.

On the bullish side, advanced sales

for new automobiles are reported to be quite strong, and two large automobile

plants in the St. Louis area are planning to add additional shifts in October.
One representative of the capital equipment industry reported that demand is
currently picking up strength.
Single-family home building continues at a fairly strong pace in most of the
District.

However, apartment construction is still at a very low level.

Reports

from St. Louis and Little Rock indicate apartment vacancy rates are quite low,
and some new apartment projects are being planned.

In Memphis, no new apartment

or condominium projects have been under way for a couple of years, but some of the
previously started projects are now being completed.

Some condominium owners in

the Memphis area are offering special sales incentives, and some are offering to
buy the condominiums back at the original price after 2 years.

Recent figures

from Memphis indicate that condominium sales doubled from June to July and in July
were about 90 percent above a year earlier.
Nonresidential construction continues at a relatively slow pace.

One

contractor reported that new commercial projects of any size are hard to find.
However, several institutional projects, such as hospitals and government buildings,
are under way.
Savings and loan associations report increases in savings deposits in recent
weeks at about the same rate as in June and July.

Mortgage loan demand continues

upward reflecting the increased housing activity.

Mortgage interest rates are

generally at 8 3/4 percent for an 80 percent loan, up from 8 1/2 percent a couple
of months ago.

All types of savings deposits at commercial banks, except for

large negotiable CD's, have increased in recent weeks.

Business loan demand

continues sluggish, although increases in consumer and other types of loans have
been observed.
The continuing lack of rain in many parts of the District over the past
month has dimmed the yield prospects for com, soybeans and cotton.

Parts of

Missouri have been severely hit by drought conditions and reports from Arkansas
and Mississippi, indicate that crops in these areas also are being damaged by
lack of moisture.

Reports indicate that the Arkansas rice crop is generally in

good shape, although the current prices for rice threaten to make production
unprofitable this year.

Soybean production is expected to be down from earlier

estimates, and prices are relatively high.

Some reporters believe that soybean

prices will rise further as knowledge of drought damage becomes more widespread.
Reports from Arkansas indicate a sizable increase in poultry production is under
way.

NINTH DISTRICT - Minneapolis

The drought continued to plague the Ninth District's farm economy this
month, but other sectors seemed to be reviving.

Bank directors expected smaller

corn and soybean harvests and described the livestock industry as "in a state of
confusion."

The dryness dampened retail sales in many rural areas, they said, but

consumer spending elsewhere was encouraging.

Furthermore, recent manufacturing

activity dramatically surpassed expectations, and manufacturers were very optimistic.
Bank directors unanimously said material shortages were not a problem.
In early September, several bank directors expressed general concern and
uncertainty about how the sustained dry weather would affect District agriculture.
The already poor prospects for the corn and soybean harvests have been further
reduced, but the wheat harvest was quite good.

Directors believed the corn and

soybean prices would rise in the coming months as wheat prices remain stable or
decline.
The confused cattle industry was expected to continue to feel the effects of
the drought too.

Dryness and high feed prices helped to increase livestock

marketings and further depress fed cattle prices to their current low levels.
Directors expected higher corn and soybean prices to make profitable livestock
feeding still more difficult.

However, as the number of cattle declines,

livestock prices should improve.
The drought's full impact on the District's farm economy was considered hard
to assess.

The big crunch should not come until after the 1976 harvest, but the

drought's effects could linger for several years.
Drought conditions were already curtailing consumer spending in dry rural
areas.

A director from Central Minnesota, for example, felt dry weather had

noticeably affected his area's spending in recent weeks, and a North Dakota
director said uncertainty about the agricultural situation had cut sales of big-

ticket items there.

Also, farm implement sales were reportedly off quite sharply

in the dry areas of Minnesota and South Dakota.
In areas without drought conditions, however, consumer spending was said to
be quite good.

One large Minneapolis-St. Paul retailer said that after a dis-

appointing August business picked up in early September.

In Western South Dakota

retail sales were fairly strong this summer and tourist spending was 20 to 30
percent ahead of a year ago.
areas.

And two directors reported good auto sales in their

Consumer spending was curbed somewhat by layoffs and labor disputes in the

Upper Peninsual of Michigan, and tourists there were spending less than in other
years.

But several directors said retailers in their areas expected a good fall

and winter.
Even more strength was reported by District manufacturers.

According to our

August survey, current dollar sales of manufactured goods grew 20.3 percent over a
year-ago in the second quarter, the most since the recovery in this sector began
in the fourth quarter of 1975, and this is much more than the gain expected in the
previous survey.

Manufacturing gains were fairly evenly distributed among durable

and nondurable goods industries, which were up 21.6 percent and 18.7 percent,
respectively.
Their strong second-quarter sales gains probably caused District manufacturers
to revise upward their expectations for the next three quarters.

In the previous

survey last May, they saw sales gains tapering off in the fourth quarter of 1976;
but in the latest survey, they looked for fairly substantial advances over a year
ago through at least early 1977:

16.3 and 16.0 percent increases in the last two

quarters of this year and a 14.9 percent increase in the first quarter of 1977.
Bank directors unanimously said material shortages were not a problem here
in early September.

Although some concern was expressed about the long-term

situation, energy supplies were considered adequate for the winter.

The District's

farm implement shortages have substantially eased.

One director did report

some delays in receiving merchandise, but they were termed not excessive.

TENTH DISTRICT - Kansas City

The moderation in national economic activity is not readily apparent throughout
the Tenth District at this time.

Most purchasing managers contacted report that

demand remains strong, although their inventory investment policies, for the most
part, remain conservative.

The protracted hot, dry weather has taken its toll in

the District's agricultural sector, with continued deterioration in the condition
of corn and soybeans observable in many parts of the Midwest since September 1.
However, current estimates of crop losses suggest that significant upward price
pressures for these commodities are unlikely.

Business loans fell slightly at

Tenth District banks contacted, while the overall level of negotiated certificates
of deposit in the District continues to decline.
Discussions with a number of Tenth District purchasing managers suggest that
the moderation in national economic activity has not impacted on the District.
With the exception of several purchasing managers whose companies are in the
consumer durables area, the majority of respondents reported that sales were good.
Demand for steel storage facilities is currently fairly strong; and except for
demands related to highway construction, sales strength for steel fabrications
and other construction materials appears to be holding up.

Although lead times

from their suppliers have not lengthened much, most purchasing managers do express
some concern over steadily increasing prices from their suppliers.

One respondent

questioned whether the recently announced steel price increases were based on
demand and near-capacity operation or were the result of pressure from the auto
industry to have steel hikes coincide with price increases on the 1977 models.
The recision of those steel price increases reinforced his belief that the order
books of the steel industry are still soft and that they backed off in order to
strengthen their position.

Despite the generally expressed concern over price

increases, inventory investment plans remain cautiously conservative.

Most

purchasing managers contacted indicated that their inventories were adequate
and little, if any, shortages were being experienced.

No major alterations in

inventory are planned unless there appears to be some firming-up in consumer sales.
In conversations with a number of Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank directors,
there was little, if any, pessimism expressed regarding economic prospects.

One

director commented, "there is no feeling the recovery is about to be aborted."
Another expressed the view that "the psychology is not gloom," even among farmers
who were still angry over the earlier ban on exports which took money out of their
pockets.
United States corn and soybean production projections have been reduced as a
result of continued warm, dry weather across the Midwest.

September 1 conditions

indicate a corn crop of 5.89 billion bushels, down from a 6.19 billion bushel
projection a month earlier, but still slightly above the record 1975 harvest.
A 1.27 billion bushel soybean drop is projected, down from 1.34 billion bushels a
month earlier, and 16 percent below 1975 production.
The condition of corn and soybeans has continued to deteriorate in many parts
of the Midwest since September 1.

In a number of areas some corn fields intended

for grain harvest are instead being chopped for silage.

Missouri farmers,

experiencing weather even drier than last summer, expect yields substantially
below normal for both corn and soybeans.

Nonetheless, it presently appears that

reductions below earlier output projections for corn and soybeans may result
primarily in stemming price declines, rather than in sharply increasing prices.
Business loans fell slightly at Tenth District banks contacted in the
September survey.

Loans to construction companies and agribusinesses were

mentioned as two areas of decline, as were loans to national accounts.

Consumer

loans, which are usually fairly slow in August preceding a September rise, were
generally flat in August.

Bankers expect near-term auto sales to be much

improved over last year, but several expected the strength to come from sales
of the remaining 1976 line, rather than from the 1977 cars.

Bankers have kept

their local prime rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent above the 7 percent national prime.
Several banks, preferring to make loans mainly to local customers, have set for
their national customers a 7 1/4 percent rate. Most bankers expect the prime
rate to remain constant for at least the next month.
The level of negotiable certificates of deposit is still declining overall
in the District.

A few banks, though, have been rebuilding their CD portfolios to

lock in funds for an anticipated increase in loan demand.

However, most bankers

contacted—including a director of this Bank—have preferred to stay in Federal
Funds because of their uncertainty regarding the timing and strength of the
expected rise in loan demand.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - Dallas

Increases in manufacturing output account for the bulk of economic strength
in the Eleventh District, although much excess capacity is still evident. Total
employment in the District continues to be soft, and total construction activity
remains weak.

Department store sales are up moderately from a year earlier, and

automobile sales exhibit continued strength in the full-size and intermediatemodel ranges.
Department store sales in the Eleventh District continue to grow sluggishly
and are falling short of many retailers' expectations.
sales is shared by both hard and soft goods.
in line with current volume of sales.

The modest growth in

Retail inventories are being held

Nevertheless, if real sales gains do not

materialize, an involuntary inventory buildup may occur before yearend, according
to several retailers.
Automobile sales are good as full-size and intermediate-size cars lead the
sales advance.

Truck and van sales are also doing quite well.

being limited by two factors.

Car sales are

First, overwhelming demand for full- and inter-

mediate-size cars has resulted in a shortage of the more popular models.

Second,

there has been some softening in overall car demand as consumers wait to assess
the 1977 models.

Small car sales continue weak, and inventories have risen to

undesirable levels.

Most automobile dealers surveyed do not feel the announced

price increases will adversely affect sales.

Financing is readily available,

and a movement toward extended term (42 and 48 months) automobile financing is
gaining momentum.
Primary metal production has begun to accelerate.

The aluminum industry is

operating at approximately 77 percent of capacity, but output is up because of the
recent reactivation of idle capacity at two major plants.
levels, and production bottlenecks are not anticipated.

Inventories are at low

The cost and availability

of energy will continue to be a potential constraint upon production levels.
Most steel plants are operating at between 75 and 80 percent of capacity.
Inventories here, too, are at reasonable levels, and no immediate shortages are
expected.

Prices remain relatively low as a result of continued weak demand for

construction steel products.

Steel producers, however, are anticipating stronger

sales in the fourth quarter.
Petroleum refining production in Texas has increased to nearly 90 percent
of capacity.

Inventories are currently in line with the volume of sales, but a

buildup by the middle of the fourth quarter is predicted.

The prices of primary

inputs have increased over the past year, and the increases have been passed on to
customers with little impact on demand.
Apparel production in Texas has increased following a summer lull, and the
industry is attempting to gradually reduce current excess capacity.
in Dallas and Houston report good sales.
up.

Manufacturers

Both input and finished goods prices are

El Paso manufacturers, however, indicate sales are sluggish and are cutting

prices to move out older inventories.

The industry is anticipating a steady rise

in sales during the fourth quarter.
Demand for oil field equipment is being dampened by the continuing
uncertainty resulting from the Federal ruling to raise the price ceilings for
natural gas.
with sales.

Output has increased somewhat, and inventories are generally in line
Production is running at approximately 75 percent of capacity, but

price increases for many products are being planned.
Chemical production is above last year's level but has failed to exhibit real
strength in recent months.

Capacity utilization is estimated at 85 percent.

Inventories are being kept tightly in line with anticipated sales to prevent
involuntary buildups.

Demand is expected to strengthen in the next few months.

Output by the paper industry has weakened with the end of a 6-month strike
in the Canadian paper industry.

Production, however, is still above last year's

levels, and demand is expected to grow at an average rate by historical standards.
Finished goods prices have remained relatively stable, and inventories are well
within manageable levels.
The devaluation of the Mexican peso had an immediate effect upon the border
economy.

Retail sales to Mexican Nationals have dropped substantially.

In

El Paso, total sales are off a third, and many lay-away purchases by Mexicans
have been cancelled.

Moreover, many Mexicans who have made purchases on time are

either requesting extensions of their contracts in order to cut their monthly
dollar payments or are having their purchase repossessed.

The largest beneficiaries

of the devaluation are the twin plant industries along the border whose total wage
bills have been cut sharply.

This windfall savings to American businessess is

expected to decline, however, as Mexican labor unions are currently pressuring
for increases in their country's minimum wage.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - San Francisco

In the Twelfth District the economy is continuing its moderate rate of
expansion.
cautious.

Consumers remain the major source of demand and business spending is
After a mid-summer pause, retail sales have resumed their steady growth.

Automobile sales of the larger domestic models are particularly good.

Home-building

activity is increasing, and the demand for forest products has improved.

In most

agricultural areas of the District, production has been good, but there is concern
about the effect of declines in prices on farm income.

Bankers report steady

demand for consumer and real estate credit but little strength in commercial loan
demand.
Retail sales appear to have resumed their climb after a pause in June and July
and are running at 10 to 15 percent above the same period a year ago. The greatest
strength has been in nondurables.

Customer acceptance of back-to-school sales and

fall lines has been described as good.

Retailers are generally optimistic about

prospects for the rest of the year, but they are being careful in building
inventories.

Consumer durables are relatively weak and large-ticket items are

moving slowly in most areas.
excellent summer.

The Western tourist industry has experienced an

In Oregon, tourist expenditures are up 10 percent over last

year.
Automobile sales have been strong through August.

Domestic large models

have been selling well; so that by the end of the month, many dealers had sold
out some lines.

Domestic economy car sales have been weak.

The market for

foreign cars has been mixed, but sales have jumped in the last month.
Home-building activity is increasing in many areas.
California and Utah indicate good demand for new homes.
homes is also strong.

Reports from Southern
The market for existing

This activity in housing has stimulated more retail sales

by lumber dealers; plywood orders have increased and some building materials are

in short supply.

With this recovery in domestic construction and foreign orders

increasing, the forest products industry is expanding production.

Another

indicator of the improved demand for housing is that many of our banking directors
report increased loan demand for mortgage and for construction financing.

These

indications of a strengthening order pattern support expectations of a stronger
upward trend in construction by the end of the year.
Agriculture production in most parts of the District has been good.

Fruit

crops in Oregon and Washington have escaped serious weather damage and are of
excellent quality. Rain and 'cool weathferrhkve hurt wheat in Eastern Washington,
but in Oregon yields are expected to be high.

Drought has caused serious problems

for California ranchers but heavy reliance upon irrigation has limited losses of
most field crops so that the overall impact on State agriculture has been small.
Prospects for farm income, on the other hand, are less promising; and concern
exists over declining or low prices for dairy products, cattle and many vegetables.
Nonetheless, banks in agricultural areas report steady demand for loans to expand
storage capacity and to buy new equipment.
In California, recent Federal legislation has allowed increased production
and drilling for oil in the Elk Hills reserve.
in the United States except for Alaska.

This is the largest reserve left

Production is expected to reach 300,000

barrels a day by 1980, and refinery capacity in the Bakersfield area is being
expanded.
District banks are reporting a steady increase in loans for real estate and
consumer credit.

A large California bank describes the demand for credit from

overseas as being firm.

The demand for commercial and industrial loans,

particularly in national accounts, remains flat. According to one large bank,
"The crucial reason for soft demand from the largest companies is their inability
to foresee an adequate return on new investment—and they have adequate cash from

(a) rising long-term money and (b) current porfits."

In contrast, loan demand

by smaller businesses and homebuilders is relatively strong.

