CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

February 11, 1976

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page 1
Second District - New York page 5
Third District - Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District - Cleveland page 12
Fifth District - Richmond page 16
Sixth District - Atlanta page 19
Seventh District - Chicago page 23
Eighth District - St. Louis page 26
Ninth District - Minneapolis page 29
Tenth District - Kansas City page 32
Eleventh District - Dallas page 35
Twelfth District - San Francisco page 38

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.]
Strong retail sales are the key to a generally optimistic outlook
for the Redbook this month.

Nearly every District focuses attention on

the strength of consumer demand as an indication that the economy may be
regaining some of the momentum it lost in the latter months of 1975.

The

picture is still far from rosy, but the outlook is distinctly more optimistic.

Even though capital goods industries are still weak, the rest of

the manufacturing sector is gaining strength.

Inventories have been

brought into line with sales and new orders are up.

Two persistent weak

spots—the construction industry's slump and high urban unemployment—
remain gloomy, but inflationary pressures seem to be moderating in several
Districts.

While there is little disagreement that "catchup" efforts in

wage negotiations scheduled for 1976 pose a problem for stabilizing production costs, there are differences of opinion on the likelihood that food
prices will rise significantly during the next few months.
sector continues to build liquidity rather than expand.

The financial

Savings are flowing

into commercial banks and thrift institutions at very rapid rates.
putting downward pressure on mortgage rates.

This is

However, despite low interest

rates for business loans, demand for credit remains sluggish.
Reports from 10 of the 12 Districts indicate that the surge of retail
sales experienced in December was no fluke.

In each case, the bulk of the

gains recorded at the end of 1975 were preserved through January.
ticket" items are leading the sales surge in most areas.
appliances and furniture are all selling well.

"Big-

Cars, trucks,

Chicago, Philadelphia and

Minneapolis note that apparel sales are also strong.

In general, retailers

appear to have their inventories at levels which they feel are sustainable
and are increasing their stocks only to the extent needed to meet revised
sales forecasts.
The manufacturing sector continues its upswing.

Cleveland notes that

steel producers are experiencing a gradual recovery while Kansas City and
Chicago both point to rising sales forecasts as a spur to automobile
production in their Districts.

In most industries manufacturing inven-

tories are now either in line with sales or nearly so.

Dallas reflects

the findings of most District Banks in reporting that business continues
to be reluctant to rebuild inventories now that stocks have been cut back.
The manufacturing sector's advances seem to be most hesitant in the
Richmond District.

That region had experienced substantial improvement

in late 1975, but this month's report indicates a retrenchment may be occurring.

New orders and backlogs both softened during January in that Dis-

trict.

Capital goods manufacturers have yet to participate fully in the

recovery, and in the Boston District capital goods orders are still "feeble."
St. Louis and Minneapolis report similar weakness.

Cleveland describes

farm machinery and mining equipment as "holding up well," while Richmond's
machinery and equipment group is one of the few sectors showing progress in
that region.
The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of
the country.

Residential and nonresidential construction activity were

both lower last quarter in the Cleveland District, and Boston's real estate
and housing markets remain "depressed."

Atlanta finds itself with very

large amounts of vacant office space that resulted from overbuilding.

How-

ever, the city is trying to turn substantial recent additions to its hotel
room capacity into a plus by searching for more convention business.

The

San Francisco District reports that its stock of unsold housing and high
building costs are continuing to discourage new residential construction
even though mortgage rates are dropping.
There has been relatively little progress so far in reducing the
nation's unemployment problem.

Chicago finds that "job markets are improv-

ing gradually but unemployment remains very burdensome in the inner cities."
St. Louis finds its region in a similar situation.

The Dallas region is

one of the few in the country where the problem is not severe.

Increasing

job opportunities in the oil industry have helped to bring the area's
unemployment rate below 6 percent.

By contrast, San Francisco reports the

opposite problem since its area's aircraft industry is once again badly
depressed and its employment is dropping.
The best that can be said of inflation is that it may be moderating.
Prices continue to rise virtually everywhere, but no District reports any
unusual increases.

New York and Kansas City both note predictions from

sources in their Districts that food prices will be declining in the months
ahead—courtesy of good harvests, heavy plantings and intensified preparation of livestock for meat production.
disputes this forecast.

The Chicago District report, however,

New York, Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis all

mention the concern that "catchup" raises will be the objective of 1976
wage bargaining.
The current outlook for agriculture is mixed.

With the exception of

soybeans, forecasts call for planting additional acreage in most major crops.
The outlook for 1976 crop harvests at this point is generally positive.
However, farm income is currently under pressure because of declining grain
prices.

According to the Minneapolis report, the price decline is also

resulting in slow debt repayment and requests for additional inventory
financing at rural banks.

The situation of the country's banking community has not changed
substantially in recent weeks.

Savings inflows are generally strong, while

business loan demand continues to be weak.

For instance, Richmond reports

that some of the banks in its District are experiencing unusually low levels
of credit line utilization.

Even aggressive loan pricing efforts (Philadel-

phia) are producing little new business.

The Dallas District banks seem to

be relatively busy with agricultural and consumer loans.

But despite the

comparative strength of that region's economy, commercial loan growth is
described as "lackluster."

The only development of significance is the

downward pressure that savings inflows are putting on mortgage rates, especially in thrift institutions.

Boston, Cleveland and Chicago all report

declining financing costs for mortgage loans.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The directors of the First District report a continuation of recent
favorable economic trends.

Retailing has retained the momentum of the

Christmas period, and vacation areas are recording one of the best seasons
ever.

However, business loan demand, capital goods orders, and manufac-

turing employment have yet to improve.

In general, the directors are con-

vinced that the recovery has really commenced in New England, but it is
neither widespread nor very vigorous.
The real estate and residential housing markets remain depressed.
One director reported that virtually all residential development in the
Boston area had depended to some degree on Massachusetts Finance Agency
funds.

The distressed condition of the municipal bond market, especially

for this state's securities, has brought a halt to development activity.
Directors also report evidence that various thrift institutions in
the region have begun to sharply reduce mortgage interest rates.

In the

month of January, some mutual savings banks lowered quoted mortgage rates
by 25 basis points; for a 30 percent down payment, the interest rate has
been cited as low as 8.5 percent at banks which had offered 9.5 or 9.25 percent loans to identical customers four months earlier.

One banking direc-

tor expresses concern that mortgage interest rates cannot decline much
further.

He feels Regulation Q establishes a "base point price" for bank

certificate rates which, in turn, props the mortgage rate.

Only illegal

collusion could initiate and maintain a general reduction of interest
rates on these instruments.
Banking directors report continued weakness in loan demand.

However,

they continue "enforcing the standards we always thought we were."

Some

competition for loan customers by New York City banks is noted, but there

is no aggressive seeking of borrowers as yet.

Bankers are considering

service charges on checking accounts, especially those that bear interest,
and they are content to let certificates of deposit run off.
Capital goods orders are feeble and directors expect them to remain
so in 1976.

Although a recovery in orders of smaller machine tools is

expected this year, there is no evidence of it as yet.
Retailing has shown no pause from the vigorous pace of the Christmas
season.

January was well above plan for stores throughout the District,

and sales show every evidence of continued strength.
to purchase hard goods in quantity.

People are beginning

Directors definitely hesitate to

label this experience as a boom, and they stress that retailers remain
conservative about stocking inventory; buyers are maintaining flexibility
on a weekly basis.
Professors Houthakker, Tobin, Eckstein, and Samuelson were available
for comment this month.

All are concerned about the weaknesses in current

economic data as well as the sluggish outlook.
Houthakker is not convinced that a 1976 forecast of 6 percent real
growth and 6 percent inflation is possible in view of recent money expansion.

Previously, he forecasted the inflation rate to be substantially

below 6 percent, but noting recent spot price behavior and productivity
reports, he has altered his personal inflation forecast to 5 percent.

Even

so, 6 percent real growth seems unattainable, since he suspects that
recent velocity increases are not sustainable.

He counsels a cut in the

Federal funds rate to 4 percent to stimulate money growth and investment
by reducing market interest rates.
Tobin shares Houthakker*s view that the funds rate should be reduced
to 4 percent.

He is most interested in improving securities prices to

hasten the investment revival.

Although the recent rally has been

encouraging, it has fallen short of the mark:

stock prices would have to

increase 10 percent faster than capital goods prices just to raise real
business fixed investment by 7 percent in two years' time.

The lower funds

rate is necessary to bring pressure on interest rates which influence borrowing and spending decisions.

The current setting of 4.75 percent can

only be judged high or low by considering the attendant path of recovery.
Tobin's view is that the weakness of commercial and industrial loan volume
is at once responsible for the large velocity increases and an omen of
sluggish investment as other sources of funding carry relatively more of
the burden.

The spread between long and short interest rates is a symptom

of the economy's portfolio strains.

He noted that market rates firmed

with the announcement of the new targets; interest rates are responsive
to Fed policy and a positive signal is required.
Eckstein believes there has been a structural shift in money demand.
So he advises that there be no change in the Federal funds rate at this
time.

However, due to the "obvious and demonstrated weakness in business

investment demands," he has lowered his forecast of 1976 rea:l growth to
less than 6 percent.

Believing that both interest rates and money growth

should be consulted in framing policy, Eckstein feels that a reduction of
the funds rate is not in order yet.

In spite of modest money growth, the

economy has begun a convincing recovery; should the recovery begin to
falter, then the funds rate must be reduced.

In any case, the rate of

money expansion should not be erratic.
Samuelson feels that the goal of policy should be to secure 7 percent
real growth from 1975:IV, once all risks are taken into account.

He

believes the Federal Reserve and the Administration should actively pursue
this target and attempt to achieve it.

Noting that lower interest rates

could assist plant and equipment spending, which is now "a gleam in the eye,"

he feels there is 110 initiative to raise interest rates.

If faster money

growth is necessary in coming quarters to attain policy goals, then there
should be no hesitation to stimulate Mi.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Second District directors, businessmen, and business and financial
economists who were recently contacted generally indicated that they were
encouraged on the outlook for continued economic recovery.

In their view,

business inventories are now in reasonably good balance with sales expectations.

With inventories thus realigned, most respondents felt that

businessmen would pursue cautious inventory policies in the coming months,
with stocks growing in line with sales.

A minority of respondents, on

the other hand, felt that any strengthening of demand should stimulate
efforts to stockpile metals and would quickly drive up prices.

For the

most part, however, inflation was seen as moderating somewhat further,
except in a few trouble spots.

Some concern was also voiced over the

large wage and benefit settlements that are likely to be demanded in
forthcoming collective bargaining negotiations.

Liquidity problems, how-

ever, were generally not viewed as posing any significant threat to the
recovery this year.
The inventory situation was generally described as in good balance
with sales.

Indeed, according to one director, manufacturers were being,

if anything, overly cautious in their inventory building.

The Buffalo

directors expected firms to maintain tight inventory control, although
they saw prospects of "cautious and watchful" inventory buildup.

The

chief economist of a major chemical company, whose firm had only recently
escaped from a tremendous inventory overhang, confirmed that his company
was holding a "tight rein" on inventories.

The president of a major

metal company observed that inventories in his industry had finally been
brought into reasonable alignment with current sales.

He felt that any

strengthening in demand would prompt purchasing agents to aggressively
seek to accumulate inventories.

Among other sectors, one financial econo-

mist looked for increased liquidation of agricultural stocks held over
from 1975, and also wondered whether severe cold weather would sharply
reduce stocks of residual fuels.
On the outlook for price increases, a majority of respondents
expected inflation to diminish in coming months, led by slower growth in
food prices.

At the same time, however, price pressures were seen devel-

oping in a number of sectors.

The chairman of a major New York City bank

expected overall prices to rise in a range of 5 to 7 percent for the balance of the year.

Buffalo directors agreed with this assessment, expect-

ing prices to increase 6 percent—somewhat below the recent rate of
increase.

A slowing in agricultural prices was viewed as one of the pri-

mary factors contributing to a slowdown in the rate of inflation.

A

director with agricultural interests expected food prices to decline and
noted that there was already some evidence that this was occurring.

An

investment banking economist looked for a slowdown in fuel price increases
in coming months as the result of the lifting of the crude oil tariff.
Less encouragingly, he foresaw near-term pressures on metals prices developing.

The president of a major metals company also expected rapid indus-

trial wholesale price increases as a result of tight operating margins in
most industrial concerns.

Short-term upward pressures on paper and lumber

prices were seen as a remnant of the Canadian mill workers' strike.
On a related subject, a senior economist at a major manufacturer
that is facing heavy collective bargaining this year felt there was
little chance of any abatement in the rapid first-year-of-contract wage
gains that marked last year.

In his view, moreover, nonunion wage gains

would accelerate in order to "catch up" from earlier imbalances.

He

expected hourly compensation to increase at least 9 percent during 1976,
reflecting not only rapid wage and benefit increases but also cyclical
increases in hours of overtime work and changes in the mix of employment
among industries.

Another business economist, on the other hand, expressed

the view that continued high rates of unemployment would help to restrain
wage increases in the nonunionized sector, even if some major unions won
exceptionally generous settlements.
Questioned on the possibility that liquidity problems might retard
economic recovery this year, the directors felt these uncertainties had
largely faded into the past—either having been resolved or close to
being resolved.

In their view the supply of funds was more than ample to

support the continuation of a moderate recovery.

The chairman of a major

New York City bank did note, however, that bank lending policies were
"more conservative and quality-oriented" but could not determine if this
would become a significant drag on the economy.

Another director observed

that financial institutions had apparently become more aggressive in the
mortgage market.

While not foreseeing any near-term balance sheet imbal-

ances, several economists of nonfinancial corporations were concerned
over the longer-term capital problems stemming from the insufficiency of
internally-generated funds to meet prospective needs for capital
investment.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District has picked up in February.
The manufacturing sector, which was just marking time in January, shows
modest expansion this month and retailers report strong sales.

Manufac-

turers in the region indicate that new orders are higher and inventory
liquidation has been halted.

At the same time, employment is about the

same as in January and the workweek is fractionally longer.

Prices in

this sector are higher, but the reported increases are not as widespread
as they were last month.

The outlook in manufacturing for the next six

months is for continued expansion.

Area retailers are enjoying brisk

sales and envision a healthy sales picture over the coming months.

Bank-

ers report that loan volume remains basically flat.
District manufacturers, responding to this month's Business Outlook
Survey, report a modest improvement in business over last month.

Of the

businessmen surveyed, 21 percent indicate improvement while 72 percent
report no change.

New orders are up this month for the first time since

November, and the level of inventories is unchanged for the first time
since the fourth quarter of 1974.

This steadiness in inventory levels

is reported for both durables and nondurables.

At the same time, jobs in

manufacturing are holding steady, and the workweek is fractionally longer.
Here, weaknesses in durables are offset by gains in nondurables.
The outlook in manufacturing for the next six months is optimistic.
More than 8 out of 10 executives polled expect a higher level of economic
activity by August.

A similar proportion anticipate an increase in new

orders over the period and more than one-third project net accumulation

of inventories.
employment.

At the same time, these businessmen look for gains in

Close to half of the respondents expect to add to their

work forces, and almost one-third plan to lengthen the average workweek.
Increases in spending for plant and equipment are anticipated by 4 out of
10 respondents.

This is a continuation of a gradual upward trend in

planned capital expenditures which began last October.
Retail executives report that current sales are running well ahead
of the same period last year.

In addition, all of the merchants contacted

indicate that present sales levels are above their expectations for this
period.

In general, the strength in sales at most stores is reported to

be broad-based, but certain items are singled out as strong sellers.

For

example, one retailer notes a resurgence in lower-priced durables such as
small electrical appliances priced under $50.

He adds, however, that the

bulk of the strength is in soft goods, especially apparel.

In general,

retailers in the area are optimistic about the next several months and
there is little expectation that sales would suffer much if the proposals
for substantial increases in Philadelphia taxes were enacted.

One mer-

chant indicates that a bullish forecast for his stores' sales made last
November will probably be revised upward in the near future.

In addition,

all of the retailers contacted feel that inventories are better-balanced
than they were during most of 1975.
On the price front, manufacturers report that prices are up for
goods they buy as well as for those they sell.

However, the increases

are not as widespread as they were in January.

This month, for example,

only one-third of the respondents are paying higher prices for their
inputs while close to one-half were experiencing increases last month.
Similarly, 19 percent of the executives polled in the latest survey

indicate higher prices for the products they sell—down from 36 percent
in the previous month.
inflation.

The outlook for the longer term is for additional

Nine out of ten respondents expect to be paying more for sup-

plies six months from now, and almost 2 out of 3 anticipate higher prices
for their finished products.

Retailers in the area note that while prices

of inputs and outputs are both higher, there is "continued moderation" in
the rate of increase.

One merchant expects a highly competitive retail

environment in '76, and as such he feels that it will be difficult for
retailers to raise gross margins by raising their prices faster than
costs.
Bankers in the District report that total loans outstanding are essentially flat.

At one bank, however, loan volume is reported to be declining

and below levels forecast in December 1975.

There is general agreement

that the weakness is in the business loan component.

One executive notes

that competition is much keener now than it was a few months ago.

Last

November an offer by his bank of 90-day loans at below-prime rates elicited
a strong response.

A similar offer recently has not added one cent to the

volume of loans outstanding.

The majority of bankers contacted look for

an expansion in loans to begin sometime in the second quarter with slightly
over 10 percent growth for the year being a frequently-mentioned expectation.

The consensus is that consumer loans will grow faster than C&I loans.

None of the bankers contacted expects short-term interest rates to go any
lower, but there's uncertainty as to when they'll begin to rise.

There is

agreement, however, that the climb will be gradual at least through this
year.

All of the bankers surveyed express concern over the recent "Problem

List" disclosures, but no unmanageable problems from customers are reported.
In general, area bankers feel that the proposed increase in local taxes in

Philadelphia will have no noticeable impact on the current recovery.
effects on the regional economy, they feel, will be longer-term.

Any

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Stimulus from consumer goods and a slowing in inventory liquidation
continue to strengthen manufacturing activity in the Fourth District.
Capital goods, while still weak, are picking up.

Manufacturing employment

has recovered very little from lows last spring.

Residential and non-

residential construction activity sagged last quarter.

Thrift institutions

report excellent net deposit inflows in January and early February.
Producers and retailers of consumer goods are more optimistic about
sales than they have been in recent months.

A major appliance producer noted

its orders of major appliances so far this year are at least 30 percent
above a year ago and orders of housewares are at least 20 percent higher
because of the surge in retail sales and bottoming out of inventory liquidation.

The same factors account for the steady improvement in shipments

and sales of passenger car tires, according to an economist from a major
tire producer.

Retailers report that January and February sales are about

equal to the November and December 1975 average after allowance for the
usual seasonal drop.

One retailer reports that sales of major appliances

last month were better than expected and that sustained improvement through
1976 is now likely.

His management has become more optimistic because con-

sumer sales have consistently exceeded expectations since last fall.

Another

retailer, although cautiously optimistic, pointed out that use of charge
accounts in their branch stores located in depressed auto and steel centers
has picked up in recent weeks, reversing several months of decline.

A direc-

tor noted advertising revenue from television and radio will be up sharply
this quarter, and that consumer spending for recreation has picked up.
Financial officers and economists with several firms report that inventory reduction for their products has about run its course.

One director

noted that sales of fertilizers and herbicides are soaring.

A major plastic

producer reports that sales of polyvinyl chloride rebounded sharply in
December and January and that rebuilding of stocks will boost output further
in coming months.

Also, retail and manufacturers' stocks of passenger tires

decreased last quarter, although inventories in this industry are typically
built in the final quarter of each year.

A supplier of frames for trucks

reports that the big inventory reduction of heavy duty trucks is about completed.

Economists with major steel producers in the District expect

reduction of steel inventories will be virtually completed by the end of
this quarter.
Capital goods industries are still generally weak.

Producers of farm

machinery and mining equipment report their business has held up relatively
well but is below peak levels in late 1974.

Orders for metal cutting and

for forming tools have risen for several months but from very depressed
levels in early 1975.

A producer of industrial equipment reports orders

so far this year are 20 percent below a year ago and not much improvement
is expected until the second half of 1976.

A major supplier of frames to

the automotive industry expects heavy duty truck sales to rise by 11 percent this year in contrast to a 27 percent drop in 1975.

He reports

orders from truck producers have begun to pick up slowly.
Steel economists in the District report that orders and shipments this
quarter will be about 20 percent higher than depressed levels last quarter.
Demand for tubing and drilling pipe used in the petroleum industries has
softened, but demand for flat roll steel products from automotive and
appliance producers has strengthened gradually.

Orders from capital goods

producers are not expected to pick up until the second half of this year.
Employment in the District has risen very little since last spring.
Scattered cutbacks in manufacturing employment are still occurring in

primary metals, electrical machinery, and machine tool industries.
Employment in fabricated metals and rubber and plastic products has stabilized.

A large machine tool builder reports that it may layoff 1,000 of

its 6,000 workers by year-end if orders don't pick up strongly.

Many manu-

facturers continue to stretch out the workweek and hold down additions to
their work forces.
Contracts for both nonresidential and residential building activity
fell sharply in the District in recent months.

Nonresidential contracts

last quarter followed the mild declining trend that began in early 1975.
Residential contracts also slumped last quarter following a rebound in the
second and third quarters of last year.

Multi-family units remain

depressed with little builder-developer interest because of existing high
vacancies and relatively low rental rates.

However, one director noted

that sales of cabinet and counter-top materials rose to a record last
month, and a major lumber and home-modernization retailer also noted
sharp increases in sales of home building materials.
is seasonally weak in most centers of the District.

Mortgage loan demand
Net savings inflows

in January were described as excellent by several savings and loan executives.

These sources describe savings inflows in February as strong

despite small losses in deposits to the 8 percent Treasury note.

Mortgage

rates in Cleveland were recently reduced 1/4 percent to 8 1/2 percent for
a 30-year, 70 percent loan.
Price developments are mixed.

Weak markets for cutting tools and

steel fasteners have prevented price increases for these products despite
higher steel and wage costs0

On the other hand, recent price increases

for steel products are holding, and a major plastics producer reported
price increases for polyvinyl chloride in January and February are holding
because of the recent strong rebound in demand.

Our latest survey of

manufacturers shows some abatement in prices last month but more respondents
in February than in January expect price increases.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

For the second consecutive month Fifth District manufacturing
activity in January apparently showed little further improvement from
recent advanced levels.

In our latest survey, District manufacturers

reported that shipments and the volume of new orders softened somewhat
after several relatively strong months.

Backlogs of orders and inven-

tories were down slightly in January, but inventories relative to desired
levels were higher than in recent months.

Survey responses indicate no

change in employment from a month earlier, while prices, including employee
compensation, advanced across a broad front.

Current plant and equipment

capacity remains in excess at one-third of the manufacturing concerns surveyed.

By contrast, consumer spending apparently remains strong.

Retail-

ers surveyed were unanimous in reporting increased sales in January, even
after a very strong December.
sales advanced slightly.

Sales of big-ticket items relative to total

Survey respondents remain generally optimistic,

as most expect business to improve over the next six months.

Over the

past month bank credit at large Fifth District banks has fallen sharply,
with both loans and investments showing declines.
Responses to our latest survey of manufacturers indicate little
further progress toward recovery in the past month.

Shipments declined

for the first time in nine months, while the volume of new orders dipped
for the second straight month.

Declines in these areas were slight, but

compare with widespread and sizable increases in most recent months.

Over

one-third of our respondents reported declines in shipments, new orders,
and order backlogs.

Manufacturers' inventories apparently fell further

but more respondents now view current inventory levels as excessive than
at any time since September.

Reports from most individual industries seem

to be consistent with this general description.

One exception, however,

is the machinery and equipment group, which apparently experienced considerable improvement in the level of business during January.
Employment in manufacturing apparently remained about level in
January as did the length of the workweek.

Prices continued to rise in

most areas, as they have done since early last spring.

One-third of the

manufacturers feel current plant and equipment capacity is excessive, and
almost all respondents view current expansion plans as about right.
In contrast with the manufacturers, District retailers surveyed
experienced a continuation of the strong improvement which began in
December.

All survey respondents reported increased sales in January.

Sales of big-ticket items relative to total sales increased somewhat during the month, only the second such increase in over a year.

Comments of

branch directors substantiate this improvement in retail sales and include
mention of such areas as automobile and boat sales as having experienced
recent improvement.

Despite some increase in inventories at retail, survey

results show current levels as about right to too low.

Twenty-five percent

of the retailers surveyed also view the number and size of their outlets
as inadequate.

Employment at retailers increased during January as did

employee compensation.

Prices, paid and received, also advanced, as

75 percent of the retailers report them higher than one month ago.
District businessmen remain generally optimistic, expecting the level
of business activity to improve over the next six months.

Most survey

respondents, both manufacturing and retail, expect improvement nationally,
locally, and in their own firms over that period.
At Fifth District banks loan demand continues weak.

Consumer lend-

ing has been essentially flat, with neither installment lending nor

credit card activity reflecting the recent strength in consumer purchases.
Business loans continue weak.

An indication of the slack in business

lending is the current very low level of credit line utilization.

One

bank reports an all-time low in its credit line usage, 21 percent compared
to normal usage of about 42 percent.
cancelled or allowed to expire.

Credit lines are not, however, being

Expectations about the future course of

business loan demand in the Fifth District are mixed.

A large North

Carolina bank, for example, anticipates that production and inventory
loans will pick up in April, while a large Virginia bank expects no
significant rise for at least a year.
Farmers in both the District and the nation indicated in early
January that they intended to plant larger acreages of feedgrains and
cotton but smaller acreages of soybeans than in 1975.

Planned increases

in District feedgrain and cotton acreages—6 percent and 30 percent,
respectively—are somewhat larger than those indicated nationally.

But

the planned 8 percent cut in soybean acreage is about the same as that in
the nation.

Although the nation's total crop output reached a new high

last year, 1975 will not be remembered as the best of crop production
years in the District.

With weather-reduced yields per acre and the

total acreage of all principal crops harvested about the same as in 1974,
the only crops recording significant production gains over a year earlier
were tobacco, soybeans, and sweet potatoes.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Continued gradual economic recovery characterizes the Southeastern
economy.

A survey of retailers in the Sixth District reveals no ebbing

during January of the strength of retail sales.

Inventory rebuilding con-

tinues in some areas at rates in anticipation of ongoing sales increases.
Some stores have begun selective price increases, and profits are improving.

Still, financial difficulties continue to surface in retailing and

real estate businesses.

Labor market developments include the termination

of a protracted strike as well as the recall of furloughed workers.

Tax

law provisions affecting state revenues may constrain state government
spending in many areas.

International trade is growing in importance in

the Southeast.
An early February survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, confirmed by recent reports from directors, indicates that the
resurgence of consumer spending at department stores has persisted.

With

very few exceptions, retailers' earlier concerns that there might be a
downturn following the holiday season have not been realized.

January

sales reflect a normal seasonal decline, with the result that impressive
percentage gains from last year's results are being maintained.

Most

merchandise categories appear to be participating in the sustained
strength of sales.
Retailers report ongoing price increases on goods they are purchasing,
but no unusually large jumps are reported in particular merchandise categories.

Goods, in general, are readily available from manufacturers, with

the exception of especially popular products such as prewashed denim
apparel and Citizens'Band radios.

(Mood rings have sunk into a deep

depression; pet rocks are on the endangered species list.) Most department

stores are reordering in line with the increasing trend of sales.

Some,

in areas where sales improvements have been particularly strong, anticipate continuing increases and are placing orders in accordance with this
projection.

Nevertheless, restraint in building inventories continues to

be a primary consideration.
Some retailers have begun selective, gradual increases in their prices
but are proceeding with care.
resistance from customers.

None of these merchants report encountering

Several stores mention a very gradual increase

in the percentage of goods purchased on credit, although the percentage of
cash purchases remains above pre-recession norms.

One report was received

of an effort to encourage new credit accounts as well as greater use of
existing ones.
Other comments from retailers indicate that the solid sales gains
achieved during and after the holiday season were attained without markdowns and heavy promotions which characterized retailing in late 1974.
The profit outlook is, therefore, much improved.

Retailers note that, as

a result of reduced manufacturers' inventories, goods obtained at low
prices for use during promotions are very scarce.

In general, the best

sales increases are reported by top-of-the-line department stores which
suffered greater sales erosion a year ago.
Information of a less positive hue is largely limited to reports from
Florida, where January sales in some areas have produced much less impressive increases than those of December.

However, independent variety

stores in Florida are reportedly reordering in line with sales following
a very successful Christmas season.

Concerning trends by type of merchan-

dise in the Southeast, it is reported that furniture and carpet sales are
encouraging but appliance sales in certain areas remain subnormal.

Kennedy

and Cohen, a large electrical appliance chain headquartered in Miami, was

forced by financial difficulties to close 17 stores located in several
major cities and to release over 650 employees.

The organization subse-

quently filed for protection under the bankruptcy laws.
Reports of financial difficulty also appeared in the troubled real
estate industry.

Control of a recently completed 35-story office building

in downtown Atlanta has been acquired by a large out-of-state bank and an
insurance company which had supplied construction financing.

The building

presently has only about six tenants, despite the very liberal leasing
arrangements being offered.

This case exemplifies the severely overbuilt

condition of the office space market in Atlanta.

Lessors are engaged in a

bidding contest for occupants because anticipated rates of entry and expansion by firms have not been realized.

One real estate consultant reports

that general office space in the downtown area is about 28 percent vacant,
with six major new projects only 23 percent rented.

A carpet supplier

notes that about 20 percent of a recent mailing addressed to smaller carpet
specialty shops and decorators was returned, indicating that many of these
small businesses have been unable to weather the recession in the construction industry.

Concern is voiced by some branch directors that disclosures

of "problem" loans in testimony before congressional committees may precipitate financial pressures sufficient to force business firms into bankruptcy,
thereby jeopardizing the employment of many workers.
A brighter note about construction activity concerns three new hotels
oriented toward convention business which have recently been completed in
Atlanta.

A total of 2,850 rooms have been added to the city's hotel accom-

modations, all of which are near the downtown area.

The negative aspect of

reduced construction employment is offset by increased services employment
produced by the opening of the three hotels.

Additional developments in Southeastern labor markets include the end
of the 126-day strike of flight attendants against National Air Lines
during early January.

One community served by the carrier is reportedly

seeking to obtain more reliable service by having its route transferred to
another carrier.

Also, 1,800 workers who were laid off two years ago, were

recalled by the General Motors plant in Atlanta as a result of improvements
in new car sales; an additional 500 new jobs have been created.

The plant

payroll during 1976 is expected to double that for last year.
A fiscal problem has surfaced in Georgia which may also be affecting
other state governments.

Tax revenues are not expected to increase in

proportion to increases in income, owing to provisions allowing previous
years' losses to be carried forward in computing corporate income taxes.
Carrying forward of losses is expected to place a restraint on expenditures
by the state government.
The role of the Southeast in international trade appears to be expanding.

Southwire Corporation has entered into an agreement with the Soviet

Union to market Russian chemical and metallurgical technology in the United
States.

Coca-Cola has contracted on a trial basis to supply Russia with

lemons from Florida.

In addition, a new duty-free foreign trade zone is

being established south of Atlanta.

Manufacturing and assembly areas will

be provided in addition to warehousing and distribution facilities.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Confidence in the economic outlook in the Seventh District has
strengthened in the past month.
pace.

Consumers continue to spend at a faster

Employment is increasing and unemployment is decreasing.

bargaining is in prospect on major labor contracts.

Tough

Some business firms

have raised their projections of sales gains for 1976, and some are raising capital spending plans.

Order backlogs are stabilizing.

Supplies

of goods are ample in all sectors, but upward price pressures persist for
finished products.
improved.

The sales outlook for both cars and trucks has

Farmland values are sharply higher.

Interest rates on new

corporate bonds and on mortgages have eased.
The business atmosphere cannot be described as bullish, but the
flagging confidence evident two months ago has been replaced with a less
hesitant view of the future.

More purchasing managers reported output,

new orders, and backlogs to have improved in January.

Projections of

increases in sales of manufactured goods and services for 1976 either are
being raised or are being stated with more assurance.

A quarterly survey

of consumer confidence in the Chicago area, just released, showed a surge
to the highest level in three years, after having fallen back last time.
The upswing in the stock market and the decline in interest rates since
the turn of the year were especially welcomed because these developments
were unexpected.

There are many comments that Congress, the Administra-

tion, and the Federal Reserve "will not let the economy falter in an
election year."
The stronger tone of retail sales noted in the Christmas period has
continued in January and February.

The list of products that are going

well has broadened and includes apparel, auto supplies, furniture,

appliances, recreational vehicles, truck-vans, and Citizens' Band radios.
A producer of garbage disposal units is producing "full blast" again
after a severe drop last year.

Retail inventories generally seem in line.

However, recent household goods trade shows in Chicago have brought an
excellent response suggesting that many retailers are planning to restock
in expectation of further growth in consumer outlays.

Consumers are

using installment credit more freely, and delinquencies and write-offs
have improved.

Loans on new cars are being held at three years, except

for exceptionally good risks.
Job markets continue to improve gradually, but unemployment remains
very burdensome in the inner cities.

Current and prospective labor nego-

tiations are uppermost in the minds of many executives.

A major airline

was well pleased with a recent settlement that provides a first year wage
boost of "only" 8.5 percent.
in Chicago.

The Teamsters are starting talks this week

As before, the Chicago union is bargaining separately and is

expected to set the pace.

(Initial Teamster demands are very large.)

UAW is pressing for COLA increases for pensioners.

The

An appliance union

demands "30 and out," which management strongly opposes.
Among the industries that have raised sales projections for 1976
recently are motor vehicles, steel, and airlines.

An oil company expects

a 6.5 percent rise in total petroleum product sales, following a 2 percent
decline last year.
Among firms that have raised capital spending plans for 1976 recently
are motor vehicles, electric utilities, and chemicals.
they are cutting back.

Oil companies say

Machine tool bookings are still very weak, but

some producers have substantial backlogs.

Increased sales of some smaller

capital goods may be satisfied from field stocks for several months.

Heavy construction equipment sales dropped off sharply late in the fourth
quarter and are not expected to recover soon.
Output schedules for trucks, including heavy trucks, have been
raised substantially recently, but from very low levels.

Auto companies

are pressing programs to offer broader lines of light-weighls-cars—under
3,500 pounds.

There has been an unusual amount of juggling of auto output

schedules recently to adjust unbalanced inventories to buyer tastes, but
total assembly schedules have been maintained and the tendency has been
to raise sights on sales for the year.
Inflows of savings to S&Ls have continued at advanced levels.
commitments are being made more freely and terms are easing.

Loan

At least

one Chicago area S&L is offering 80 percent, 30-year loans, at 8.5 percent, plus "two points."

Most loans are at 8.75 to 9 percent, down

slightly in recent months.

Builders and lenders maintain that most pro-

posed new apartment projects do not offer prospects for profits at present levels of rents.

Rents on existing apartments are under upward

pressure, partly because of sharply higher costs of fuel and maintenance.
District analysts expect food prices to rise at a faster pace in
the second quarter more than offsetting a slowdown in the first quarter
associated with declines in prices of cattle and processed foods late
last year and early in 1976.

Cuts in wholesale prices of processed

fruits and vegetables are not fully reflected at the retail level.
izer inventories are heavy and prices have declined recently.
ment sales are expected to be larger this year.

Fertil-

Farm equip-

This Bank's survey of

farmland values shows further increases in the fourth quarter to levels
22 percent above last year on average.

Credit conditions at rural banks

are much improved this year, because of good deposit growth and agricultural
loan repayments.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The economic recovery in the Eighth Federal Reserve District is
continuing according to recent reports from businessmen.
remain relatively strong after the Christmas surge.

Retail sales

Most manufacturing

firms likewise report increasing sales and are optimistic that further
improvement will occur during the year.

Funds continue to flow into

financial intermediaries at relatively high rates, though mortgage interest rates remain stable.

On the agricultural scene, crop farmers are

making plans for large 1976 plantings.
Department store representatives noted strong sales in the postChristmas season, following the excellent sales gains during Christmas.
Most types of merchandise are reported to be selling well, with some
improvement in big-ticket items which heretofore have registered less gains
than other items.

Reports by local car dealers are mixed.

However, car

and truck sales appear to be improving with domestic automobiles selling
somewhat better than foreign cars.
Several manufacturing representatives noted moderate gains in their
sales and reported that inventories are at desired levels.

A major chem-

ical firm reported sales gains late last year and early this year.

Chem-

ical products with rising sales this year include fabricated plastic
products, petrochemicals, rubber, phosphates, and herbicides.

A local

steel firm has recently brought on line an additional blast furnace as a
result of rising orders.

A producer of both consumer and capital goods

noted strength in consumer products, but no growth of demand for capital
goods.

A representative of a paper and boxboard manufacturing firm

reported sizable gains in sales in recent months and believes the uptrend
will continue this year.

Apparel manufacturers, which have already

experienced a substantial turnaround in demand, expect further increases
in sales in the coming months.

Institutional apparel, which until recently

had lagged the upturn, was reported to have shown some strength in sales
recently.
Latest employment data indicate that the upturn in the District's nonmetropolitan areas has been stronger than in metropolitan areas.

The

rise in employment in District states has so far been about twice the rate
of increase in major District cities.
Residential constuction has increased somewhat, according to housing
representatives.

Several builders of single-family housing report opti-

mism about housing sales this year.

A couple of builders in the St. Louis

area reported rising sales in recent weeks and they have already sold a
sizable percentage of the homes that they plan to build.

Multi-family

construction has generally remained at a very slow pace throughout most of
the District, but some improvement is expected later in the year.
Although a surplus of multi-family dwellings has been a depressing factor
in many parts of the District, especially the Memphis area, no overhang
in multi-family units is reported in the St. Louis area.

As a consequence

of this small inventory, several analysts are predicting a sharp increase
in rental prices this year in St. Louis.
Savings and loan associations report strong gains in time and savings
deposits in recent weeks, continuing the upswing of last year.

Commercial

banks reported increases in time deposits in January, with declines in
large certificates of deposit more than offset by increases in other time
and savings deposits.

The pickup in single-family housing construction

has resulted in some expansion in mortgage loan demand, but the situation
in multi-family construction remains a limiting factor to such demand

growth.

Despite the large quantity of funds available and the relative

weakness of mortgage loan demand, lenders are reluctant to decrease mortgage rates.

Some savings and loan institutions are investing some of

their funds in installment-type consumer loans.
Bank business loan demand continues unchanged.

One representative

of a large bank noted the widening gap between bank lending rates and
rates on commercial paper as one factor.

Demand for consumer installment

loans was also noted to be rather weak.
Crop plantings are expected to be larger in 1976 than last year.
Recent reports indicate farmers will increase the acreage planted to most
major crops, except soybeans.

They are planning to shift some acreage

from soybeans to cotton and corn, reflecting changed price relationships.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District directors are becoming more optimistic that the
current recovery will be sustained through the remainder of 1976.

Midway

through the first quarter, consumer spending is proceeding at a strong
pace.

Business investment spending, though currently not very robust,

is expected to gain momentum by the second half.

Fears of inflation have

subsided somewhat, though several directors anticipate slightly higher
inflation rates later in the year.

However, the lessening concerns over

inflation appear to be having little effect in moderating overall wage
demands.

Farm income in the District is running below year-earlier

levels, and inventory financing of grain is up in rural areas.

Both

rural and city banks appear to have adequate liquidity to meet anticipated
loan demands in coming months.
Directors confirm that consumer spending in this District was strong
in the fourth quarter, and they say that current spending is proceeding at
a good pace.

A North Dakota director says that January retail sales in

his area were very good; and a Minnesota director expects consumer spending in 1976 to average about 10 percent above 1975.

Automobiles continue

to sell well and one director reported exceptional strength in soft goods.
Despite sales gains, retailers continue to exercise tight control over
inventories, with any buildup generally being kept in line with increases
in sales volume.
Directors foresee increases in aggregate investment spending through
the remainder of the coming year.

On balance, the directors feel that

advances in investment spending in 1976 will exceed the 5.5 percent gain
registered in the recent Department of Commerce Expectations Survey.
However, one director, taking a more cautious view, expects that current

excess capacity in the industrial sector will help keep the increase in
spending in the range of 5 to 6 percent.
Currently, though optimism is increasing in the business community,
most firms are still being slow to commit themselves to new capital projects.

However, a more rapid advance in investment spending is foreseen

for the second half, and one director anticipates second-half investment
spending substantially above 1975 levels.
At the micro level, patterns of investment spending are mixed.

A

Montana director observes that farm machinery is still moving at a brisk
pace, but a North Dakota director expects farm machinery demand to be
down in the coming year due to the heavy investments in that industry in
recent years.

A Michigan director said that investment spending in his

region will be off due to depressed copper prices and an inventory overhang.

However, spending on coal development and associated industries

will likely be up through 1976.
Directors feel that investment spending will not generate a major
increase in bank loan demand.

Any increases which do occur in loan

demand are expected to be modest, at least through the first half.

Two

directors say that businesses will be looking more to internal cash flows
to help finance new investments.
Ninth District directors generally feel that fears of inflation have
subsided somewhat.

Two directors cite declines in the prices of some food

items as one reason to expect only modest inflationary pressures in
coming months.

On the other hand, price increases for heavy goods and

rate increases for utilities will continue to exert inflationary pressures
on the District's economy.

In addition, several directors anticipate a

somewhat faster pace of inflation in the second half than in the first
half.

Few directors feel that the slowdown in inflation will have much
effect in moderating wage demands in 1976, though there are some exceptions.

For instance, a North Dakota director feels that recent wage

settlements in that state have been tempered by a slowdown in inflation,
and a Minnesota director reports that teachers in his area appear satisfied with wage gains in the 5 to 7 percent range.

Nonetheless, most

directors feel that workers will be seeking large wage increases in 1976,
not so much to hedge against future inflation as to recoup losses from
past inflation.
According to bankers responding to the latest Agricultural Credit
Conditions Survey, farm earnings in the District are moderating as producers remain reluctant to sell grain on a bearish market.

The rate of

debt repayment is slow, and farmers are seeking more inventory financing
from rural banks.

The refinancing of farm debt is up, and rural bankers

expect refinancing needs to be fairly strong through the first quarter
of 1976.

Nevertheless, banks appeared to have sufficient funds to meet

credit needs of farmers; few agricultural banks were forced to turn down
farm loans in the last quarter because of a fund shortage, and a high
proportion of banks are still seeking new farm loan accounts.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District retail sales continued strong during the month of
January and are expected to show steady growth at least through the summer.
Area automobile manufacturing plants are expanding employment and Ford and
GM dealerships reported both excellent sales and an optimistic outlook.
Chrysler and AMC dealers, however, were not doing well.

Although there is

still concern about wheat, generally positive crop expectations, expanded
cattle placements, and increased hog farrowings all point to reduced pressure on food prices during 1976.

Tenth District bankers, however, reported

mixed views on the strength of business loans, noting that local businesses
were exercising caution in inventory rebuilding.

Savings inflows, on the

other hand, continued strong.
The strong January retail sales reported in the national press were
also evidenced throughout the Tenth District.

While two large stores in

Denver noted a falloff at the end of the month, all respondents indicated
that January sales ranged from "good" to "super."

The majority of stores

reported that improvement was strong "across the board."

Big-ticket items

were said to be strong in two stores but weak in two others.

On the inven-

tory front, no problem areas were mentioned, and several respondents
stated they were now in excellent shape going into spring.

Only one

Denver store reported any difficulty in obtaining merchandise from suppliers.

Citing improved consumer confidence, all interviewees looked for-

ward to a strong spring and summer.

Consumers were expected to emphasize

quality in their purchases rather than price.
Automobile manufacturing plants in the Kansas City area reported a
favorable outlook for 1976.

Starting March 1, the remaining 1,900 GM

workers laid off last year will be recalled, representing a $26 million

increase in annual payroll.

The Ford plant outlook is not as bright, with

a tentative shutdown scheduled for the week of February 23, depending on
sales.

Ford still has 519 employees on indefinite layoff.

On the retail side, however, both Ford and GM dealers throughout the
Tenth District reported excellent sales and expectations.

While all models

are selling well, Ford is doing best in large cars and Chevy in smaller
models.

Buick and Pontiac are also doing well.

On the other hand, both

Chrysler and AMC reported strong December sales, but very sharp falloffs
in January to below 1975 levels.
Volare and AMC sales on Pacer.

Chrysler sales are concentrated on

All dealerships reported that most units

sold were fully-equipped and that inventories were generally good though
some shortages existed in high-demand models.
Recent reports on agricultural conditions have bolstered the prospects
for greater stability in food prices in 1976.

Farm prices have been quite

sluggish for the last five months, owing to large harvests last fall and a
seasonal increase in red meat production during the fourth quarter of
1975.

For the month ended January 15, prices received by farmers dropped

0.5 percent following a modest increase in December.

Given the evidence

of increased cattle placements in feedlots during the fourth quarter,
together with the beginning of an expansion in hog farrowings, meat supplies in 1976 promise to be large enough to offer some stability to retail
prices—assuming that the farm-to-retail margins do not widen significantly.

The winter wheat situation in the District is still hanging in

the balance due to the lack of moisture.

Several stories of farmers

abandoning the crop, taking steps to prevent wind erosion where there is
no wheat, and applying for disaster payments have been reported in the
news media.

However, a large crop is still possible if the weather

cooperates over the next few months.

And, if crop producers follow through

with their intentions as reported in January, the production of most crops
in 1976 will likely be large enough to restrain any sharp rise in prices.
In fact, given the information on probable carry-over stocks next summer
and fall, grain prices could slide rather significantly should 1976 production levels be of bumper proportions.
Tenth District bankers contacted had mixed views of business loan
strength.

Four banks indicated January declines in business loans while

three reported strong gains.

Shifting of national accounts was mentioned

by several banks as a major reason for either increased or decreased loan
demand.

Only one bank reported strong gains in demand from local custo-

mers—primarily from agribusinesses and utilities—while several mentioned
that local businesses are exercising caution about inventory rebuilding.
Credit card sales are still up seasonally, and a few banks reported
increases in auto loans.
Savings inflow continues to be strong in both the consumer and the
corporate areas because of low CD and Treasury bill rates.

Some outflow

is expected within the next week because of the new Treasury issue.
are continuing to run off certificates of deposit.

Banks

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

Large commercial banks in the District report that lending activity
continues at a lackluster pace even though loan officers have become
more aggressive in seeking new customers.
a moderate recovery in bank loans in 1976.

As a result, they expect only
Total loan volume should

only increase between 7 percent and 10 percent with petroleum loans—
especially to finance oil field operations—and consumer installment loans
leading the recovery.

For the largest banks, foreign lending should also

continue to increase, as these banks attempt to offset the sluggish recovery in domestic loans.
Consumer installment lending, paced by new car sales and home improvement loans, has increased steadily since last fall.
also on the rise.

Credit card use is

Moreover, credit card delinquencies and demand for debt

consolidation loans are down sharply from their peak levels early last
year, indicating household finances are much improved.

Bankers are

aggressively marketing consumer loans, trying to keep this market strong
throughout the year to help offset slack demand for other loans.
According to most loan officers, business continues to be reluctant
in rebuilding inventories.

Although retailers are replenishing stocks in

expectation of a record sales year in 1976, manufacturers and wholesalers,
for the most part, are keeping their stocks near last year's low levels.
Nevertheless, nearly half the bankers surveyed said a number of manufacturers
are currently reevaluating their inventory policies, and as a result, borrowing may pick up in the spring.
Bank loans to small businesses for equipment and plant expansions
are also sluggish.

Many of these firms have cut back their capital spend-

ing plans until they can build liquidity.

Moreover, Houston bankers say

the major oil companies are facing uncertainties that will keep new
capital requirements below the level of last year's spending.
In addition, the reluctance of bankers to make term loans last year
to bail out firms with weak working capital positions has resulted in
these firms turning to other sources of funds.

Asset lenders in par-

ticular are reported to be doing a brisk business at interest rates in the
neighborhood of 6 percentage points over prime.
Real estate lending is increasing, but loan officers say the cautious
rise in lending activity is far different from the speculative pace of a
few years ago.
strength.

Sales of single-family homes are providing most of the

Bankers note that large holdings of non-income producing land

by both banks and REITs continue to hold down real estate lending.
More on the positive side, bankers expect a revival in business
acquisition lending in the near term.

A Dallas banker, for example, said

he is receiving an average of two inquiries a week from large firms looking for small businesses as candidates for acquisition.
Rural bankers report demand for farm and ranch credit is strong.
With rising costs of production and more intensive irrigation due to dry
weather, demand for crop operating loans is up sharply.

And, as a result

of declining grain prices, crop storage loans have risen.

Also, farm

machinery loans have increased due to substantially higher prices for
tractors, machinery, and equipment.
Livestock lending has strengthened with more feedlot placements and
increased supplemental feeding of cattle on ranges and pastures.

In

addition, lending for dairy operations has picked up as that industry has
responded to lower feed costs and higher milk prices.

However, demand

for stocker cattle for winter grazing on wheat and oats is below normal
because

of the lack of rainfall and deteriorating forage conditions.

-37-

Agribankers indicate that many farmers and ranchers in the District
are having problems repaying loans.

Farm and ranch income has been weak-

ened by depressed grain and cattle prices, rising production costs, and
poor moisture conditions.

As a result, loan renewals and extensions are

running well above normal.
The Texas labor market continues to improve as the unemployment
rate in the state has dropped below 6 percent.

The number of jobholders

in the state is slightly higher than the level a year ago, paced by a gain
of nearly 10 percent in mining employment.
of oil field drilling.

This reflects the boom level

If legislation is enacted to partially deregulate

natural gas prices, new hirings in this sector are expected to continue to
increase.
Construction employment is the weakest sector in the labor market.
In the Dallas-Fort Worth area, many large companies have been making greater
use of industrial workers for plant constuction, reducing employment opportunities for union members in the building trades.

Already, jobless rates

in some organized building trades are running 30 to 40 percent.

As a

result, union bricklayers, operating engineers, and laborers in the North
Texas area have agreed to pay cuts of around 30 percent to help union
contractors compete for construction bids against open-shop rivals.

And

in El Paso, many building tradesmen are pocketing their membership cards
and are hiring out to nonunion contracts.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

More optimism than caution characterizes the most recent attitudes
of our directors concerning business trends.

Retail trade has sustained

its year-end buoyancy and advance orders are dramatically higher than a
year ago.

For many manufacturing industries, e.g., steel, pulp and paper,

and clothing, operating rates have increased substantially in recent
months; in some instances such as lumber and wood products and electronics,
operating rates have at least firmed or have moved up slightly.

In the

aircraft industry, however, business has resumed a declining trend after
a period of stabilization.
are mounting.

Order backlogs are disappearing and layoffs

In agriculture, prices are generally lower than they have

been in two years and crop prospects are good.

Lower feedgrain prices

have activated cattle feedlots and brought a sharp increase in cattle
slaughterings.
The year-end acceleration of consumer spending was sustained through
January causing a slight shift of emphasis from caution to optimism on the
part of retailers.

Order backlogs have built up to a "respectable" level,

especially for automobiles.

A national clothing manufacturer indicated

that orders for spring and summer wear were "very much better" than a year
ago and that "January orders were excellent."
Except for the aircraft and heavy construction equipment industries,
manufacturers report gradual improvement in business over the past three
months.

Operating rates have risen substantially in the steel, pulp and

paper, and clothing industries, and have increased noticeably in the
lumber and wood products, electronics, and chemical coatings industries.
Regarding the lumber industry, however, one director commented on the
concern of the industry over pending lawsuits that could reduce timber

sales by 50 percent, noting that the "environmentalists are. winning all
the way so far."

While new orders for machinery are picking up, it is

estimated by one director that "an additional six months would have to
elapse before operating rates of a year ago are realized."
The aircraft industry is facing a very depressed market.

Backlogs

are down and business has slipped to about half of what it was last year
at this time.

Industry employment is declining.

Manufacturers complain

that "the CAB will not agree to fare increases but the costs of fuel and
labor continue to go up."

Prices are being heavily discounted as producers

are forced to choose between market share and profit margin.

Developments

are tied to a world market and are responding to slow growth in Japan and
Western Europe as well as domestic demand.
For most industries, on the other hand, prices have firmed over the
past three months.

Discounts and special deals are rapidly disappearing

so that effective prices have generally increased.

In some instances,

however, e.g., farm machinery, chemical coatings, and marine products,
price increases have had to be rolled back.

The actual cost of producers'

materials is reported to be increasing, but at a decreasing rate.
The agricultural community is being careful about new expenditures and
planning for reduced net income for the next several years.

Commodity

prices are reasonably lower than they have been in the last two years and
there is no anticipation of change.

Crop prospects are generally good with

feedgrains stored about 10 percent higher than a year ago.

With increased

feedgrains on hand, placement of cattle in feedlots during the last quarter of 1975 rose 23 percent in Oregon, while marketing for slaughtered
cattle rose 21 percent.
In response to a question regarding the probable effect of lower
interest rates on construction activity, a director from a large west coast

bank believes that additional expenditures over those already planned
will be modest.

"Further significant increases in housing starts will be

limited by high selling prices well beyond the financing capability of
most families, plus some remaining surplus housing built earlier.

Fortu-

nately, this unsold inventory is now small in California and mostly multifamily.

Land development suitable for new housing is proceeding very

slowly for environmental and financial risk reasons.

Significant

increases in commercial construction will be held back by some excessive
vacancies and by needed investment expenditures for new and depreciated
equipment."

