CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

April 12, 1977

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 9
Fourth District-Cleveland page 13
Fifth District-Richmond page 17
Sixth District-Atlanta page 20
Seventh District-Chicago page 25
Eighth District-St. Louis page 28
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 31
Tenth District-Kansas City page 34
Eleventh District-Dallas page 37
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 40

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.]
The recovery has been solidly reestablished, according to this month's
district reports.

Manufacturing activity has increased, retail sales are

generally good, inventories appear to be at satisfactory levels and there are
signs that capital spending is picking up.

Deposit inflows continue to be

strong, particularly for savings accounts.

Loan demand seems to be up overall,

but there is considerable variation in the reports on commercial loans.

Recent

rainfall has eased problems in the agricultural sector, but several districts
mention that this area remains a trouble spot.

Farmers are caught in a profits

squeeze as costs, often drought related, are rising faster than prices.

The

one rather negative element in this generally favorable picture comes from
reports of widespread price increases.
Consumer spending continues to be strong.
observed that retail sales are in an upward trend.

Almost all districts
Large ticket items such as

appliances and furniture were singled out as moving particularly well by
several Banks. (Boston, Richmond, St. Louis and Minneapolis).

Sales of

automobiles were reported to be healthy by Cleveland and Minneapolis, although
in New York's district they are lagging last year.

All three Banks observed

that standard and intermediate size cars are in much greater demand than
compacts.

When mentioned, inventories were said to be within desired limits.

Boston expressed concern that the tax rebate might lead to an excessive
inventory buildup as a result of temporarily higher sales.

Manufacturing output and employment have picked up.

Surveys by

Philadelphia, Richmond and Chicago indicated that new orders and shipments
are higher for many manufacturers.

In both Philadelphia and Richmond this

improvement has caused increases in both employment and the workweek.
Cleveland, St. Louis and Minneapolis also expressed optimism about business
prospects.

Among the industries which were observed to have made significant

gains in recent months were primary metals, especially steel, textiles and
chemicals.

Manufacturers of apparel and furniture were reported to be doing

well in some districts but not in others.
The outlook for capital spending remains confused but there are
signs of an improvement.

Producers of capital goods, particularly small

items, are experiencing increased interest in their products, but there
seems a general reluctance to undertake any large-scale expansions.

Increases

in the demand for component capital goods like bearings, castings and engines
were reported by Boston, Cleveland, Chicago and St. Louis.
Chicago observed that steel sales were strengthening.

New York and

Boston and San Francisco

reported that sales of aircraft and aircraft equipment were expected to
improve; and Cleveland and Chicago noted a strengthening in orders for
equipment used by the lumber industry.

St. Louis indicated that sales of

construction equipment have increased but Cleveland commented that these were
still weak in its district.

Despite these indications that capital spending

is picking up, several Banks expressed dissatisfaction with the level of
investment in their districts.

Boston and Richmond noted that there was little

interest in their regions in expanding capacity,
capital spending was recovering slowly.

New York reported that

Businessmen in its district are

said to feel strongly that investment is being discouraged by government

regulations.

Environmental regulations were singled out.

This view was

echoed by Chicago and St. Louis: while capital spending is picking up,
government regulations are hindering it.
by Kansas City.

Similar sentiments were expressed

On the more positive side, approximately 40 percent of

the firms responding to Philadelphia's survey plan increased capital
spending.

Kansas City reported that investment in the energy field

has been strong and will increase if there is a shift from natural
gas to coal.

According to Dallas, oil drilling activity is

continuing to rise and the demand for oil field equipment is climbing
steadily.
Recent rains have relieved drought conditions in the west, but several
districts remain very concerned about low crop prices and drought-induced
cost increases.

Chicago and St. Louis reported that soil moisture conditions

are considerably improved in their districts and planting is proceeding
normally.

Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco, on the other

hand, reported that while drought conditions have been alleviated considerably
more moisture is needed.

All are concerned

particularly for wheat and cattle.

about depressed product prices,

These prices in combination with rising

costs have reduced farm income and except in San Francisco's district have
resulted in heavy borrowing at rural banks.
Financial developments seem generally consistent with other sectors
of the economy.

Loan demand appears to have increased with real estate and

consumer loans accounting for most of the gain.

Richmond, Kansas City and

San Francisco noted increases in commercial loan demand; Boston, Philadelphia
and St. Louis observed that it was flat or varied throughout the district
and Dallas reported a decrease.

As mentioned above, agricultural loans have

increased in parts of the west.

Philadelphia reported that banks are receiving

inquiries about fixed rate loans and that one is offering high quality
customers loans at 8 percent with an outside maturity of five years and no
balance requirement.

Kansas City noted that in Oklahoma a number of banks

had raised their local prime lending rate from 6 3/4 to 7 percent because
of a strong demand for energy-related loans.

Deposit inflows to savings

accounts and savings and loan associations are said to be strong, although
they have slowed recently in St. Louis and Minneapolis.
The ominous note in this month's reports is the widespread price
increases observed in several districts.

All the eastern banks - Boston,

New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond and Atlanta - noted that
manufacturing prices are increasing.

Over half of the respondents to

Philadelphia's survey reported higher materials prices.

Price increases in

metals appear to be holding according to Boston and Cleveland, although
Cleveland also noted that producers of stainless steel withdrew increases
announced earlier this month.

Concerns about inflation were apparently quite

common among respondents for New York and Boston, although the academic
economists consulted by Boston believe that recent spurts in prices are
temporary and that the underlying inflation rate is still between 5 and 6
percent.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Directors and other Redbook respondents in the First District are
optimistic about continued economic recovery although several expressed
concern about inflation.

Retail sales in New England continue to improve,

consumer durable producers are doing better and construction is starting to
recover slowly.

While increased interest in capital goods is reported, sales

growth continues to be slow and bankers report continued spotty commercial
loan demand.
A large retail chain reports that after a slight pause in late March,
sales have resumed a strong upward trend.

While gains are expected through-

out the rest of the year, inventories are being watched very closely.

One

retailer expressed concern that the tax rebate if enacted may come at just
the wrong time, provide a temporary boost in sales leading some stores to
build inventories too much, necessitating a later correction.

A thread

producer reported strong increases in sales, particularly to the garment
industry.
Manufacturers of consumer durables in the First District indicate
strong demand for major appliances and also for goods related to the housing
market.

Several respondents who sell to the automobile market also report

very strong sales with a producer of an input to tire production indicating
they were operating flat out.
Capital goods producers in New England report that while they have
been asked for more price quotations, sales continue to be slow.

Sales are

particularly poor for big ticket items although purchases of smaller items
such as milling machinery are reported to be increasing^ ball bearing sales

are also doing well.

Commercial purchases of aircraft equipment are seen as

improving and one supplier to the airline industry expects substantial
increases in this area.

Capital goods producers report that overseas sales

are not improving as much as they had hoped.
Southern New England bankers report continued slow growth of
commercial loan demand although smaller banks in the northern part of the
region indicate more substantial increases.

Bankers across the district

report that consumer loan demand is quite healthy and deposit inflows remain
strong.

Construction loan activity is starting to increase from depressed

levels.
Although most Redbook respondents were quite optimistic about the
economic outlook, few reported any interest in undertaking major new investments of their own.

Some respondents expressed concern that rates of return

still do not justify major new plant and equipment commitments.

Most

expressed continued apprehension about inflation and some are worried about
the possible reimposition of wage and price controls.

Price increases in

metals are seen to be sticking more now than a few months ago and chemical
price jumps are expected.

Several respondents also indicated they had

increased their own prices recently or intend to do so soon.
Professors Eckstein, Tobin and Samuelson were available for comment
this month.

All three focused on fears of inflation.

Professor Eckstein

believes that inflation fears have been blown out of proportion in recent
months.

The underlying rate of inflation remains between 5 and 6 percent.

Last year's price increases were relatively modest, but so far this year's
price increases have been much larger, due in part to the weather and to a
desire to realign prices with costs in some industries.

Eckstein suggests

that April's wholesale price index will increase sharply reflecting recent
announcements in the steel and aluminum industries.

Nevertheless, with an

average inflation rate of 5.5 percent, it is not startling to encounter
periods of price increase as low as 2 to 3 percent or as high as 9 to 10
percent; neither development marks a trend.

From discussions with clients,

Eckstein infers that businessmen's inflation concerns are founded in the
fear that the tone of demand for their products will not be sufficient to
maintain profit rates.

With regard to policy, Eckstein believes it may

be appropriate for the federal funds rate to increase 100 basis points by
this fall.

However, should short-term yields increase as much as the futures

market suggests, he claims his forecast of 5 percent real growth of GNP
would be too high.
Professor Tobin also believes that monthly price indices contain
a lot of noise, and expects inflation to average 5 or 6 percent although
sensitive sectors may produce much higher or lower rates of price increase
occasionally.

"In any case, we shouldn't try to fight commodity price

increases with macro monetary policy."

Tobin observes that businessmen and

investors remain very uncertain about future growth.

Fears of tight money,

wage-price controls, and soft demand have contributed to a collapse in stock
prices, restrained investment spending, and produced strong fears that shortterm interest rates will rise sharply.
stimulus appears to be foundering,

Indeed, now that the program of fiscal

monetary policy must be prepared all the

more to assist the economy in reaching 6 percent real growth during 1977.
For now, Tobin advocates not changing the federal funds rate.
Professor Samuelson contends that recent spurts in prices are not
related to changes in business conditions; in fact, we have not seen great

strength.

Consequently, there is no rational cause and effect linkage to

justify more macro demand restraint.

The rapid growth rates forecast for

the middle quarters of 1977 can be regarded as a healthy "catch-up."
Inflation can unwind only very slowly, and the present goal of policy should
be to accomodate the momentum of 6 percent real growth.

Major sacrifices

in employment and real growth would be required to force the underlying rate
of inflation substantially below 5 percent.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District has continued to improve
moderately according to directors, business leaders, and analysts contacted
recently.

Department store sales have for the most part been satisfactory,

and several merchants reported that the New York metropolitan area was doing
better than the rest of the country.

This pattern did not carry over to

District auto sales, however, which were lagging the remainder of the
country.

Inventory positions were generally considered to be in line with

sales, although several respondents indicated that inventory building would
soon be under way.

Orders for capital goods remained weak; government regula-

tions, sluggish demand, and financial constraints were among the reasons
given.

The Buffalo directors did report, however, that the near-term outlook

for orders in the steel industry had improved.

Finally, considerable concern

was voiced over the outlook for prices.
Reports on department store sales in the District were generally
favorable.

Indeed, several national retailers indicated that, in contrast

to recent experience, sales throughout the New York metropolitan area and
the East Coast in general were outpacing sales elsewhere in the country.
Certain other New York merchants, in contrast, found sales a bit disappointing,
yet even they seemed "cautiously optimistic" about future sales.

In upstate

New York, expectations for the spring buying season were characterized as
"reasonably good" by the Buffalo directors.
Reports on District auto sales were less encouraging.

Although sales

nationwide appear to be booming, the president of an automobile dealers' trade
association indicated that so far in 1977 sales in the New York metropolitan

area were lagging sales of a year ago.

Uncertainty about economic conditions,

talk about taxes on large cars, and concern about financial conditions in
New York City were blamed for keeping customers away from the auto showrooms.
The president of a New Jersey trade association likewise categorized automobile
sales in northern New Jersey as weak.

Although dealers throughout the country

are experiencing difficulty in moving small cars, this problem is even more
pronounced in New Jersey.
Inventories generally appeared to be at desired levels, although plans
to restock inventories were reported by some respondents.

The vice president

of a large petroleum company stated that oil inventories, which had been
depleted by the cold weather, were rising to planned levels and that no
inventory problems were expected before the next heating season.

Retailers

have been keeping a close watch on inventories, which has kept them in line
with sales.

In the paper industry inventories had been allowed to run down

since mid-1976, according to a top executive of a paper company, but some rebuilding is now anticipated.

An economist for a large publishing firm stated

that he expects inventory accumulation to occur throughout the year.
Capital spending in the Second District, as in the nation, has
recovered slowly, although conditions may be improving.

The chairman of a

major oil company observed that, due to confusing regulations in the oil industry,
it is not profitable to build plants today.

He further stated that unless

controls are eliminated, a shortage of refinery capacity will develop in the
early 1980's.

The view that government regulations inhibit capital spending

was echoed by an executive of a major commercial bank.

In the same vein,

the director of finance for a private utility company complained that,

because of delays caused by environmental regulations, the time required
for constructing a nuclear plant has been lengthened from six years to ten
years.

The vice president of an iron and steel company attributed the

sluggishness in plant and equipment spending to insufficient financial capital.
And in the rubber industry, a spokesman for a trade association stated that
the industry is reluctant to add further to its already heavy debt burden.
On the brighter side, a textile industry economist reported that capital
spending, long lackluster, has recently shown signs of turning up in response
to improved demand conditions.

Moreover, the Buffalo directors reported

favorable near-term prospects for capital goods orders as well as for production and employment.

This was especially true for the steel industry in

Western New York, which is experiencing new demand by Canadian customers as
well as strong demand by the automobile industry.
Concern over the outlook for prices was voiced by many respondents.
The production manager of a machinery company reported widespread increases
in the cost of materials and fabricated inputs.

He also expressed his belief

that the effects of recent increases in the price of steel would continue to
ripple through the economy.

While most businessmen were reporting higher

materials prices, the president of a major capital goods-producing company
stated that, despite increases in list prices of steel and various other
materials, actual prices paid by his company were about the same as a year
ago (with the notable exception of aluminum).

An economist for a paper

company said he expects upward pressure on prices as businesses try to rebuild
their profit margins after the cost increases of the past year.
are expected to continue rising as the import share grows.

Oil prices

In the consumer

goods sector, the editor of an industry publication reported a round of
wholesale price increases in February and March that are expected to show
up in the form of higher retail price tags in late summer and early fall.

THIRD DISTRICT-PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District is expanding.

Retail sales

are reported to be good except in areas affected by the Philadelphia transit
strike.

The manufacturing sector is on a clear upward trend with expansion

reported for the fourth month in a row.

New orders, shipments, and inventories

are higher this month, and employment is improving as well.
foresee additional expansion over the next two quarters.

Manufacturers

Price increases

for finished products in this sector are more widespread this month, but
projections of increases six months out are less widespread than in March.
Sales of existing housing are brisk, while new construction is limited.

Com-

mercial bankers report that business loan volume is flat but see signs of
increased interest by potential borrowers.
Manufacturers responding to the latest Business Outlook Survey report
additional improvement this month.

More than half of those polled say that

business conditions are better than in March.

This is the highest proportion

indicating expansion in a year, and the fourth consecutive month in which
gains have been reported.

New orders and shipments are higher in April, and

inventories, which declined in February and held steady in March, are up as
well.

This expansion in industrial activity is giving a boost to employment.

Factory work forces are increasing at one-fourth the firms sampled, and a
similar proportion reports a longer workweek.

This is the second month in a

row in which both employment and the workweek have expanded.
For the longer term, manufacturers look for additional growth.
Three out of four expect better business conditions by October.

New orders

and shipments are expected to increase from their present levels, and inven-

tories are projected to climb as well.
in factory employment is anticipated.

At the same time, additional growth
For the third month in a row, one-

half the executives surveyed plan to add to their work forces six months out.
In addition, close to one-third plan to lengthen the average workweek.

This

is down somewhat from last month, but still well above the proportions
reported in 1976.

Capital spending increases are planned at 40 percent of

the firms sampled—about the same as last month.
Prices in manufacturing continue to increase.

Fifty-six percent of

the respondents report higher prices for supplies this month.
the same as in March.

This is about

On the output side, 40 percent of the businessmen

surveyed report higher prices compared to 31 percent last month.

By October,

84 percent look for higher prices for supplies and 64 percent expect to be
receiving more for their finished products.

Last month, these proportions

were 86 percent and 74 percent respectively.
Except for a public transit strike in the immediate Philadelphia
area, department store sales in the region are showing gains over last year.
Sales in areas served by the affected public transit are down considerably,
and merchants say the strike is an important factor in this drop.

The aver-

age guess by retailers contacted is that the strike, which began on March 25,
is reducing sales by one-third.

Outstide of the affected area, sales are up

over the same period last year with reported increases ranging from 6 to 11
percent.
Retailers say they may be experiencing a slight drop in sales as a
consequence of the upcoming shutdown of a major competitor.

Lit Brothers, one

of the four major Philadelphia department stores, has announced its intention
to close within a few weeks.

The chain has 10 branch stores in addition to its

downtown location, and employs 2,800 people.

Since the last week in March

it has been offering hefty discounts on most of its merchandise.
In general, retailers say that soft goods are selling well, especially
spring and summer apparel.

At the same time, inventories are reported to be

in "good balance," although some say that their stocks could become excessive
if the transit strike should last through Easter.
The market for existing housing is reported to be very active, but
construction of new units is limited.

At one large MSB mortgage lending is

at its highest ever, and most of this is for existing housing.

Mortgage rates

have firmed within the past two weeks after being under downward pressure
earlier in the year.

The current rate on conventional mortgages with financ-

ing between 65-80 percent of purchase price is 8 3/4 percent.
Demand for NINOW accounts, which MSBs in Pennsylvania could offer as
of March 12, is said to be "slow but steady."

Overall deposit inflows are

reported to be reasonably good, although they have moderated recently.

One

MSB official looks for inflows to be fairly good, at least until the third
quarter when there are heavy CD maturities.

According to this executive, "I

don't expect market rates to move up enough to cause any problems by then, but
if they do, thrifts are going to lose deposits and people in the housing
industry will start screaming."
Bankers in the area report that business loan demand remains basically
flat, but a few indicate that they do see some encouraging signs.

One notes

that, "We're seeing customers who haven't been in to see us for some time."
Two other bankers say they're receiving an increasing number of inquiries
about fixed-rate loans.

One reports that such requests are being handled

"gingerly," while another says that his bank has made commitments for fixed-

rate loans of $50 million.
have no balance requirement.

These are to high-quality customers, and typically
Rates are in the 8 percent range and the outside

maturity is five years.
For the longer term, bankers look for no more than a gradual pickup
in business loan demand over the next few quarters.

Interest rates are

expected to rise gradually as well with a prime in the neighborhood of 7 percent by year-end.

Liquidity is reported to be ample for expected credit

demands and several banks have lowered rates or extended maturities on their
CDs.

Bankers say they are concerned about NINOWS, but add that it's too

early to get a good idea of their competitive impact.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Strengthening in capital goods, steel, and housing is boosting output
and employment in the fourth district this quarter.
coming from some rebuilding of inventories.

Additional thrust is

Capital goods producers

generally seem more optimistic that production and spending will accelerate
this year, although none expect a boom.

Auto retailers are optimistic that

1977 will be a strong year for sales, but other retailers are still cautious
over prospects.

Upward price pressures remain about as intense as they have

been since last fall.
Output and employment in district manufacturing should strengthen
this quarter in response to completion of inventory liquidation or to a
buildup of inventories.

Steel economists report that a good recovery in

orders in the last two months is likely to boost production this quarter to
within an 85-90 percent operating rate, compared with about 73 percent last
quarter.

Price hedging and inventory rebuilding account for only a small

part of the improvement, according to two steel sources.
Some major appliance producers in the district are rebuilding
inventories that were depleted late last year and early this year.

For one

firm, the inventory buildup is expected to bring inventories up to desired
inventory-sales ratios, while another producer expects a buildup of in-process
materials of about 10 percent above expected sales.
Capital good producers seem to be gaining confidence that plant and
equipment spending in 1977 will increase at least as much as indicated in the
latest Department of Commerce survey, despite erratic behavior in new orders.
While none expect a boom in capital spending in 1977, some indicate that their

forecasts of a 12 to 15 percent increase in spending now appear to be reasonable.
They also indicate emphasis is on modernization of facilities rather than on
expansion.

Two large machine tool builders remain optimistic that orders,

shipments, and backlogs will improve from 1976.

They note that their orders

in February continued to increase (in contrast to a drop reported in national
data) and doubt that their industry has reached a cyclical peak in orders.
An economist with a major producer of motors, generators, and general
industrial equipment noted that since last November orders began to pick up
for a broad line of products, with the exception of equipment used by utilities.
He indicated there is a lack of major projects but feels his forecast for a
13 to 14 percent increase in capital spending this year will be realized.

His

firm will boost capital spending by 20 percent from a depressed 1976 level,
with expenditures allocated largely for modernization rather than expansion,
except for a few high technology items and new products.

Similarly, a financial

officer with a large capital goods producer reports its projected increase in
spending for 1977 will be for modernization, except for completion of some
plants that will produce products different from those originally intended
when the plants were started a few years ago.

He noted further strengthening

in orders for heavy-duty trucks and materials-handling equipment for the lumber
industry but continued weakness for industrial-purpose lift trucks and shovel
loaders used in construction.

Recent demands for communication equipment,

presses, mini-computers and terminals have been at a rate well above shipments
in recent months, according to one producer.

A bank economist noted several

capital goods clients commented that it is now easier to get finance committees
to approve appropriations for all but large projects.

Welding equipment and

electrode producers expect record sales in 1977 with real gains of at least

7 percent from last year.
Two soft spots in capital goods are utilities and steel.

Spending

by utilities remains weak, with little sign of improvement, according to
several major suppliers.

Some steel economists expect that capital spending

by their firms will be no higher than last year because of continued inadequate
cash flow and a loss in profits last quarter.

A major steel producer is

expected to allocate expenditures primarily for replacement, repairs, and
pollution control equipment.
Retailers' views of consumer spending range from mild optimism to
confidence that real sales will improve this quarter further from last quarter.
Several auto retailers and producers are encouraged by the sharp comeback in
sales last month and do not expect much consumer resistance to recent price
increases in new cars.

Auto plants in the district, except for the GMC

Lordstown plant which produces the slow-selling Vega, are expected to work
overtime or six days a week to meet projected high demand for standard and
intermediate size cars.

On the other hand, department store executives comment

that although sales have been good, they have not increased across-the-board.
Some note considerable strength in sales in recent weeks, in part because of
a make up for winter losses.
Demand for new and used housing is reported to be strong, according
to directors and mortgage lending officials.

Higher prices are not a deterrent

in the present market, which is described as a sellers market.

One director

expects new starts to reach 1.8 million units this year and 2 million units
in 1978.

Multi-family starts remain weak in the district.

An official with

a savings and loan association in northeast Ohio expects mortgage rates will
increase by at least a quarter of a percent before the end of May.

Liquidity

of several savings and loans is well above the required rate and can amply
support a considerably higher volume of commitments than a year ago.

Some

directors associated with banks note substantial growth in passbook savings
accounts and slow growth in time deposits relative to a year ago.

S&L

officials report continued strong flows in deposits that in some cases still
exceed demand in this area.
There appears to be little relaxation in upward price pressures.
In addition to increases for some steel prices expected by next month, price
increases have been announced in recent weeks for glassware, polyvinyl chloride,
polyester resins, aluminum and publishing paper.

Recent steel price increases

appear to be sticking; however, producers of stainless steel withdrew increases
that were scheduled to take effect early this month.

On the other hand, an

official with a petroleum refinery expects that motor gasoline prices, which
tend to rise during peak demands in the summer months, may not increase this
year if inventories continue well above normal as they have been in recent
weeks.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Business activity in the Fifth District picked up sharply in
March judging from our latest survey.

Manufacturers surveyed indicate

widespread increases in shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders.
Also in the manufacturing sector employment and weekly hours Increased
after experiencing minor declines in the last survey period.
Inventories remain above desired levels.

Total

Manufacturers continue to

report widespread price increases, particularly in the prices they are
paying.

Retail sales Improved among our survey respondents and sales of

big ticket items relative to total sales also picked up slightly during
March.

Manufacturers and retailers remain strongly optimistic although

the strong gains experienced recently have apparently fulfilled their
positive expectations to some extent.

In the banking sector, the center

of activity over the past few weeks has been the commercial lending area.
Virginia's early peach and apple crops suffered extensive freeze damage
during the first week in April.
Of manufacturers responding to our April survey, more than one-half
report increases in both shipments and the volume of new orders over a month
ago.

There was also a general increase in the level of backlogs of orders.

Despite the fact that stocks of materials were essentially unchanged and
finished goods inventories showed some decline, the number of manufacturers
reporting current inventories exceeding desired levels increased from the
last survey period.

More than one-third of the manufacturers view current

Inventory levels as excessive, while fewer than one in eight considers
them inadequate.

Over one-third of our manufacturing respondents increased employment during March while nearly one-fourth worked more hours per week.
Although a few more respondents have come to view current plant and equipment capacity as inadequate, they continue to be outnumbered by those who
feel it is in excess, and there is still little sentiment for enlarging
current expansion plans.
The textile industry appears to have accounted for much of the
improvement in our survey results this month.

Nearly 90 percent of the

respondents from that industry reported improvement in the volume of new
orders and one-half also noted increased levels of shipments.

The chemicals

and primary metals groups also experienced some general improvement as they
did a month ago.

The apparel industry, on the other hand, appears to be

still awaiting any significant improvement in activity.

The furniture

industry also has not experienced any general pickup, although there are
some signs this month the Industry may be nearing a turnaround.
Of the retailers responding to our survey this month, two-thirds
experienced improved sales activity and 40 percent report an increase in
the relative sales of big ticket items.

Inventories at retail rose generally

but remain essentially in line with desired levels.
Both manufacturers and retailers continued to experience widespread
price increases, particularly in prices paid, during the past month.

Prices

received and employee compensation also continued to rise across a broad
front.

Manufacturers and retailers surveyed remain quite optimistic

concerning the outlook for the next six months, with half the retailers
and nearly two-thirds of the manufacturers expecting further improvement
in business conditions nationally, locally, and within their respective
firms over that time period.

-19-

Buslness loans of weekly reporting banks have risen $100 million
in recent weeks, more Chan Che increases in other major lending areas.
Consumer Instalment lending has slowed down a good deal and real estate
lending is likewise not as strong as it has been.

The increases in

business lending are fairly well distributed across industry groups,
although the durables manufacturing area seems to stand out; borrowing
by metals and machinery producers is strong.

There have also been

significant increases in loans to the textile industry, and to the wholesale and retail trade groups.
In the agricultural sector, the full extent of the freeze damage
to the peach and apple crops has not been determined, but the loss is
believed to be as high as 90 percent in some orchards.

With this year's

loss, Virginia orchardists have had a major peach kill for six consecutive
years and a major apple kill for two years in a row.
District farmer's cash receipts from farm marketings in January
were up about 9 percent over a year earlier, compared with an 8 percent
increase nationally.

Sharply higher crop receipts, due primarily to

marketings of crops carried over from last year, accounted for all of the
increase.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Warmer weather has revitalized major parts of the southeastern
economy.

A special survey elicited indications of pervasive, tenacious price

increases.

The construction industry continues to benefit from strong home

construction, while apartment building lags.
reflect the trends in construction.

Financial developments largely

Retail sales are vigorous, in general,

with particular strength evidenced by auto sales.
penditures have revived.

Tourist traffic and ex-

Trends in transportation, inventories, and new

orders suggest increasing economic vitality.

Federal Government review of

water resources projects may pose a threat to economic prospects in several
parts of the Southeast.
Responses to a special survey of directors suggest that persistent,
widespread price increases are continuing, partly in response to adverse
weather.

In Florida, in addition to the price increases resulting from the

reduced juice yield of citrus fruit, the heavy demand for harvesting labor
has boosted labor costs 10 to 20 percent.

Vegetable growers in South Florida

are now shipping their first replanted crops of beans, yellow squash, and
zucchini, but tomatoes will remain in short supply until late April.

Growers

in central Florida report ideal conditions in recent weeks, promising high
yields.
Manufacturers of products which use petroleum-based raw materials,
such as fiberglass boats and tires, anticipate price increases stemming
from the forthcoming energy program.

Energy-dependent producers, such as

transportation, utility, and lumber companies are requesting or posting
price hikes.

A large aluminum producer notes that recent aluminum price

increases are "sticking."

They expect additional price boosts resulting

from power cutbacks in the northwestern U. S. and a lack of sufficient
capacity in other regions to offset the production losses.
Food manufacturers are presently increasing their list prices but are
maintaining transaction prices by offering discounts.
in wholesale food prices are anticipated.
been held down by cold weather.

No immediate increases

However, the price of beef has

Feed supplies were cut sharply by the

adverse weather, which maintained the supply of cattle for slaughter.

The

resulting herd depletion may eventually result in a sharper upturn in prices.
Construction executives note that home prices are rising in step
with materials prices and that increasing costs of construction will gradually
be reflected in prices of industrial commodities and in apartment rentals.
Observers also note a shift in a number of industries from fixed price to
flexible price contracts containing pass through clauses.
Directors also indicate that single-family construction continues
to dominate the District's construction recovery.

In most areas, large

increases from year-ago levels in home construction and sales are reported.
In some areas, sales have doubled.

Areas where sales have not increased

sharply are those where sales were already strong.

Multifamily residential

unit sales continue to gain, reducing the stock of unsold units; in some
cases this decrease is quite rapid.

The foundation appears to be developing

for a slow recovery in this depressed sector.
Apartment construction has increased in Alabama.

In other District

states, high costs of construction and financing, as well as the conversion
of condominium units to rentals in some areas, have limited the construction
of new apartment units.

Financial developments primarily reflect construction activity
trends.

Savings and loan associations have felt increased demand for con-

struction loans in some, but not all, areas.

Despite decreasing vacancy

rates, lenders are reportedly reluctant to lend for apartment construction
as a result of previous adverse experiences.
cing of new condominium projects are reported.
in the mid- to upper-price range.

However, inquiries about finanThese are mostly small projects

Stringent terms of lending and financial

standards are reportedly being applied.
Retail sales are improving, according to most reports, although some
retailers found March sales disappointing in view of an early Easter,
which was expected to boost sales.

Concern is voiced about the inhibiting

effects of increased utility bills, the cost impact of the minimum wage
increase, and the response by consumers to higher prices on fall merchandise.
Inventories remain in a satisfactory range.
Auto sales are very strong; the strength continues to be centered
in the large- and intermediate-sized models.

Dealers are still experiencing

difficulty in obtaining deliveries of the models most in demand.
Tourist traffic has rebounded strongly in the Southeast, following
the dampening effect of severely cold weather.

Hotel and motel occupancy has

risen markedly; highway traffic and air passenger arrivals have increased
sharply.

In Florida, tourist attractions and beaches are packed.

are enjoying increased sales.

Retailers

Employment in service businesses has grown.

However, one director notes doubts concerning the strength of tourism by
sources within the industry, based on a sustained weakness in business
prior to the cold weather period and the absence in recent weeks of an
appreciable upsurge.

General business developments include an improved, although erratic,
pattern of truck rental and leasing business in Florida and Alabama.

Strong

rental business is said to indicate that industrial shippers are moving
large quantities of goods.

A Louisiana trucking executive cites recent

contacts with his accounts that indicate a general increase in the volume of
their business.

In Florida, an employment increase is noted in business

support services, including janitorial, engineering, and computer services.
Appliance manufacturers are reportedly building inventories to
meet an anticipated expansion in demand.

Some retailers report plans to

increase their inventories, while the improved retail sales picture in Florida
is attributed, in part, to better selections of merchandise resulting from increased stocks.
An office and home furniture manufacturing division of a national
firm reports a recent significant increase in orders.

Heavy domestic and

international demand for phosphate has caused congestion at the Port of
Tampa docks.
Georgia mobile home plants should benefit from recently enacted
legislation permitting 14 foot wide mobile homes to be transported on state
highways.

Employment and the number of firms in the industry have fallen

sharply in recent years.

Restrictions on transportation were viewed as a

major impediment by the industry.
The major development affecting employment is the impending layoff
of as many as 15,600 employees of a major shipbuilder located in Mississippi.
Fortunately, some of these workers may be hired by New Orleans shipyards
which have a substantial backlog.

Recent scrutiny of Federal water resource projects has raised
questions concerning the continuation of several major projects in the
Southeast, including the Richard Russell Dam on the Savannah River, the
Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway in Alabama and Tennessee, and the Red River
navigation project in Louisiana.

Each project is regarded as significantly

affecting current and prospective economic development in its surrounding area.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

The expansion of activity in the Seventh District appears to have been
firmly reestablished.

Retail sales remain strong for both hard and soft goods.

Inventories are in good shape in virtually all sectors.

Forecasts for 1977

for motor vehicles, steel, some types of capital goods, and residential construction have been raised since December.

Prices are rising somewhat more rapidly.

Except for fuel, there are few reports of shortages, currently, but some leadtimes
are moving out.

Labor markets have strengthened in most areas and many employers

expect to increase hirings as the year moves on.

Soil moisture conditions have

improved "dramatically" throughout the district in the past two months and drought
fears are over, at least for the planting period.

Some farmers are shifting

acreage from corn to soybeans, causing a scramble for seed beans in certain
areas.
Virtually all business and financial executives in the district expect
that the uptrend in their lines will continue throughout the year.

Some are vir-

tually certain of further gains in 1978, but others are pushing "contingency
plans" in case demand declines.

There are more than the usual complaints about

uncertain government fiscal and regulatory policies and specifically about rising
costs of unemployment compensation, workmen's compensation (especially in Illinois),
and product liability insurance which is especially costly for small firms.
Reports of purchasing managers and other statements indicate that inventories, output, employment, new orders, backlogs, and prices charged by vendors
have been rising moderately on a broad front in recent months.

Pressing shortages

are rare, but leadtimes on orders are stretching out and some buyers complain
of deterioration in product quality and delivery dependability.

There is appre-

hension over supplies of coated paper, certain types of bearings and castings,
building materials such as gypsum board and lumber, and, of course, fuel of all
types.
Major retailers continue to be pleased with sales of most classes of
merchandise.

Credit purchases have increased relatively, and delinquency exper-

ience has been favorable.

Inventories are within budgeted limits generally.

Plants making the most popular auto models have been operating on full
overtime, but successive shutdowns are continuing for domestic small cars.
for light trucks is excellent.

Demand

Sales of heavy trucks and trailers are expected

to move to record or near-record levels next year.

No significant shift in the

trend to highway transport from rail is considered likely or even feasible, even
though shippers have been fairly well pleased with the performance of Conrail and
the private lines.
Capital spending on equipment, as opposed to structures, is improving,
but many delays or cancellations are attributed to vague or "unworkable" federal and state regulations relating to health, safety, and environment.

Other

than highway transport, orders have improved for machine tools, outdoor cranes,
bulldozers, large front-end loaders, overhead cranes, hoists, and lumbering
equipment.

Demand for such components as controls, bearings, castings, diesel

engines, electric motors, and transmissions has increased and a larger share
of new orders is for original equipment rather than replacement.

Some equipment

makers have increased output to prepare for an increase in orders that they are
fairly confident will occur.

Many of the bottlenecks that limited capital

goods output in 1973-74—engines, axles, transmissions, castings, and controls—
are not so likely to cause problems in the future because of increased
capacity.

Steel orders have increased significantly since January.

Demand is

especially strong from the motor vehicle and appliance industries, but orders
have also increased for plate, larger-diameter tubes, bars, and containers.
structural steel remains weak, however.

Most analysts have raised forecasts

of steel shipments for the second quarter and for the year.
are believed to be quite low.

Heavy

User inventories

Bunching of orders to beat expected price in-

creases could tighten supplies of some types of steel.

The apparent agreement on

the steel labor pact over the weekend, still leaves a wide assortment of local
issues unresolved, and important strikes cannot be ruled out.
A major oil company reports that product prices are inching up in response to strong demand.

Barring stoppages of imports, no shortages of oil

products are foreseen for the next year or so.

Gasoline stocks are currently

ample, partly because of increased output that accompanied the all-out effort to
produce heating oil.

Oil refineries are operating at practical capacity.

In-

creases in capacity are the result of expanding or modernizing existing refineries.
The Midwest imports oil products from other districts.

Local experts insist

that decisions on the transport and processing of Alaskan oil cannot be delayed
much longer without serious consequence.
All companies able to do so are pushing programs to improve efficiency
of energy use, increase fuel storage capacity, and, especially, to reduce dependence on natural gas.

Some are acquiring their own energy sources, e.g.,

coal or natural gas supplies.

An appliance producer that converted several

plants from coal to natural gas a few years ago has recently decided to reconvert these plants to coal.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District continues on an upward
course.

Reports on department store sales indicate only modest improvement in

recent weeks, but a definite acceleration has occurred in manufacturing
activity over a broad range of industries.

While some signs of a pickup in

capital investment were detected, individual firms indicate only modest
investment increases for this year.

Residential investment, however, is on

the uptrend over most of the District with substantial gains in both singleand multi-family dwellings expected this year.
generally in a liquid position.

The financial sector is

Banks report only modest increases in

business loans, but savings and loan associations report strong demand for
mortgages, spurred by the increasing demand for housing.
sector recent rainfall has improved soil moisture.

In the agricultural

Soil preparation and crop

plantings are now proceeding at a normal pace.
Consumer spending continues to increase, although no surge in such
spending was evident in reports from District retailers.

One major retailer

reported that March sales were well above last year, with heavy goods, such as
appliances and furniture, beginning to move well.

Another major St. Louis

retailer, however, reported only small gains in March and sluggish sales in
early April compared with a year ago.

Overall, retailers are optimistic about

prospects for this year, with sales gains of 8 to 10 percent generally
expected.
Representatives of several manufacturing firms were quite optimistic
about business trends in recent weeks.

A representative of a major chemical

firm stated that sales of a number of products, including fibers, plastics,

lndustrial chemicals, and agricultural chemicals, had shown significant
improvement.

Another chemical industry representative making polymer

specialties also reported a "good" recovery in March, after a slow January and
February.

Representatives of firms manufacturing paints and coatings noted

that first quarter profits had been adversely affected by bad weather earlier
this year, but a pickup in sales in the latter part of the quarter had
improved profits over earlier expectations.

Reports from various

manufacturers of consumer items, including furniture, home fashions, apparel,
recreational equipment, and appliances, reported rising incoming orders.
Representatives of large food processing firms were quite optimistic about
trends in the food business and expected good sales gains this year.
A few reports indicated that capital investment may be starting to
pick up.

For example, a major manufacturer of heavy capital equipment has

experienced some increase in capital equipment orders recently.

A steel

fabricating firm and an industrial casting firm reported increased requests
for bids.

A representative of a welding and cutting equipment firm noted

continued improvement in sales in recent weeks.
in construction had strong sales gains in March.

A manufacturer of items used
Yet, discussions with a

number of small- to medium-sized businesses indicated a reluctance to go ahead
with capital spending plans in view of a number of uncertainties, including
environmental regulations and energy policies.

Plans for capital expenditures

were mostly of a routine nature, designed to replace or upgrade existing
facilities or to comply with environmental regulations.
Housing continues to be a bright segment of the economy.

Home sales

have been increasing in recent weeks after the setback early in the year.
Backlogs of orders for new homes are beginning to build up in some cases.

An

observer of the St. Louis home market expects housing starts to increase 15 to
25 percent this year for single-family dwellings.
St. Louis is also expected to make gains.

Apartment construction in

Reports from the Memphis and

Louisville areas also indicate some improvement in the housing markets.
District banks have experienced some increases in loans in recent
weeks, although much of the increase has been in real estate loans.

Business

loans have remained relatively stable, after increasing somewhat in the early
months of the year.

Savings and loan associations in the St. Louis area

experienced some slowing in the growth of deposits in the past four to six
weeks, especially at those institutions which lowered their rates on deposits.
Loan demand at thrift institutions is described as "good," reflecting the
general uptrend in housing activity.
Agricultural prospects in the District have been considerably
enhanced by sizable amounts of rainfall in the past several weeks.

While

these rains have not been sufficient to completely replenish subsoil moisture
in parts of the District, they will allow field preparation and planting to
proceed at a normal pace.

NINTH DISTRICT—MINNEAPOLIS

District economic conditions have brightened considerably in
recent weeks.

Both housing activity and retail sales have rebounded

after weather-induced slowdowns earlier in the year; auto sales, too,
have been fairly strong.

Recent labor market activity denotes a pickup

in district business activity.

Although recent rains have helped

relieve drought conditions somewhat, the agricultural situation continues
to be troublesome.
District homebuilding, which experienced a weather-related
slowdown in December and January, recovered substantially in February,
and its near-term outlook seems bright.

Recent Minneapolis/St. Paul

vacancy rates for both single- and multi-family units are below a year
ago despite the strong housing expansion in 1976.

In addition, outstand-

ing loan commitments at district S&Ls are currently at record levels.
Although savings inflows at mortgage lending institutions have declined
in early 1977, S&L liquidity is still quite high by recent standards.
Major Minneapolis-St. Paul area retailers report improved sales
in March after cold weather depressed sales in January and February.
Home furnishing items in particular have been selling quite well, which
may reflect the pickup in residential construction.

Furthermore,

retailers are optimistic about this spring and are satisfied with current
inventories.

Outside the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, recent rains have

made consumers less hesitant to spend, but considerable concern remains
about future moisture conditions.
District automobile sales have also been quite good.

Regional

sales offices report that sales of full- and intermediate-size cars are

strongest.

Compact and subcompact sales are still weak but improving

with recent rebates on certain small cars helping their sales.

Vans

and, to a lesser degree, pickups are also selling very well.
Another encouraging development in early 1977 has been improvement
in the labor market.

The district unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted,

averaged 5.5 percent in January-February compared to 6.1 percent in the
fourth quarter of 1976 and 5.9 percent for the year-earlier period.
Unemployment insurance claims, seasonally adjusted, declined 12 percent
between fourth-quarter 1976 and early 1977 while the help wanted advertising index increased 4 percent.

Moreover, manufacturing employment

increased 2.2 percent in early 1977 from the fourth quarter of 1976, and
average weekly hours worked in manufacturing also increased slightly.
Loan activity at district banks has also picked up during early
1977.

Total loans at district member banks increased at a seasonally

adjusted annual rate of 19 percent during the first quarter, up from a
10 percent advance in the second half of 1976.

The faster growth in

early 1977 occurred primarily at large city banks where loans advanced at
a

26 percent annual rate and reflected large banks' increased willingness

to make business loans.

Smaller district banks also reported faster

loan growth—from a 12 percent annual rate in the second half of 1976 to
16 percent in the first quarter.

This increase reflected greater loan

demand—including refinancing of existing loans—at rural banks.

Although

deposit inflows have recently slowed, liquidity positions at district
depository institutions are still adequate and should not be a factor in
tightening loan terms.

The agricultural sector is still experiencing stress from
drought and low prices.

Increased marketings boosted 1976 cash live-

stock receipts 11 percent over 1975, but low prices depressed crop
)

receipts 23 percent from the year before.

Reduced farm income has led

to increased borrowing and refinancing, pushing up loan-to-deposit
ratios at rural banks.

Although recent rains will probably encourage

many farmers to proceed with customary planting intentions, abundant
wheat stocks and red meat supplies will continue to have a depressing
effect on commodity prices at least until midyear.

Also, despite recent

rains, there are still many areas in the district that continue to have
serious moisture deficiencies and farmers in those areas aren't likely
to enter the planting season with much enthusiasm.

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Tenth District directors report that area businessmen are optimistic
about the economy.

Recent rains have provided a psychological boost, retail

sales are good, and the energy situation should, on the whole, benefit the
region.

Although farm prices rose in March for the fourth consecutive month,

the continued rise in farm costs has kept producers from significantly improving their profit margins.
recent rains.
yields.

The drought has been somewhat alleviated by

Nevertheless, additional moisture is needed for normal crop

Loan demand in the District increased in March, due to abnormally

high levels of agricultural loan renewals and increased commercial loans.
Savings deposit growth was also reported as strong, though fears were expressed about the effect on this inflow should short-term interest rates rise.
Directors report that the mood of businessmen in the Tenth District
is largely one of optimism.

Given the strong agricultural orientation of

the District, the recent rains have provided a needed psychological boost,
and other areas of the economy are generally showing strength.

One trouble-

some situation that was mentioned is the depressed prices for wheat and
cattle.

Country banks are highly loaned up to farmers, and there are indi-

cations that their correspondents are beginning to apply pressure on these
banks to encourage farmers to begin selling their wheat—some of which has
been stored for 2 years.
In agricultural areas of Kansas, it was reported that "retailers
have been doing amazingly well."

Farmers are continuing to spend strongly

on consumer goods, although farm implement sales are quite depressed.

Else-

where in the District, retail sales are generally good but not outstanding,

while construction spending remains relatively weak.
In the labor market, unemployment still remains abnormally high,
but excluding Kansas City (which is experiencing strikes of public school
teachers and workers in heavy construction), the situation is untroubled.
Furthermore, in Oklahoma City, General Motors announced plans to build an
assembly plant which will ultimately employ 5,000 workers.
Several directors also commented on energy and capital investment.
Wyoming and Colorado should benefit from the national commitment to shift
from natural gas to low-sulfur coal.

Outside investment in the energy field

has been strong and a solar energy research center has been established in
Golden, Colorado.

While levels of capital spending appear to be rising,

uncertainty remains a strong consideration influencing expansion.

One

director noted, however, that "a few good moves (by the administration)
could restore confidence."
Farm prices rose 1 per cent in the month ended March 15, marking
their fourth consecutive monthly gain.

Although the index of prices re-

ceived is now slightly above year-earlier levels, the index of prices paid
by farmers for all items was 5 per cent higher in March than it was a year
ago.

Consequently, many producers are confronted with a rather tight

price-cost squeeze in their operations.
The severe drought in many parts of the District has been temporarily
broken by recent thunderstorms and showers.

Most of Nebraska, Kansas, and the

eastern half of Oklahoma have received good moisture during the past months.
The wheat crop is now greening up, as are the pastures for cattle grazing.
Reports from District states indicate that the condition of the new
wheat crop ranges from just fair to good.

There is evidence of wind damage

and winterkill in southwest Kansas, and insect problems are increasing in
Oklahoma, where the wheat is now jointing.

Despite the recent improvements

in weather conditions, additional moisture will be necessary to achieve
average yields.

However, a large carryover of wheat will help maintain

total supplies and prevent a sharp runup in price.
Most Tenth District banks contacted for the April Red Book indicated that loan demand had increased in March.

In addition to renewals of

agricultural loans, which would normally be repaid during this part of the
year, a number of banks reported an increase in commercial loans to finance
higher levels of inventories and receivables.

One Colorado banker expressed

apprehension about the effect of President Carter's upcoming energy proposals on the tourist industry and the demand for loans to finance purchases
of recreational vehicles.

Oklahoma bankers, on the other hand, expect the

passage of a comprehensive energy bill to provide further impetus to the
already strong demand for energy-related business loans.

Some Oklahoma banks

have already raised their local prime lending rate from 6 3/4 per cent to
7 per cent as a result of the strong loan demand in their area, and others
expect to do so in the near future.
Strong savings deposit growth was reported in all areas of the
Tenth District.

Most banks indicated that the rate of growth of time and

savings deposits was either stable or increasing.

Some bankers stated that

they expect this trend to be reversed if short-term interest rates rise by
as much as 50 or 100 basis points.

None of the bankers contacted expect the

rebate package to have an appreciable impact on deposit growth, although
some admitted that they were still puzzled by the 1975 experience when
deposit growth exceeded expectations during the rebate period.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The pace of the economic recovery in the Southwest continues to pick
up.

Although the unemployment rate for the District states edged up to 5.8

percent, total employment continues to climb.

Drilling activity in Texas is

at a 15-year high, and production of oil field equipment is on the upswing.
New orders for apparel have picked up, and output is beginning to rise.

Total

loans at the District banks have decreased since January because of a moderate
decline in business loans.

Real estate and consumer loans, however, have

continued to advance sharply.

Steadily increasing costs of production are

pushing up agricultural loans.
Drilling activity in Texas continues to rise, but production and proved
reserves of oil and gas continue to decline.
yield, shallow fields.

Most of the drilling is in low-

The supply of idle drilling rigs has dropped to a

comparatively low level, but there are apparently no serious equipment shortages.
The number of rotary rigs in operation is at the highest level in over 15 years
and is nearly a fourth above the level a year ago.

Few onshore rigs are idle,

and they are mostly deep-well rigs located largely in West Texas.

There is

strong demand for offshore rigs used in shallow water, while many deep-water
rigs remain idle.

Demand for drilling crews is increasing, but there are no

indications of a shortage of labor.
Reflecting the higher level of equipment utilization, demand for oil
field equipment is climbing steadily.

Oil field equipment manufacturers expect

a strong improvement in sales in 1977 over last year.

Better terms of financing,

as well as increased business, have spurred many drilling contractors to order
new equipment and retire older machinery.

With the upswing in production of

machinery and drill pipe, prices for equipment have also begun to rise sharply.

Apparel production, which suffered a sharp downturn last year, is
starting to show signs of improvement, as indicated by a pickup in new orders.
Manufacturers of men's clothing indicate sales this year will be greater than
in 1976, but they continue to be very cautious in making sales forecasts.
According to observers at a recent showing of women's and children's early
fall merchandise at the Dallas Apparel Mart, demand was strong for sweaters
and coats.

Inventories of these items were drawn down sharply last winter,

and retailers appeared to be building ample stocks in anticipation of another
cold winter.

That buying pattern leads many observers to believe new orders

for other winter garments will be up substantially during the next big market
in May.

Manufacturers estimated that retail prices for fall merchandise would

be 10 to 12 percent higher than last year, and those estimates did not take
into account higher labor costs that would stem from an increase in the minimum
wage.
Total loan demand at District member banks has declined since January.
Virtually all of the decrease has been in business loans, and bankers expect
only a small to moderate pickup in business loan demand this year.

Eeal

estate loans continue to strengthen with further recovery in the construction
industry.
confidence.
up.

Consumer loan demand is expanding sharply, reflecting rising consumer
Auto loans are particularly strong, and credit card usage is also

One bank in Dallas reports the level of credit card debt outstanding has

remained near the Christmas peak, and normally it would have run down by $8-9
million by this time of the year.
The inflow of time and savings deposit funds to District banks remains
strong, and bankers have not attempted to slow the inflow by reducing interest
rates paid or changing other terms on time deposits.

Because the supply of

loanable funds continues to grow, more banks are becoming more aggressive in
seeking new loans or loan participations.

Moreover, banks are increasing their

holdings of various types of government securities—especially municipal bonds.
Agribankers indicate that reduced cash flows from low grain and cattle
prices, coupled with the rising costs of production, continue to adversely
affect agricultural credit conditions in the Southwest.

At current grain prices

and with "normal" weather, only the most cost-efficient farmers will make a
profit this year.

Drought conditions and rising costs of energy are increasing

irrigation costs in the grain-producing northern High Plains of Texas and are
leading to greater demand for operating credit.

Conversely, cotton and soybean

producers in the southern High Plains are faring much better.
good year in 1976

They experienced a

and are reported currently to be increasing purchases of machinery.

Reduced cash flows and larger lines of operating credit have caused
loan-to-deposit ratios at rural banks to rise.

Renewals and extensions of

loans are also increasing, particularly in the intensified wheat-producing
areas of the High and Rolling Plains of Texas.

The supply of loanable funds

to meet credit needs has declined somewhat in the area mainly reflecting low wheat
prices.

Bankers continue to maintain firm collateral requirements and are taking

a closer look at the credit worthiness of their customers.
referrals to nonbank credit agencies is rising sharply.

The number of

Although the supply

of loanable funds has declined, few member banks have used the seasonal borrowing
privilege at the discount window this year, as the discount rate still remains
well above short-term interest rates.

TVJELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The recovery appears to be continuing in the Twelfth District,
although capital investment is increasing in only a few industries.

Retail

sales as well as sales of a number of manufactured goods are strong and
employment is generally increasing.

Low crop prices and drought-induced

cost increases have hurt both farm income and agricultural employment.
Housing demand and construction activity in general are very strong and a
few lending institutions have raised their mortgage rates by 1/4 of a
percent.
Retail sales are reported strong in many areas and at least two
major shopping centers are under construction.

Retail business is reported

to be an important source of commercial loan demand.
Sales of a number of manufactured products are also reported strong.
Lumber sales are rising due to the housing boom.

A major aerospace firm in

the Pacific Northwest is experiencing brisk sales of commercial aircraft and
expects to expand employment by about 10 percent during the year.

To increase

mileage ratings, the auto industry is switching from steel to lighterweight
aluminum to the delight of Western aluminum fabricators who are currently
operating at full capacity.

Some primary aluminum capacity in the Pacific

Northwest has been shut down due to drought-related curtailments in hydroelectric power.

There is some fear of severe aluminum shortages next year.

Mineral sales in Utah are good, with mineral production having exceeded a
record $1 billion last year.

Mild weather has stimulated tourism in Washington, but has severely
hurt the ski industry in most Western states.

California's ski resorts

however, were aided by March snow which brought business almost back to
normal.
There are very few bright spots in Western agriculture.

Despite

some rainfall in all states in March, reservoir levels remain very low causing
severe cutbacks in irrigation deliveries, amounting to as much as 60 to 75
percent in California and 94 percent in one portion of Washington.

There is

great concern over the survival of vines and fruit trees in Washington's
Yakima Valley.

It is expected that ranchers in Utah will bring sheep and

cattle to market in large numbers as range conditions grow worse.

And on

top of the drought problems, it is reported that the prices of a number of
farm products (wheat, corn, rice, sugar beets, potatoes and cattle) are
currently below the cost of production.

On the retail food scene, there

appears to be another supermarket price war taking shape in the Los Angeles
area.
Housing demand and overall construction activity are reported strong
throughout the district.

Mild weather has allowed construction activity to

exceed normal seasonal levels, and construction employment is reported to be
increasing.

The housing market is still exceptionally strong, with used

houses selling within a few days of being put pn the market, and housing
prices increasing 75 percent over the past year in some parts of Southern
California.

A major Indian Reservation in Oregon reports very active housing

demand and construction activity.
market.

Activity is not confined to the residential

Demand for commercial and industrial property is also strong.

In

Southern California, $75,000/acre is now considered inexpensive for industrial land.

Eraployment is on the increase in most parts of the District,
especially in construction, wood and paper products, aerospace, and aluminum.
Partially offsetting has been a general decline in agricultural employment.
For example, the agricultural work force declined by 5,600 during January
in Kern County, California alone.

A large clothing manufacturer in Oregon

was forced to layoff a large number of workers when sales of its summer
clothing line failed to materialize.

But there appears to be a broad upward

movement in Western employment.
Banks report that business loan demand is increasing after a period
of remaining flat demand during the first quarter, but they expect even
greater strength in the third and fourth quarters.

Mortgage, construction

and consumer loans are reported strong, but business loans are generally
static and agricultural lending is generally weak.
facing strong business loan demand.

Still, a few areas are

One banker from Southern California

claims no need to even seek borrowers and a northern Washington banker
anticipates a shortage of loanable funds before year-end.

The frenzied

demand for housing has driven mortgage rates up by 1/4 of a percent in parts
of Southern California and Utah.

