CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 14, 1977

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 20
Eighth District-St. Louis page 23
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 26
Tenth District-Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District-Dallas page 32
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.]

Business continues to improve, if somewhat unevenly across the
nation, according to District reports, and businessmen remain optimistic
that economic activity will expand further in the year ahead.

Respondents

in every District expect at least satisfactory growth in retail sales this
holiday season, although sales of new domestic cars may be below amounts
projected earlier for some regions.

Despite good to excellent prospects

for Christmas sales, inventories at retail are still regarded as above
desired levels in several Districts.
In manufacturing and other nonretail industrial activity, the
overall impression is of a slight upward trend nationally, with District
reports on production and sales varying from spotty and unchanged to
generally expanding.

Strikes are again mentioned in several reports as

factors influencing business activity.

And the Administration's still

uncertain economic policies are said to be one of the main barriers to
capital spending.

Improvements in the prices of some agricultural products

have helped the incomes of farmers who are now using strike and protest
techniques to draw attention to their plight.
Credit demands are reported as strong in financial markets. Thrift
institutions are apparently having no problems supplying mortgage funds
for the booming housing industry.

Demands for bank credit, business loans

in particular, appear to be growing rapidly in most Districts outside the
money centers of New York and San Francisco.
Everyone may not be optimistic about business conditions in 1978

but, as Chicago puts it, no one seems to be forecasting a recession.

Cleveland

and Richmond report increases in business confidence this past month, and
it might be inferred from some other district comments that their respondents are also more optimistic than a month ago.

For example, Minneapolis

finds manufacturing sales stronger than expected.
Retailers' concerns about excessive inventories were relayed by
Boston, New York, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Kansas City.

Philadelphia also

reports relatively high retail inventories, but these stocks are expected
to be worked down without difficulty by early next year.

Softening in auto

sales is concerning suppliers to the auto industry, according to Cleveland.
Although new car sales are up in St. Louis, Atlanta, and most of San Francisco's
District, inventories of new cars are described as ranging from near normal
in Kansas City and Atlanta to very high in New York.

Chicago, however, sum-

marizes the story of new car sales nationwide by noting that recent adjustments
in auto production schedules clearly reflect sales falling short of expectations.
Some Reserve Banks commented on special topics.

San Francisco direc-

tors estimate that the average wage increase for western industries in 1978
will be between 7 and 8 per cent.

Richmond expects serious consequences

to its District economy from the United Mine Workers strike.

Cleveland

finds capital-goods producers to be more optimistic about capital spending
for the first half of 1978 than indicated by the latest estimate of the
Department of Commerce.

Boston respondents have seen no sharp industrial

price increases in recent months, and they are not concerned about shortages
of materials or fuels in 1978. .Dallas says petroleum refining capacity is
not being expanded because of unresolved economic and political issues, but
New York observes that well drilling by the oil industry is at a 16-year high.

Richmond and Atlanta report District farmers are joining in nationwide protests against low prices of farm products.

Chicago notes that some

rural banks are hard-pressed to accommodate farmers who have been forced to
renew loans.

St. Louisr Kansas City, Dallas, and Richmond call attention to

the recent improvement in prices received by farmers for some products, while
Minneapolis reminds us of subsidy payments now being made to wheat farmers.
San Francisco says that it is not yet clear that the drought in the western
states is over.
usual.

St. Louis reports farmers storing more of their crops than

Only about 25 per cent of the 1977 cotton crop and about 10 per cent

of the soybean crop has been sold.

Kansas City suggests that it is likely

that wheat and corn prices may peak earlier than usual in this marketing year
—if they have not already done so.
Increases in business- loan demand are reported by Kansas City, Richmond
St. Louis, Boston, and. Philadelphia, with adjectives ranging from robust to lessthan-hoped-for.
Atlanta.

Broad-based loan growth continues in the Sixth District, says

New York and San Francisco, however, describe their demands for busi-

ness loans as persistently sluggish and limping, respectively.
of terms and new lending programs are reported by New York.

Some softening

Philadelphia

bankers expect at least one round of prime rate hikes between now and June.
Saving and loan associations in the Dallas District suggest mortgage demands
will slow in coming months, but in the meantime, mortgage rates are expected
to remain near present levels.

Problems with disintermediation are not antici-

pated by S&L executives interviewed for the Dallas report; in Minneapolis, the
disintermediation possibility that concerned directors last month has not
materialized.

Inflows into S&L's are reported to be increasing by St. Louis,

but at a more moderate rate than earlier in the year.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Industrialists, retailers and bankers in the First District report
that economic trends have changed little in the last month.

Some soft spots

in the region's economy have been offset by stronger growth in other areas.
Retail sales are doing well.

Commercial loan demand has been strengthening

and production continues to improve.

Respondents have not seen any sharp

price increases in recent months and there is very little concern about shortages
of materials or fuels during 1978.
Retail sales continue to improve across the District.

In northern

New England bankers report significant increases in credit card usage as a
result of very strong consumer sales.

Massachusetts retailers have seen strong

sales in the last two weeks, partly as a result of a change in state laws
allowing stores to remain open on Sunday from Thanksgiving to Christmas.

How-

ever, Connecticut, which already had Sunday sales, is also enjoying very strong
demand.

Some department store retailers feel that part of the increase in their

business may be coming at the expense of a slowdown in auto sales.
The chief executive officer of a large soft goods chain expressed
continued concern about inventories.

He believes that while strong Christmas

sales will enable many stores with excessive inventories to work them off,
retailers will have to slow down purchases from manufacturers.

As a

result of the East Coast dock strike some stores will not receive goods they
have already purchased in time for this Christmas rush.

This could contribute

to inventory problems later on.
Connecticut has been troubled by layoffs and plant closings in some
areas.

These reflect the difficulties of individual firms more than an overall

slowdown.

These job losses are also likely to be offset by strong employment

increases in other industries from defense contracts and very strong demand
for machine tools and fabricated metal products.
uniformly slow across the region.

Construction activity remains

Respondents indicate that there have been

increases in the number of firms bidding for new work and that the price
competition is intense.
None of the Redbook respondents are experiencing any difficulty in
obtaining materials, labor, or energy.

Although material prices were not

reported softening there was some indication that posted increases are not
sticking.

In part this may reflect suppliers' raising list prices because

of a concern that price controls may be imposed and then discounting these
increases away.

While energy prices are increasing, no supply difficulties are

expected and the coal strike is unlikely to affect any of the firms queried.
Several large industrial firms continued to express concern about
capital formation.

Uncertainty about future tax and energy policy was mentioned

by one large electronics firm as having a depressive effect on investment
spending.

The chairman of a highly diversified conglomerate indicates that the

problems of the steel industry have been a drag in the capital goods sector.
Professors Houthakker, Solow, Eckstein, and Samuelson were available
for comment this month.

Houthakker does not believe that the recent wholesale

prices suggest accelerating inflation.

Because unit labor costs are well-

behaved, the major concern is that the domestic prices of exported goods
as well as of imported goods will rise substantially due to continuing
devaluation of the dollar.

Houthakker is worried about the Fed's apparent

inability to control money aggregates.

For each aggregate, the stated growth

target should be a single number rather than a range.

The tolerance range

should reflect the uncertainties of control and should not obscure the goal
of policy.
Solow is also concerned about monetary targets.

If the Fed is aiming

for 9 percent M2 growth, then a realistic target would place 9 percent at midrange rather than at the upper limit.

Accordingly, the misunderstandings

accompanying modest overshoots can be avoided.

In this vein, "an attempt

to mop up any excess money growth over some target which might not have been
appropriate adds unnecessarily to downside risks in 1978."
Eckstein believes that there is no reason to raise interest rates
at this time, a policy of watchful waiting is appropriate.

With real growth

of only about 4.3 percent, the unemployment rate will fall only .3 percentage
points next year.

Any additional restraint will sacrifice this already modest

performance, and should interest rates rise as much as 75 basis points, a near
recession is possible.
Samuelson believes that the outlook for next year has improved
recently; nevertheless, real income will require help to reach a 5 percent
growth target.

If adequate growth requires higher levels of investment

spending, the cost and availability of finance must improve.

Accordingly,

monetary policy must be prepared to be lenient should the prospects for
future capital spending remain weak.

Samuelson also believes that there

is little virtue in maintaining capacity utilization rates as low as 83
percent.

Although "it makes things easier for macro controllers by having

an invalid economy," utilization rates as high as 88 percent are acceptable.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

The pace of economic activity in the Second District continues to
expand moderately, according to directors and other business leaders who were
contacted recently.

Retailers are optimistic about holiday merchandising as

department store sales quickened in early December, after some sluggishness
early in the season.

Retail inventories remain on the high side, though.

Containerized port activity rebounded with the settlement of the dock strike,
but district employment continues to grow only slowly.

On the financial

front, the persistent sluggishness in business loan demand appears to have
prompted some New York City banks to take aggressive measures to encourage
borrowing.
Department store sales strengthened in early December and district
merchants are optimistic about Christmas-sales prospects.

According to

leading retailers, sales slowed in late November but posted sizable gains in
early December.

Several department store executives attributed the softening

in late November to the unseasonably warm weather that followed Thanksgiving.
As a result of the subsequent pickup in consumer purchases, most merchants
expected a strong Christmas buying season.

In New York City, retailers'

assessments of the outlook ranged from "very optimistic" to "pretty good."
Directors of the Buffalo branch reported that, despite the large layoffs by
the steel industry, the sales experience in Western New York suggested a very
strong holiday merchandising season.

For the most part, retailers' reports

on inventories suggested that stocks were high.

Respondents emphasized that

inventory positions are extremely difficult to assess at this time since so

much depends on the strength of sales for the remainder of the holiday season.
One respondent, nevertheless, felt that price markdowns would be required
to bring stocks down to satisfactory levels.

Reports on new car sales

suggested that the district developments reflected national conditions.

Area

auto dealers reported an unexpected drop-off in new car sales in November.
As a result, auto inventories were characterized as "very high."
In the industrial sector, comments of district business leaders
continue to paint a mixed picture.

According to the Buffalo branch directors,

orders for industrial goods in upstate New York appear to be holding steady.
More positively, the chief economist of a major paper firm noted a significant
pickup in paper orders.

For the most part, district industrialists reported

ample unused capacity and had few plans to step up capital spending in 1978.
Most expenditures appear to be aimed at replacing or modernizing existing
plant and equipment, and few new capacity additions seem planned.
tion appears to be the petroleum industry.

One excep-

The economist of a major oil

corporation stated that his firm planned large expenditures and that drilling
activity for the industry as a whole was at a sixteen-year high.
Construction activity appears to be gaining some momentum, but continues to lag behind the nation.

Several businessmen reported a pickup in

residential construction activity in recent months.
among building trades workers remains high.

Nevertheless, joblessness

Indeed, in order to encourage

further construction activity, a bricklayers union in New York City has
accepted more than a ten percent cut in wage rates for specific types of jobs.
Part of the general gloom of the region's sluggish employment picture
has been dispelled by the settlement of the dock workers strike.

In the wake

of the settlement, employment and port activity rebounded as shippers attempted
to move the backlog of imported merchandise to distributors and retailers.
But some depressants to the district business climate remain.

Cutbacks in

steel production are continuing in the Western region of the district.

Also,

in New York State, an appeals court ruling overturned a lower court decision
that had declared unconstitutional the payment of unemployment benefits to
strikers.
Business loan demand continues to lag in the district.

Partly as a

consequence, one major New York City bank has introduced a new lending facility
to accommodate commercial paper borrowers.

The program involves very short-

term lending at terms only slightly above the Federal funds rate.

The facility

is designed to provide borrowers a temporary alternative when paper financing
is either relatively unattractive or not feasible.

According to a senior

lending officer of the bank, only a few dozen borrowers have used the facility
in its initial month of operation, but other potential users appear to be
interested.

At least one competing bank has reportedly responded by matching

this lending rate.

Because of the pervasive sluggishness of lending demands,

a few banks are reportedly foregoing compensating balance requirements, on a
highly selective basis, on loans to prime customers or lending at somewhat
below the prime rate.

Outside of New York City, loan demand appears flat in

Western New York, and Buffalo directors report no visible prospect for a
turnaround in the near term.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from the Third District indicate that economic activity
is expanding at an uneven pace.

Industrial activity is unchanged from No-

vember according to the Business Outlook Survey, but retail sales are up for
the third month in a row.
both optimistic.

For the future, manufacturers and retailers are

Merchants expect to see positive real gains in sales over

the next six months, and manufacturers foresee higher employment and increased
spending on plant and equipment.

Area bankers say that business borrowing is

stronger this month, but still less than hoped for.

They anticipate at least

one round of interest rate hikes between now and June.
Manufacturers responding to the December Business Outlook Survey
report that general business conditions are unchanged from last month, so that
the slowdown reported in November appears to be continuing.

New orders are

also unchanged from last month, and shipments are only marginally higher.
Inventories are down slightly for the second consecutive month.

Consequently,

employment reports are no brighter in December, and the average workweek in
the industrial sector is up only fractionally.

Most of the current sluggish-

ness appears to be concentrated in the nondurable goods industries.
Comments by a director of this Bank are in line with these reports.
He says that business is no better than in November at his firm, which manufactures nondurables.

He notes, though, that business always tends to level

off at the end of the year.

With respect to the future, he expects only

moderate improvement in 1978.
The slow pace of activity in the current period has not, however,
put a damper on manufacturers' optimism.

Over half of the respondents to the

current survey say they expect business conditions to get better in the first
half of 1978.

A like proportion projects higher levels of new orders and ship-

ments by June, and inventories are expected to rise fractionally by that time.
Hiring and spending plans reflect this bullish attitude.

About one-third of

those responding anticipate adding to their work forces over the next two
quarters, and 10 percent foresee a lengthening of the workweek.

Capital spend-

ing increases are forecast at slightly more than one-third of the sampled firms—
up from last month.
Price increases in the industrial sector are still less widespread
than they were earlier this year.

About 25 percent of the executives surveyed

report paying more for raw materials this month, while less than 10 percent
say they are getting higher prices for their finished products.

For the longer

term, over four-fifths expect to be paying more for inputs by June, and about
three-fifths foresee higher prices for the goods they sell.
Area department store sales are higher this month according to
retailers contacted.

Reports of current dollar sales range from 10 to 16 per-

cent above December '76 levels, and are generally above anticipated levels
as well.

Both downtown and suburban stores are doing well this month.

Retailers attribute the fast pace in early December to bad weather last month,
which kept a lid on sales, and better overall economic conditions from the
consumer's point of view.

Inventories have been built up through the fourth

quarter, but most of the accumulation was voluntary, and executives think that
the higher level of stock is consistent with stronger sales.

They expect

inventories to return to lower levels in the first part of next year.
Over the next two quarters, merchants anticipate sales to be 7 to
10 percent above year-earlier levels.

Part of this projected increase, though,

(about 2 percent) reflects low sales last spring, owing to a public transit
strike in the area.

Merchants contacted say they have not adjusted their

plans to take lower inflation into consideration, despite the recent slowing
in money stock growth.

Nor do they expect the imminent increase of two-

tenths of a percentage point in the Pennsylvania personal income tax to affect
their sales significantly.
Commercial bankers in the region report that the demand for business loans is stronger.

Current volume is reported to be at or above last

year's levels, but most contacts say it is still below plan.

Bankers say that

with higher short-term interest rates, many borrowers are turning to the
commercial paper and bond markets, instead of borrowing from banks.

In an

effort to increase business loan volume, some banks have been making special
marketing efforts, such as offering fixed rate loans, and increasing offshore
loans.

Consumer borrowing remains strong and well ahead of year-ago levels.
For the longer term, most bankers contacted foresee some pickup

in the demand for C&I loans, with June 1978 levels 8 to 10 percent above mid1977 figures.

Their general feeling is that uncertainty in the business com-

munity about tax changes, energy plans, and the dollar's position on foreign
exchange markets is blocking further expansion of loans.
The prime rate at all of the banks contacted is steady at 7 3/4
percent.

Most bankers forecast "moderate" increases in the prime of 50 to

100 basis points over the next six months.

Although one contact says some

disintermediation has occurred because of higher short-term rates, most say
that any current deposit outflows are a seasonal occurrence.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND

Financial officers and economists in the Fourth District generally
are more optimistic than a month ago, although they are reluctant to increase
forecasts of output.

Retailers of general merchandise are cautiously opti-

mistic that Christmas sales will show larger gains than a year ago, but
softness in auto sales concerns suppliers.

Capital-goods producers believe

capital spending for the first half of 1978 will exceed latest estimates by
the Department of Commerce.

Steel operations are picking up gradually.

Although material shortages are delaying new housing completions, mortgage
loan demand remains strong.
Despite the recent spate of favorable business news, economists have
not revised upward their projections of output for either the first half
of 1978 or the entire year.

Those who look for stronger gains than 4 to

5 per cent annual rates of increase in real GNP feel that the latest data
corroborate their more optimistic projections.

Others, who are less opti-

mistic, believe developments that would accelerate consumer and business
spending have not improved sufficiently to justify scaling up their projections.

Skepticism centers on sales prospects for the auto industry

and on acceleration of fixed investment.
Retailers view Christmas sales with cautious optimism.

One depart-

ment store executive believes that sales gains this season will exceed last
year's increase.

Prior to recent heavy snowfalls, sales were strong.

Unconcerned that consumer debt was burdensome, this economist indicated that
the retailer will continue to encourage credit sales, which now make up about
58 per cent of total sales.

An economist with a major national chain of

department stores had expected November retail sales to fall from October
levels because of weakness in auto and general merchandise sales.

He now

estimates that December sales will rise by 1 to 1.5 per cent over November
and that PCE will increase at an annual rate of 8.5 per cent this quarter,
not much more than last quarter's increase.

Growth in real sales is being

limited because consumers are saving a higher proportion of their disposable
income.

The strongest retail gains have been in lumber and building mater-

ials, reflecting home maintenance and remodeling.
Auto producers and auto suppliers view recent softening in auto
sales differently.

An economist with a major producer still forecasts a

9.3 million rate of sales for 1978.

GMC officials project domestic new

car sales of 9.7 million, but one supplier reported GMC recently has shaved
its production schedules for the first quarter 1978 by 2h per cent.

Some

suppliers, skeptical of what they consider to be unrealistic sales forecasts of producers, expect auto sales in 1978 at around 8.8 to 9.0 million
units.

While suppliers of flat glass, tires, steel and body frames report

little or no cutbacks in orders from Ford, a major tire producer reported
that GMC has cut back orders for tires for intermediate-size cars.

Chrysler

also has reduced tire orders as a result of production cutbacks because of
excessive new car inventories.
Officials and economists associated with capital-goods industries
generally believe that real capital spending during the first half of 1978
probably will increase more than the latest Department of Commerce survey
indicates.

Although no one expects a boom in capital spending, some contend

that the Department of Commerce estimates are too conservative for even the
moderate growth in output expected next year.

Still others thought that

the timing of the survey may have affected business expectations.

One

producer who earlier predicted a 6 to 7 per cent increase in real spending
in 1978, now believes only a sizable business tax reduction, enacted early
in the year, could bring about such increased spending.

Some expect a

slower rate of gain in fixed investment next year because of a moderated
pace of spending by the utilities and petroleum and automotive industries.
A producer of transmissions and axles for heavy-duty trucks looks for a
slower rate of expansion in both output and shipments next year, in spite of
record orders.

Similarly, machine tool orders and shipments are not ex-

pected to rise as rapidly in 1978 as this year.

Others expect gains in

spending early next year to be at rates at least equal to or stronger than
1977, especially in such nondurables as food, paper, and chemicals and some
nonmanufacturing, especially communication.

Lack of confidence and uncer-

tainty are hindering fixed investment and more rapid economic growth, according to one of this Bank's directors.
Steel sources remain more optimistic than just a few months ago.
Orders continue to strengthen, as indicated by a higher volume for December
deliveries than received for a comparable period in November.

January orders

are also somewhat stronger than for a comparable period in December.

This

quarter's steel shipments will approximately match last quarter's, and
shipments next quarter should rise about 5 to 10 per cent from the fourth
quarter, according to one steel economist.

Steel sources attribute strength-

ening primarily to termination of steel inventory liquidation and to a drop
in imports, one that is partly seasonal and partly because of the problems
relating to recent charges of dumping.

One steel economist projects that

production could rise to as much as 85 per cent of capacity next quarter,

compared with about a 75 per cent operating rate this quarter.

Some econo-

mists suggest that domestic industry is being forced to accept the reference
pricing of steel as an alternative to enforcement of anti-dumping laws.
Inventories are not judged to be excessive, but excess stocks of
some types of automobiles, chemical products and petroleum products will
likely restrain gain in output.

One retailer estimates that stocks of

consumer goods are about 5 per cent higher than warranted by sales, but he
expects that aggressive pre-Christmas sales promotions will help bring stocks
into line with actual and projected sales.
Some coal producers appear less certain about the duration of the
coal strike than they did a month ago.

One director of this Bank expects

a strike of at least two but not more than three months, at which time
union funds will be exhausted.

The work stoppage is not expected to affect

users for at least two months, since half the industry is unaffected by the
strike and coal inventories are adequate.
Bankers note continued strength in deposits, while S&L's still are
experiencing a reduced flow of deposits, especially for savings accounts.
Mortgage loan demand remains strong and has contributed to firming in mortgage rates in some areas, according to one director.

Building materials

shortages have hampered completion of new housing starts, and one mortgage
lender reported that builders have noted easing in lumber prices from last
summer's highs.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Advances in Fifth District manufacturing activity continued spotty in
November.

Responses to our survey of manufacturers were nearly evenly divided

between gains and losses in shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders.
This essentially sideways movement apparently prevailed for most individual
industries as well as for the entire sample. Initial indications are that the
retail sector is experiencing a strong Christmas selling season.

The UMW

strike, should it persist, looms as a major factor in Fifth District economic
performance.

Coal mining is virtually shut down in the District, even in such

non-union areas as Maryland.

In addition to the coal industry, the effects are

already being felt by District railroads, where layoffs began before the strike.
Fifth District bank credit expansion continues strong, with robust business
lending compensating for weaker expansion in consumer and real estate loans.
Despite problems in the coal industry and the lackluster results of our latest
survey of manufacturers, business psychology in the District appears to have
improved substantially in recent weeks.
In the manufacturing sector the overall level of activity appears little
changed over the past month.

Shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders were

higher in some firms, lower in others.

This pattern was apparent within individual

industries as well as across the manufacturing group as a whole.

Inventories of

finished goods are somewhat higher than a month ago while stocks of materials are
essentially unchanged.

Approximately one-third of our respondents now view

current inventory levels as excessive.

The diffusion of manufacturers' responses

suggests a decline in employment as well as a reduction in weekly hours worked.
Employee compensation and other prices paid by manufacturers rose widely in
November while prices received were stable.

Current plant and equipment capacity

remains in excess of desired levels and there appears to be little sentiment
for enlarging current expansion plans.
Among District retailers the situation has brightened significantly
in the past month.

All respondents indicated a pick up in sales and in relative

sales of big ticket items from a month ago.
all rose over the month for these retailers.

Inventories, employment, and prices
Christmas related sales are

apparently running ahead of last year's heady pace.

Sales are also substantial

in a broad market for items to keep warm and to conserve energy, including
such varied items as warm clothing, fireplace equipment and chain saws.
Expectations of retailers are more buoyant than at any time in recent months,
with respondents unanimous in expecting further improvement nationally, locally,
and in their firms over the next six months.
Optimism among our manufacturing respondents also appears to have
increased significantly after lagging for two months.

A third of these respondents

now expect the level of activity nationally and in their respective firms to
improve over the next six months.

Also, at their latest meeting, both head office

and branch directors of this Bank expressed more bullishness about business in
general than at any time since early in the year.
The UMW strike represents the largest uncertainty in the Fifth District.
From preliminary figures, it appears that the strike is directly affecting
approximately 80,000 miners in the District.
miners in Maryland but not in Virginia.
add 10,000 to the figure.

This figure includes non-union

A non-union walkout in Virginia could

In addition, more than 1500 railroad workers have

been laid off as a direct result of the strike, and this figure could run as
high as 3500-4000 by mid-December.

Beyond these effects, the impact on other

activity in the District will depend on the duration of the strike. Most

manufacturers and utilities have stockpiled up to 90-day supplies of coal.
The most optimistic estimates of the length of the strike are in the 2-3 week
range.

Other

estimates run as high as three or four months.

Business credit at large District Banks expanded at an annual rate of
20 percent in the last month.

Some of this expansion, estimated at 15-20 percent

of the total, is attributable to the dock strike, as exporters have sought credit
to finance unexpected inventories.

The greatest part,.however, appears to be

accounted for by middle-sized corporations representing a broad spectrum of
activities.

Consumer credit is recovering from an early fourth quarter lull,

with some reports of special strength in the bank card area.

Although real

estate lending has shown some recent weakening, bankers feel that it will be
strong in future months.

The demand for single family mortgage loans is seen

as a primary source of strength, with apartment lending increasing too.
Marketings of the 1977 crop of flue-cured tobacco were characterized by
smaller volume and lower quality tobacco, particularly the leaf usually bought
by exporters.

The shortage of export grades resulted in record prices for the

better grades usually purchased for export, bringing the season average to a
record high $1.18 per pound, some 7 percent above the 1976 figure.

Total value

of sales was down $133.8 million or 10 percent below a year ago, however.
The nation's farmers apparently face another year of relatively low prices and
incomes in 1978.

Consumers, however, seem assured of abundant supplies of food at

prices only moderately higher—4 to 6-percent—than in 1977.

The November crop

report revealed further declines in the District cotton crop but slight gains
in the tobacco, soybean, and peanut crops.

The District farmers are joining in

nationwide demonstrations against the cost-price-income squeeze in agriculture.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Optimistic reports of consumer activity highlight economic news
in the Southeast.

The employment situation is still troubled by strikes,

and crop farmers' revenue losses have been brought to the nation's attention.
Inventories appear generally in balance.

Housing continues to set post-

recession records, while commercial and industrial development shows moderate gains.

There's been no slackening of loan growth, but deposit inflows

have tapered.
Reports of day-after-Thanksgiving retail sales have been almost
universally glowing, fueling merchants' expectations of an excellent holiday
season and extra-seasonal sales gains.

Heavy advertising, special sales,

and the recent opening of new shopping centers in many areas have helped
stimulate sales.

One director notes that the dock strike has created

shortages of electronic products, such as TVs, radios, and stereos, and of
some soft goods from the Far East in his area.

Despite their optimism,

retailers in several cities have expressed concern that their large preseason stock build-ups won't be entirely worked off.
Sales of new and used cars and trucks have varied widely in
strength, by location and by make.

Though December is typically a slow

month for them, many dealers expect sales tallies to surpass last
December's.

Inventories of 1978 models seem short to adequate, with

deliveries quickening.

However, a few scattered dealers have substantial

supplies of slow-moving 1977 models.
Indications are that producers' inventories are generally stable
and under control, with finished goods stocks in a slight downtrend and

raw material supplies holding.

However, cold, wet weather has delayed

fertilizer applications and driven up stocks of phosphate products.
Producers (mainly in central Florida) had been working down excess stocks
for several months, and the latest setback prompted them to cutback production, close several small plants, and lay off some workers.
The biggest inventory story is coal.

Electric utilities have

been stockpiling for weeks in anticipation of the U.M.W. strike and are
carrying supplies adequate for roughly four months of normal winter service.
Gas utilities and fuel dealers continue measures to ensure
supplies through the winter.

Gulf States Utilities has announced a three-

year, $750 million investment program to convert its gas-burning plants to
coal or nuclear power.
Settlement of several large strikes has sent thousands of workers
back to their jobs.

But 5,000 Lockheed workers in Atlanta and 2,000

Pullman-Standard employees in Birmingham were still striking when the
U.M.W. pulled coal miners off the job.
Abnormally heavy November rains put harvests even further behind
schedule and damaged crop quality in many areas.

Cattle prices have risen

slightly; one director remarks that a spring swell in beef cattle herds is
in the making.

Orange and concentrate prices remain at an all-time high,

with excellent harvest conditions, unusually strong post-Thanksgiving
demand, and heavy out-of-state shipments.
An estimated 5,000-8,000 farmers from Georgia and neighboring
states tractored to the State Capitol in Atlanta this weekend, peacefully
protesting low prices of farm products and income losses (particularly
pronounced in the Southeast because of production shortfalls) and demanding

100 percent parity.
Wednesday.

They say they will join a nationwide strike to begin

More ominous than this threat has been the rumor that the

Teamsters may support them with a boycott of farm products; at least one
importer of feed from the Midwest has arranged for advance deliveries.
Residential construction and housing sales show no signs of
letting up, other than or in spite of the usual seasonal slackening.
Nonresidential gains continue to be less spectacular but moderate.

Recent

building plans announcements have included sizable portions of medical
facilities and public construction.

Private investment plans are by-and-

large for smaller, less costly additions and short-lived equipment, though
several major investments are on the horizon.
Strong, broad-based loan growth has continued.
have been virtually flat.

Bank investments

While savings deposit growth has diminished at

member banks, demand deposits have expanded notably and large banks' outstanding large-denomination CD's have risen.

At savings and loan associa-

tions, deposit inflows have moderated; though rates are generally stable,
some increases in rates on mortgages and certificates have been reported
in Atlanta and Birmingham.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

As the year draws to a close, virtually all informed, observers in the
Seventh District are confident that the expansion will continue well into 1978,
perhaps through the year.

Retail sales have been at satisfactory levels, and

inventories are generally well balanced.

Price increases in many industrial

markets have been restrained by competition, but the underlying trend is still
strongly upward.

Orders for steel have improved.

The capital goods sector

continues to improve with a bigger boost from nonresidential construction.

The

agricultural sector remains weak with some optimism generated by the recent
rise in grain prices.

Credit is generally available, but some rural banks are

hard-pressed to accommodate farmers who have been forced to renew loans.
Professional forecasters in the district have predicted increases in
real GNP for next year ranging from 3'5 to 5-5 percent.
forecasting a recession.

No one seems to be

Most expect price inflation to accelerate somewhat

next year for various reasons including:

a bottoming out of farm prices, moves

for protection, the higher minimum wage, increased social insurance taxes, rising wages, and higher income supplements—both private and public.
differ on the desirability of a large reduction in federal taxes.

Views
Some pro-

fessional forecasters believe that a substantial tax cut is necessary to sustain the expansion, while others, probably more numerous, believe that a cut
of $20 to $25 billion is not large enough to make a significant difference in
a $2 trillion economy.
Sales of general merchandise were adversely affected by extremely
cold weather in the first third of December, but prospects for the Christmas
season remain excellent.

Sales of soft goods had begun to improve relative to

hard goods in October and November, "but hard goods—especially appliances, home
improvement items, and auto parts—continue to show the largest gains.

Some

retail executives believe that recent heavy use of instalment credit will
moderate.

Nevertheless, delinquency experience continues to be excellent.

The use of bank cards continues to expand with another department store chain
added to the list of users.
The airlines have been pleased with larger than expected (10 to 12
percent) increases in traffic over year ago starting in October.

Only part of

the gain can be attributed to cut-rate fares on certain routes.
Recent adjustments in auto production schedules clearly reflect sales
falling short of expectations.

Success of the new smaller models, in doubt at

present, is necessary if 1978 sales are to equal or exceed 1977 as auto executives have predicted.

There is greater confidence that sales of light trucks

will continue at high levels.

All makes have expanded capacity to produce

vans, which have been in short supply.

Sales of heavy-duty trucks and trailers

continue on a plateau, and at least one maker has cut production.
Orders for capital goods continue to expand overall.
tually

Sales of vir-

1 types of farm equipment have been far below year ago levels, how-

ever. Among the strongest capital goods sectors have been components:

cast-

ings, fluid power, mechanical and electrical drives and controls, bearings, and
electric motors.

Some producers of these items report that inquiries suggest

a shift toward larger projects for expansion and modernization, as opposed to
orders for off-the-shelf items for replacement and maintenance.

Manufacturers

of capital equipment, except for some specialties, have expanded capacity substantially since 197'+, and could accommodate additional orders.
Steel orders began to improve in November and order books are filling

up for early 1978.

Pressure to curb imports and possible shortages resulting

from extended coal /ore strikes may be temporary factors. A major district
producer, however, cited an improvement in orders for plates, bars, and structurals, which are associated with a rise in capital goods production.
Prospects for nonresidential construction continue to improve.

Except

for the auto industry, planned industrial projects are relatively small, e.g.,
light manufacturing and distribution centers.

Plans for new office buildings

and hotels are significantly stronger in the Chicago area, both in the Loop and
in favored suburbs.

Retail store construction also is picking up in the dis-

trict, but only for smaller "community1' shopping centers.
centers are needed in the near future.

No large "regional"

Some huge "closed mall" type shopping

centers still are not operating at planned levels.
Residential construction should be at a high level again in 1978.
Sales of new and existing units continue strong with prices 10 to 12 percent
above year ago.

More and more existing apartment buildings are being converted

to condominiums. Apartment construction is picking up, but on a highly selective basis.

Rents will have to rise substantially further to justify major

rental projects because rising costs of construction and operation are outpacing rents.

The rise in construction labor costs has moderated, but prices

of lumber, insulation, and other materials are up 20 to 50 percent from year
ago.
Although incomes of grain and livestock farmers have been sharply reduced, to the point of bankruptcy in some cases, the agricultural picture is
not all bad.
year.

Fruit and dairy farmers have had good to excellent results this

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Business activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District continued
to expand at a moderate rate in recent weeks.

Consumer spending has advanced

in line with expectations of most retailers, but few inventory excesses have
developed.

In the financial sector, credit demands remain strong.

Time

deposits at commercial banks have increased substantially, largely reflecting
sales of large CDs.

Savings inflows at savings and loan associations

continue to increase, but at a more moderate rate than earlier in the year.
In the manufacturing sector some gains continue to be made in most
industries.
year.

Home building remains at a high level for this season of the

In the farm sector, the income picture has shown some promise for

improvement as a result of recent increases in farm commodity prices.
Farmers are reported to be holding and storing a larger proportion of their
1977 crops than usual.
Consumer spending has continued above year ago levels according to
area retailers.

Major department store representatives report that recent

sales have been in line with their expectations.

Appliance sales at

department stores have been especially large in recent weeks.
sales are also reported to be up from year ago levels.

Automobile

Some weakness was

noted in women's apparel items, but this was believed to be the result of
some unfavorable weather and was viewed as temporary.
Most retailing and manufacturing firms report inventories are at
desired levels.

However, some product lines —

paints and coatings, and furniture —
desired.

including some chemicals,

were reported to be larger than

On the other hand, a manufacturer of connector plates used in

construction experienced greater than expected sales in recent weeks and some
rundown in inventories.

Also, inventories of some building materials,

principally insulation and storm doors and windows, are well below desired
levels.
In the financial sector, commercial banks report that demand remains
quite strong for real estate, consumer, and agricultural loans.

Demand for

commercial and industrial loans has also increased in the past two months.
Savings and loan institutions, however, report that home mortgage loan demand
has leveled off since last summer.
Total time and savings deposits at commercial banks have increased
rapidly in recent months.

Time deposits, primarily large certificates of

deposits, have increased quite rapidly, more than offsetting a decline in
small consumer-type savings deposits.

Savings inflows at savings and loan

associations have continued to advance, but at a more moderate rate than
earlier in the year.
Production of manufactured goods generally continues to advance.
Production of capital goods —
cutting equipment —

such as motors, railroad cars, and welding and

were reported to have made further advances.

A

manufacturer of capital goods reported, however, that although appropriations
for capital goods are quite strong, orders had not been as good as expected.
A sizable backlog of orders continues in the home construction
industry in parts of the District.

In some cases, new home buyers are

waiting two months or more beyond original scheduled dates for completion.
Unfavorable weather is hampering efforts to get back on schedule.
Reports indicate that farmers are holding a larger proportion of
their fall crop off the market than in recent years as a result of the

relatively low farm commodity prices.

It is estimated that only about 25

percent of the 1977 cotton crop and about 10 percent of the soybean crop has
been sold.

As a result, farm storage facilities for crops have increased

very rapidly this year.

Farm income prospects have improved somewhat in

recent weeks, reflecting the recent rise in farm commodity prices.
In early December an electrical power emergency developed in the TVA
service area and customers were asked to cut back electrical consumption.
The situation developed as seven large generating units required repairs
(five unexpectedly) at the same time and a substantial rise in electrical
power demands occurred due to sharply lower temperatures.

Repairs for most

of the units are expected to be completed by the second week of December.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Despite some business uncertainty, the Ninth District economy
is quite healthy in late 1977.
expanding briskly.

Both retail and manufacturing sales are

Mortgage funds are available to support the district's

current high level of homebuilding.

And the region's two weak areas,

iron ore mining and agriculture, are slightly improved.

However, directors'

comments indicate that uncertainty about the Administration's economic
policies is holding back some investment spending.

Strong retail and manufacturing sales . . .
Consumer spending is strong in most of the district.

Two major

Minneapolis/St. Paul area retailers report that recent sales either have
met or exceeded their fairly optimistic expectations, and another says
business is currently "pretty good."

Directors also report strong

retail sales outside Minneapolis/St. Paul, except in areas affected by
the iron ore workers' strike and in smaller communities where farm
income is down considerably.
District manufacturing sales are strong too; overall they are
stronger than expected.

During the first nine months of this year,

manufacturing sales were up about 14 percent from a year ago, but in
August manufacturers expected only a 10 percent increase in the fourth
quarter.

In November, however, manufacturers reported a fourth-quarter

sales gain about the same size as the rest of the year (with durable
goods sales up 17 percent; nondurable goods sales, 11 percent).

This

pickup in business has not resulted in any inventory shortages or capacity

problems.

It has, though, increased manufacturing employment about 4

percent over a year ago.

. . . and homebuilding
Homebuilding is another important source of strength for the
district economy.

A record number of building permits has been issued

this year for residential dwellings.

Also, last month's concerns about

disintermediation have not materialized, so funds are still available to
accommodate a high level of homebuilding.

Although some sophisticated

investors have shifted funds from savings deposits to higher yielding
money market instruments, this Bank's directors report that higher
interest rates on U.S. government securities have had little effect on
the growth of time and savings deposits in their communities.

Improving iron ore mining and agriculture
Not only are the district's strong sectors still expanding, but
the two weak sectors look better than they did last month.

The striking

iron ore workers appear to be closer to reaching a settlement; several
locals have already signed contracts.

Ending these disputes would do

much to boost economic activity in northeastern Minnesota and the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan.

In the other trouble spot, agriculture, the

subsidy payments to farmers under the recent farm legislation are being
made this month.

They should help offset some of the current weakness

in district farm receipts.

In fact, a Montana director thinks December

wheat subsidy payments in his county will total about $8 million.
would be about $20,000 for a farmer with an average-sized farm.

This

Business uncertainty
Even though the district's economy is currently quite strong,
uncertainty about the Administration's economic policies is dampening
plant and equipment spending.

Two directors associated with large

manufacturing firms say uncertainty about the tax and energy programs is
holding back some investment outlays.

And a regional economic survey by

a director's large Minneapolis bank found that a lack of confidence was
limiting investment spending in the Minneapolis/St. Paul area.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Tenth District retailers report moderately good fourth quarter sales,
continuing the improvement seen in the first 9 months of the year.

Several

merchants, however, mention the possibility of a need for inventory cutting
in the period ahead.

Auto dealers, on the other hand, have relatively low

inventories of 1977 cars and also report good sales for the 1978 model year.
On the agricultural front, wheat and corn prices have exhibited unexpected
price strength, despite the large production of these grains.

Tenth District

bankers report unseasonably strong loan demand, especially for commercial,
industrial, and consumer instalment loans, although agricultural loan demand
is relatively unchanged.
Larger retailers in the Tenth District appear to be cautiously optimistic
about both expected total sales for 1977 and prospects for 1978.

In almost

all cases, results for the final 3 months of the year are expected to exceed
the same period last year by about the same percentage recorded for the first
9 months of 1977.

In the Denver area, however, a few merchants report

slower than expected December sales.
Reports on the actual magnitude of sales improvement and on the inventory situation are varied.

Projected sales increases for all of 1977 range

from a low of 6-7 per cent to a high of 20 per cent over 1976.

No store

reported any unusual problems in getting goods from suppliers, but several
indicated that their inventories might be too high.

Several respondents had

difficulty making comparisons with 1976 because one or more new branch stores
have been opened in the past year.
Domestic automobile dealers in major cities of the Tenth District

report normal or somewhat lower than normal inventory levels for 1977 model
cars.

The 1978 model cars appear to be selling quite well, with midsize

and small car sales outpacing large car sales.

Generally, cars are being

sold with many accessories, with this especially true for larger cars.
Used cars are selling very well, possibly due to the price increases on new
cars.

It also appears that the demand for smaller used cars is particularly

high.

Foreign car dealers seem to be having difficulty in getting cars from

manufacturers, and most have very low inventories of 1978 models.

Generally,

the 1978 model year is expected to be better than 1977, although about a
third of the dealers, especially those in Denver, indicated it was too early
to tell and felt that sales might be off somewhat.
Prices received by farmers for wheat and corn exhibited counterseasonal increases during late summer and fall this year.

Despite the prospects

for large U.S. production, wheat and corn futures prices trended upward from late
August to mid-November.

Since then, futures prices have declined somewhat.

Rumors in the grain trade of increased Russian purchases no doubt account for part of the price strength.

Continued strength will be dependent

upon larger placements of grain under Commodity Credit loan—thus reducing
free market supplies—and continued favorable export news.

Given the large

supplies of grain on hand, it is likely that wheat and corn prices may peak
earlier than usual in this marketing year—if they have not already done so.
Tenth District bankers report that loan demand in November was moderately
to significantly stronger than usual for this time of the year, with areas
of strength being commercial and industrial loans, and consumer instalment
loans.

The strength in commercial and industrial loans is related primarily

to construction of commercial and residential property, with single-family

homes and condominiums in ski resort areas being of major importance.
Mortgage loans, either placed directly or through mortgage brokers, are,
nonetheless, reported as normal or somewhat weaker than normal for this time
of the year.

The strength in consumer instalment loans appears to be con-

centrated primarily in the areas of new auto loans and revolving credit for
bank charge cards.
Agricultural loans are reported as relatively unchanged in November,
although most bankers consider this normal as crops are brought to market.
Several bankers indicate that the liquidity position of their smaller
respondents has so improved that these respondents are repurchasing agricultural loans from them.
Time and savings deposits as well as small CD's at most banks were
either unchanged or declining in November.

A few bankers attribute the

decline in small CD's to stiffening competition with savings and loan
institutions.

Large negotiable CD's, on the other hand, are reported by

most bankers as either steady or increasing.
Several bankers expect that, as a consequence of insufficient overall
deposit growth, their banks will have to purchase funds (either negotiable
CD's or Fed funds) in order to keep pace with loan demand.

Some of the

bankers note, however, that the purchase of funds is normal for their bank
at this time of the year.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

According to the Directors and businessmen surveyed this month,
the economy of the Eleventh District continues to expand nicely.

The unemploy-

ment rate fell to 5-3 percent in October—the lowest rate for the year.

Pre-

liminary indications suggest Christmas sales this year will be up sharply
from a year ago.

Residential construction remains strong, while nonresidential

construction activity is making a year-end surge.

But industry spokesmen

predict a slowing in construction activity by mid-1978.

The demand for home

mortgages remains very active, but savings and loan associations suggest
market demands will slow in coming months. Most petroleum refiners continue
to put aside plans for plant and equipment spending until a national energy
policy is established.

Because profit margins have improved, the number of

cattle on feed in Texas is up sharply from the level a year ago.
Department store executives indicate Christmas sales should be excellent
this year.

Thanksgiving sales were ik percent above a year ago, and December

sales may well top that rate of increase.

Although consumers continue to

be price and quality conscious and are making "practical" gift selections,
many show a ready willingness to buy expensive gifts.

The more popular selling

items include major appliances and electronic television games.

Although

dresses and young men's apparel are selling well, sales of coats and sweaters
have been slow because of mild weather.

Inventories are at planned levels,

and there appears to be little need for price cutting to move merchandise.
Residential construction remains strong in the Dallas-Fort Worth and
Houston areas.

A major home builder in Dallas reports his company has all

the contracts it can handle through March.

In Houston, about 5 percent of all

single-family homes are vacant, and the vacancy rate for multifamily units is
a thin 1 percent.

In other areas of the District, reports are mixed.

Con-

struction of single-family homes in El Paso has slowed because of a rise in
the inventory of new unsold homes.

However, housing sales remain good, and

the current lull in home building should be short lived.

In San Antonio,

construction of single-family units remains active while multifamily unit construction remains weak.
Nonresidential construction in Texas has picked up substantially since
midyear.

The growth is broad based in the construction of shopping centers,

office buildings, warehouses, and manufacturing facilities.

Construction of

shopping centers is increasing at a fast pace in most urban areas within the
District.

The demand for new office space in downtown Houston continues strong.

The construction of that city's tallest building is to begin this month.

Con-

struction of warehouses is also active, and the manufacturing industry that
currently appears to be building new production facilities at the fastest rate
is the electronics industry.
Shortages of labor and materials continue to hamper overall activity
in the construction industry.

The supply of labor remains especially tight.

Material shortages are being managed by careful planning and by placing orders
well in advance of project startup dates.
to climb.

Prices of most materials continue

The price of cement, for example, has increased 15 to 20 percent

during the last few months.

Lumber prices, however, have declined to the level

that prevailed in late summer.
Savings and loan associations report continued strong demand for mortgages
for new homes and renovation of old homes.

However, an easing of mortgage demand

is likely to develop in the spring if the anticipated slowness in the current

construction boom materializes.
to remain near present levels.

In the meantime, mortgage rates are expected
Some S&L's report a substantial slowing in

savings inflows, but most indicate that sufficient mortgage funds are available
to meet demand.

Savings and loan executives still do not anticipate having

problems with disintermediation.

S&L's have approximately 75 percent of

their savings capital in long-term certificates of deposit.

And if there

is going to be disintermediation, it will affect the short-term savings
accounts and not the long-term certificates of deposit.
Demand for petroleum and other refined products continues to increase,
but production is only slightly higher than a year ago.
shows few signs of growth.

Refining capacity

Refiners point to unresolved economic and polit-

ical issues, especially the Administration's announced energy program, as
creating uncertainties that make current expansion plans, more speculative.
The only plant expansions that are currently underway are by small specialty
refiners.
Cattle feeding in Texas has increased sharply in recent months in
response to improved profit margins.
was up 11 percent from a year earlier.

The number of cattle on feed in November
Placements have considerably outpaced

marketings, and feedlots, on average, are currently at about 85 to 90 percent
of capacity.

Current costs of gain are 36 to 38 cents per pound.

And with

slaughter cattle prices at 1*1 to k2 cents per pound, profits are averaging
$35 to $1+0 a head.

As a result, banks in the cattle feeding areas are expe-

riencing strong loan demand.

Placements in the next few months are likely

to remain high as feeding costs should continue to be favorable.

In addition,

poor winter grazing could move more cattle to feedlots, and cattle prices
are expected to increase further by spring.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District remains in relatively good health.

Retail

sales exceed year-ago levels by double digits in many parts of the district
and only in the depressed agricultural machinery sector do inventories exceed
desired levels.

Among district industries agriculture remains weak but

struggling and construction remains strong but moderating.

A survey of wage

increases reveals the average rise in labor costs is running at about 7 to 8
per cent.

In the banking sector, consumer lending keeps pace with strong

retail sales while commercial lending limps behind.
Retail sales appear strong in all areas of the district.

In the

Seattle area, the settlement of the Boeing strike has perked up sales to
10 per cent above year-ago levels.

The greatest strength there is said to

be among costlier items such as stereos, cameras, microwave ovens, videogames, TV's, washers and dryers.

Oregon retailers use mainly superlatives

when discussing their Christmas season sales, and double digit increases
over last year's levels appear to be the rule.

One area of Utah reported

retail sales running about 14 per cent above a year ago.

Reports from

Southern California peg retail sales at 10 to 15 per cent above last year.
The only specific weaknesses reported were in auto and truck sales in
Washington, Idaho, and parts of Southern California.

Truck sales were said

to be down because of depressed farm incomes, and auto sales down because
of consumer resistance to higher prices.

However, this latter phenomenon

was spotty since several areas reported auto sales to be strong.

The only

less-than-optimistic reports on general retail sales came from bankers in
rural areas, where farm incomes have been squeezed between drought related

costs and low crop prices.
The only reports of undesired inventory buildups come from the
agricultural sector where sales of new farm machinery are very slow and
dealer inventories have grown quite large.
The health of district industries remains generally strong and even
agriculture is doing its best to adapt to a difficult situation.
uncertain whether the California drought has ended —

It is

one very good storm

has generated some hope, but rainfall for the rainy season (which Began
October 1) is still below normal.

Farmers have taken a number of measures,

such as changing crop spacing and shifting from spray or flow to drip
irrigation, to significantly reduce the water input to crop production.
Construction remains strong in many areas, but the rate of increase
is beginning to moderate in some.

Kern County, California reports very

strong growth in both- residential and non-residential construction,
while requests for building permits have slowed in five southern California
counties.

At the other end of the west coast in Washington, the real estate

market is reported to still be booming.

One other economic bright spot lies

in the Sierras where that November storm allowed the ski resorts to onen on
Thanksgiving for the first time in three drought-ridden years.
When asked about wage increases for the coming year, our directors'
estimates seemed to converge in the area of 7 to 3 percent.
side are:

On the high

the Boeing settlement with a first year increase of 9 to 12 percent,

the aluminum settlement with a first year increase of 14 percent, and the
Oregon forest-products agreement where the second year increase beginning
June '78 is 11 percent.

Northwest steel workers have been on strike for four

months and are holding out for an 8.7 percent increase.

On the low side is

the Oregon construction sector with a June 1978 wage gain between 3.6 percent
and the change in the CPI, the Northwest metal industry which just negotiated
a first-year increase of 7 percent, and the Southern California natural gas
industry which expects its March negotiations to yield a 7 to 8 percent wage
gain.
In the banking sector consumer lending continues strong while
commercial lending limps behind.

In Salt Lake City, consumer lending is

said to be keeping pace with retail sales —
year-earlier levels.

i.e.., about 14 percent above

One Washington bank reported installment loans to be

running almost 70 percent above year-ago levels, while an Idaho bank noted
consumer lending was proceeding at a seasonally normal pace.

Banks in both

Oregon and Southern California report consumer lending to be growing more
rapidly than the norma.! seasonal pattern.

Installment lending at one large

California bank increased at the following annualized rates:

34 percent

during the first 9 months of the year, 21 percent October over September
and 13 percent November over October.

Its president inferred from this

that consumers were becoming more cautious after their debt levels had
risen to such high proportions of their incomes.
In commercial lending, only one Oregon and one Utah bank reported
real strength.

The more typical report was one in which there was a

seasonal pickup in commercial lending to finance Christmas inventories.
However, one Oregon and one large California bank claimed not to even be
experiencing the usual December bulge in such lending.

