CONFIDENTIAL

(FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 15, 1977

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 17
Sixth District-Atlanta page 20
Seventh District-Chicago page 24
Eighth District-St. Louis page 27
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 31
Tenth District-Kansas City page 34
Eleventh District-Dallas page 37
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 40

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The economy continues on a firm upward path, according to this
month's district comments.

Retail sales in general remain good, with the

sales of autos and other durables showing particular strength.

Factory orders

continue to rise,and a building up of business inventories could well be underway.

At the same time, the capital spending picture, while not exuberant, has

brightened somewhat.

Residential construction remains very strong, but little

evidence of speculation is reported.
balance, favorable.

The outlook for the 1977 harvest is, on

In the financial area, the demand for consumer and mortgage

credit continues relatively strong, that for business loans generally weak.
Consumer spending generally continues to support the recovery, although
several districts report a mixed performance.

Chicago characterizes

retail

sales in its district as excellent, with sales of appliances, domestic large
cars and imported small cars especially strong.

Dallas reports department store

sales as running about 14 percent above year-earlier levels, with durable goods
selling especially well and retailers looking for a steady increase for the
rest of the year.

Similarly, solid gains in consumer spending were also reported

in the New York, Minneapolis and San Francisco districts.

And Boston indicates

that, after rather disappointing performance in early May, retail sales gained
considerable strength in the second half of the month.

On the more restrained

side, Cleveland reports a recent flattening in retail sales, although new car
sales remain strong if off somewhat from the March and April pace.

Richmond

finds little change in total sales during May, but some decline in sales of
big ticket items, while Atlanta reports that retail sales have turned
although car sales remain robust.

spotty,

Philadelphia finds the pace of sales mixed,

but generally below the expectations of retailers.
Housing construction continues very strong, in virtually all districts,
and sharp increases in real estate prices, including farmland, are widely noted.
Against this background, district reports address themselves to the question of
the possible role of speculation in the current real estate market.

With few

exceptions, little or no evidence has been uncovered that speculation has been
a significant factor in that market.

Comments from the San Francisco district

in general explain the sharp rise in housing prices as the result of a surge of
post-recession demand confronting a housing supply reduced by the preceding
recession.

The influence of speculation, however, is reported in Southern

California, where speculators may account for an estimated 20 percent of some
markets.

Scattered instances of possible speculation are also noted by Phila-

delphia and Atlanta.
Business sales and manufacturing activity continue strong.

Manu-

facturing respondents to the Philadelphia monthly survey report that new orders
and shipments are higher in June, and further increases are expected.
sentiments were echoed by respondents in the Richmond district survey.

Similar
St. Louis

reports that manufacturing activity continues to register gains in sales and
orders over a wide range of industries, including the chemical, home building
products, and commercial aircraft industries.

Dallas mentions further gains

in manufacturing output, and Minneapolis reports that district manufacturing
activity remains quite strong, with manufacturers responding to its latest
survey looking for year-over-year increase in sales of about 15 percent in the
first half of 1977.
Against this background, a period of modest inventory rebuilding may
be underway.

Manufacturers in the Philadelphia district thus project an increase

in inventories over the balance of the year, and Richmond reports that manufacturers' inventories, after remaining flat for several months, are once again
moving upward.

San Francisco reports that some industries, including aerospace

and electronics, are cautiously bringing inventories back to "normal" levels
to support higher production levels and sales.

Minneapolis' manufacturers in

general feel inventories to be in line with expected sales, as are department
store inventories in the Dallas district.

Similarly, Chicago reports inventories

of some items, mainly hard goods, to be below levels necessary to maximize sales.
Growing shortages of drilling equipment are mentioned by Dallas and Atlanta.
Reflecting the continued strength in manufacturing activity, improvements in the labor market are reported by several Banks, including Philadelphia,
Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis.

Growing shortages of certain types of skilled

workers are mentioned by St. Louis (carpenters) and Dallas and Atlanta (oil
drillers).
Assessments of business capital spending generally remain cautious,
but on balance have become somewhat brighter.

Among others, Boston reports

increased orders at machine tool manufacturers, as well as an expansion in the
investment plans of New England firms themselves.

Capital good producers in

the Cleveland district expect capital spending in 1977 to at least match that
projected by the latest Department of Commerce survey, in some instance to
exceed it.

Chicago reports increased steel shipments to capital equipment

producers as well as a "well grounded" upswing in spending on such equipment,
although the strength of demand varies greatly among industries, with construction leading the way.

St

Louis reports strong sales of machine tools, welding

and cutting equipment, and commercial aircraft.

However, the proportion of

manufacturers in the Philadelphia survey anticipating increases in their capital

spending over the next six months declined somewhat.

Several Banks including

Cleveland, Minneapolis and New York, mentioned the uncertainties

surrounding

the energy program and/or environmental controls as factors inhibiting capital
outlays.
Reports from the agricultural areas are generally good.

Kansas City

reports that the wheat harvest now underway in that district is expected to
top the 1976 harvest by 15 percent, while Minneapolis indicates that recent rains
have eased concerns about the draught.

San Francisco, on the other hand, reports that

the agricultural sector in that district seems "resigned" to a less than good
year, while weather has adversely affected some crops in the Atlantic district.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Respondents in the First District report that the favorable trends
of the past several months are continuing.
is an important source of optimism.

A steady decline in unemployment

Capital spending appears to be picking

up and the housing industry is at last showing vitality.

The retail sales

situation is somewhat mixed with a fall-off in early May followed by a
strengthening in recent weeks.

Fears of inflation seem to have lessened

but some businessmen appear to have become slightly apprehensive about the
general outlook.

This reflects concerns about national and international

developments, particularly as regards energy, rather than their own experience.
The most important development in the manufacturing sector is the
apparent pick-up in capital spending.

Manufacturers of producers durables,

particularly machine tools, report increasing orders.

In addition, New England

firms themselves seem to be expanding their investment plans.
Retail sales in New England had a rather disappointing early May.
However, there was considerable strengthening in the second half of the month.
Assessments of the retail sales performance range from pretty strong to
mediocre.

Housing products are selling particularly well.

One major retailer

in the region commented that inventories are slightly higher than desired.
He believes the industry as a whole is apprehensive about the future and is
trying to keep inventories low.
One of the disappointing aspects of the New England economy has been
the housing industry.

However, there are now significant signs of improvement.

Although new construction remains relatively weak in most of the region,
there are now fairly widespread reports of a pick-up, particularly in single

family homes.

In addition a special survey of realtors revealed a very

active market in existing units.
percent above last year.

Several realtors said that sales are 50

Single family units account for most of the activity,

although two realtors ventured that the slower market in multi-family units
reflects lack of supply.

Responses regarding price ranges were quite varied,

but in southern New England the market seems to be strongest among higher
priced units.

Prices are escalating quite rapidly as the overhang of unsold

housing from the recession period has moved off the market.
Commercial and savings bankers in New England also report moderate
to high levels of activity in real estate markets, but no unusual speculative
activity.

Demand for both completed single family homes and improved building

lots remains strong in southern New Hampshire and house prices there are
currently appreciating at a rate of 1 percent per month.

However, banks in

the area report that most local builders operate on a very small scale and
that while some of these builders are constructing units on speculation, the
overall level of speculative activity does not appear to have increased over
that occurring one year ago.
Bankers in the agricultural district of northern Maine report an
acceleration in the rate of increase of land prices there.

Loan officers also

noted that an increased number of sales were to buyers from outside Maine.
However, these bankers feel that the effect of the recent acceleration in land
prices was to restore the historical relationship of Maine land prices to
agricultural land prices elsewhere, since Maine land prices had lagged national
prices in recent years.
Sources elsewhere in New England report no unusual speculative activity
at present.

While some banks reported requests for second mortgages, they did

not consider the number of such requests to be abnormal.
reported requests for wrap-around mortgages.

None of the banks

None of the banks reported

purchases of single family homes by nonoccupants, and several said that the
customary policy in New England is to only lend to owner-occupied

units.

On balance the performance of the New England economy is quite
promising at the moment.

Businessmen are optimistic but vaguely concerned

about the possibility of external shocks.
Professors Houthakker and Samuelson were contacted this month.
Houthakker is satisfied with the performance of the economy and of monetary
policy.

He sees no need for immediate further correction of April's excessive

money growth and guesses that the current level of rates will be adequate to
bring money growth back within the target range.

On the inflation outlook,

he sees the rate of inflation as fairly stable with no significant
tion or deceleration.

accelera-

He notes weakness in various raw materials markets

which serve as a good leading indicator

of inflation.

The world economy is

still growing slowly but is no cause for alarm.
On the basis of the recent economic data, Professor Samuelson would
favor some tightening provided that policymakers are willing to reverse
course subsequently if economic targets are not being met.

Specifically,

Samuelson feels that annual real growth of less than 5 percent over the next
six quarters would be politically unacceptable.

While a prestigous minority

of forecasters expect this goal to be met, the consensus forecast is of somewhat
slower growth over that period.

Samuelson's philosophy is that a "zig-zag"

policy, such as tightening now and reversing if the optimistic forecasts gets
marked down, is not fine-tuning

(which implies perfect command).

Zig-zagging

around the desirable range as new information accumulates is, to the contrary,
the optimal policy posture in a changing world filled with uncertainty.

SECOND D I S T R I C T — N E W YORK

The Second District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace
according to recent reports from directors, business leaders and economists.
Residential construction activity appears to be picking up, but respondents
reported no evidence of speculative excesses.

Retail sales continue to post

solid gains, and inventories appeared to be at satisfactory levels.

While

many directors voiced concern that the uncertainty created by the proposed
energy program would delay capital outlays, District industrialists report
few revisions in spending plans.

Employment growth remains sluggish, but

directors heralded a step toward an improved business climate offered by a
ruling against payment of unemployment insurance benefits to strikers.
Several respondents noted a recent improvement iii residential construction activity in the Second District.
Jersey

The president of a leading New

bank stated that the demand for residential mortgages was the strongest

in more than five years.

The president of a major telephone utility reported

phone sales were running at rates much higher than anticipated.

For the most

part, the strength appears concentrated in single family and low-rise condominiums.

Construction of new apartment houses in this area continues to lag.

Boding well for continued regional growth, none of the respondents, including
the directors of the head office and Buffalo branch, saw any indication of the
speculative fever reported on the West Coast.

One banker noted that New York

City apartment prices have improved tremendously in recent months, but there is
nothing speculative about that.

Retail sales have shown further gains in the New York metropolitan
area.

An executive of one national chain reported a much brisker pace here

than in the country as a whole.

For the third consecutive month sales gains

at several large Nex? York City stores outpaced gains at suburban

counterparts.

The president of one major department store attributed much of his store's
improvement to a recent, large-scale refurbishing of its New York City site.
The increase in retail inventories generally was viewed as accompanying the
rise in sales.

Merchants felt sales prospects remained bright.

Most businesses remain cautious about inventory levels, expanding
stocks only in response to gains in sales.

One business economist noted that

inventory building was quite low for this stage of an economic recovery.
Overall, inventories appeared to be in good balance with sales.

While some

respondents reported inventories were somewhat below desired levels, most firms
felt inventories were at generally satisfactory levels.

A vice-president of

a large capital goods producing firm, which had been facing sluggish demand,
reported that with a good flow of new orders his firm could establish a satisfactory level without having to curtail production.

The languishing demand

for structural steel prompted one steel producer to close one of its older,
less efficient plants in western New York.

Steel inventories were somewhat

higher than desired due in part to less-than-anticipated hedge buying by
customers prior to the mid-June steel price rise.
The regional employment picture shows little near term improvement.
In addition to the steel plant closing, a major automobile manufacturer
announced a substantial reduction of New York City personnel.

More positively,

the Buffalo branch and head office directors cited the ruling against the
payment of unemployment benefits to strikers in New York as a step toward

reestablishing a healthy business climate.

It was expected that employment

costs would only be marginally reduced, but the general impact toward improving
New York State's competitive position will be considerable.

Thus, while it

would be unlikely to bring in new industry, the motivation to leave should be
reduced.

One Buffalo director felt it might lead firms to reconsider or alter

decisions not to expand New York facilities.
Regarding the impact on capital spending of the President's energy
program, opinions were mixed.

Spokesmen from industrial companies stated that

their current plans were unaffected either because they comply with the proposal
or are firmly fixed.

On the other hand, the chairman of a major New York City

bank felt that on balance the program appeared to be having a negative effect
on capital spending.

The chairman of an international oil company said it could

result in lower investment by the petroleum industry.

Several economists and

directors believe that longer term capital spending is likely to be temporarily
postponed until the uncertainty concerning the final program is resolved.

On

the general outlook for capital spending, one director noted that sharp increases
in costs have clearly had a major impact on capital spending and may keep the
rise in spending down even through 1978.

Capital appropriations have been high,

but follow-up in terms of spending may be slow since many businesses do not
think they can pass on higher costs in terms of product prices.
In the financial area, there are some indications that loan demand
is increasing in selected parts of the District.

One of the directors noted

a quickening of demand in upstate New York while another reported that business
loans were up in the central part of the state.

A banking director from New

Jersey noted that while overall loan demand was still lagging, home improvement
and installment loans were strong.
little growth.

Business loan demand in New York City shows

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the Third District is expanding but at an
uneven pace.

Sales at area department stores are reported to be mixed,

while activity in the industrial sector continues to expand.

New orders and

shipments are higher than in Hay, while inventories remain stable.
and the workweek also continue to increase.

Employment

For the longer term, retailers

report widely differing sales forecasts while manufacturers anticipate additional improvement in business conditions.

Plans for increases in capital

spending over the next two quarters are less widespread than in previous
months.

Commercial bankers say that business loan demand is flat, but consumer

loans are increasing.

Housing markets are active, but with the exception of

Atlantic City, no speculation in real estate is reported.
Manufacturers responding to the latest Business Outlook Survey report
that general business conditions are better than in May.

Of the executives

surveyed, 42 percent say that business has improved this month.
to the proportion reporting gains in the previous survey.

This is similar

New orders and

shipments are higher in June, and inventories remain unchanged after increasing fractionally last month.

At the same time, employment and the average

workweek in the industrial sector continue to expand, although the gains are
not as widespread as in May.
For the longer term, manufacturers continue to be optimistic.

More

than two-thirds of those polled expect better business conditions by yearend.

Specific increases are projected in new orders by about two-thirds of

the respondents, and shipments are expected to climb at a similar proportion
of the sampled firms.

At the same time, inventory levels are expected to

increase over the period, and gains in employment are forecast as well.

One

out of three respondents plans to add to their work forces by December, and
one out of five foresees a longer workweek.

Increases in capital spending

six months out are anticipated at one-third of the firms polled.

This is down

somewhat from last month and the lowest fraction since last summer.
Prices in the industrial sector continue to climb but increases are
no more widespread than in May.

Fifty-six percent of those sampled report

paying higher prices for their inputs, while 29 percent are receiving higher
prices for the products they sell.

By December, about eight out of ten

expect to be paying more for supplies and seven out of ten anticipate
receiving higher prices for their finished products.
Department store sales in the area are mixed.

Reports of current

dollar sales range from 17 percent above to 8 percent below year-ago levels.
For the most part, merchants say that sales are running somewhat below their
expectations.

They cite unseasonably cool weather, a public transit strike

early in May, and going-out-of-business sales by a major competitor as reasons for sluggish performance.

In general, inventories are said to be in

reasonably good shape.
For the longer term, some retailers expect sales to remain weak
throughout the next two quarters, while others look for a pickup.

One mer-

chant expects sales by the end of the year to be "about the same as last
year in real terms with a 5 percent increase in current dollar sales."
Bankers in the region report that while consumer loans are expanding,
business loan demand remains essentially flat.

All of the banks contacted

have hiked their prime rate to 6 3/4 percent, but bankers say that this has
probably not slowed loan demand.

One notes that his bank has made a few

loans at rates below prime in order to attract some non-local customers.
For the longer term, bankers look for moderate gains in business loans
and further increases in interest rates.

One banker expects commercial and

industrial loan volume by the end of this year to be about 6 percent above
year-end
tion.

'76.

He notes that loan volume is currently running behind that expecta-

At the same time, gradual increases in interest rates are expected with

a prime rate at the end of the year in the 7-7 1/2 percent range.
The subject of real estate speculation was discussed with several
contacts at various locations in the Third District.

With the exception

of Atlantic City, there are no reports of any speculative activity.

Mortgage

lending is reported to be strong in some parts of the District, but there is
little in the way of "second mortgage" activity at the institutions

surveyed.

One executive of a large MSB in Philadelphia notes that, "We don't have any
speculation in this area, and we don't expect to see any."

According to this

official, land prices and construction costs are going up at "expected" rates
and appraisals of existing housing are not climbing "inordinately."

Moreover,

he adds that there is little or no excess demand for housing in the region,
and this type of market will not support much speculation.
Commercial bankers in the Pocono Mountains resort area say that
residential and commercial real estate markets appear to be "orderly"—sales
activity and price movements are well in line with their expectations.

In

the Lancaster area, price increases for housing and farmland are about the
same as last year.

Some farmland there is being converted to commercial use,

and all land that is being sold appears to be for the immediate active use
of the buyers.
One area where real estate prices have gone up at a much faster rate

than in the past is Atlantic City.

An official with that city's Housing

Authority attributes this to the recent legalization of casino gambling in
that city.

In one case, a lot which sold for $800 before the casino refer-

endum sold for $10,000 afterwards.

In this contact's view, "Some of these

prices seem out of line, but with the casinos on the horizon, who knows?"

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Economic activity in the Fourth District continues to expand
moderately, except for recent flattening in retail sales.

Retailers have

experienced some slowing in sales, including new cars, although producers
are still optimistic about prospects.

Capital goods producers expect

spending in 1977 will rise at least in line with the latest Department of
Commerce survey on capital spending.

The recent surge in steel output,

supported by a high level of auto production and inventory buildup, is
expected to end shortly.

Economists who met at this Bank on June 3 expect

the rate of growth in real GNP to slow to an annual rate of about 4 1/2 to
5 1/2 percent from 1977-III to 1978-11.

Bank and savings and loan officials

see little evidence on speculation in housing, but savings and loan associations
have been expanding the use of second mortgages as a source of consumer
financing.
Retailers indicated a mixed pattern of consumer spending over the
past several weeks.

Some department store officials are concerned about

near-term sales prospects.

One reported sales in May were a bit better

than in April although still below expectations in real terms.

In his view,

consumers are still paying for high fuel bills and buying new cars; therefore, sales promotions might be necessary to stimulate department
goods and to hold inventories to desired levels.

store-type

Another executive fears

consumers will retrench because of the rapid buildup in debt in recent
months.

An official with a producer of nondurable housewares, including

wall coverings and window shades, indicated a flattening in sales in recent

weeks.

Others are still relatively optimistic about sales prospects.

A

loan officer with a major bank commented that increasing demand for loans
to finance autos, boats and recreational vehicles suggests greater consumer
confidence in economic prospects than indicated in the latest consumer
surveys.

While somewhat off from the pace of March and April, new car

sales in recent weeks remained strong, according to several new car dealers.
One dealer stated that consumer interest in large cars stems from the
belief that buyers get the most for their money from large cars.

An

economist with a major auto producer expects an average annual rate of new
car sales in the second half of 1977 of about 11 million units, compared
with an average annual rate of about 11 1/2 million units during the first
half of this year.

He does not regard the runup in consumer debt as a major

concern and believes that consumers are unlikely to step up their rate of
personal savings much above 6 percent of disposable income.
Capital goods producers generally expect that the increase in
capital spending this year will at least match the 12 percent increase
indicated in the latest Department of Commerce survey.

An economist with

a major capital goods producer expects a 14 percent increase in capital
spending this year and 15 percent in 1978 (about 8 percent in real terms
each year).

A producer of transmissions, axles, and other equipment for

trucks expects a 12 percent increase in capital spending this year and
continued strength in heavy-duty truck sales,although they are likely to
slow by mid-1978.
industries.

Small gains in capital spending are expected in a few

An economist with an oil refinery in the District expects

refinery capacity in the U.S. will expand by 500,000 barrels this year
but only 200,000 barrels next year, because of uncertainty over the

Administration's energy program.

At a meeting of sixteen financial

officers from Cincinnati-based firms held by this Bank on June 10,
several officials commented on the difficulty of devising projects
that will meet a satisfactory return in investment.

Contributing to

these difficulties are such factors as changes in environmental and OSHA
regulations, inflation and other shocks in the economy.

Some say that

the target rate for return investment has been increasing in recent
years, while others feel the target may not have increased but that it
is more difficult to achieve the same target rate.

Several asserted that

despite a need to replace some existing inefficient capital stock
occasioned by higher costs of energy, new spending projects are hindered
because of uncertainty over return on investment.
Economists who met at this Bank on June 3 expect that the expansion will continue at a relatively moderate pace at least into the second
quarter of 1978.

The median forecast of 29 economists indicates an

increase in real GNP at about a 6 percent annual rate for the second and
third quarter of 1977, followed by a rate of increase of from 4 1/2 to 5
percent

(annual rates) from the fourth quarter of 1977 to the second quarter

of 1978.

The slower pace of growth expected for the first half of next

year is attributed largely to a slower buildup in inventories than in 1977
(annual rate of about $16 billion for the first half of 1978), and to a
reduced level of domestic new car sales (9.0 million annual rate).

The

group also raised their forecasts of the implicit price deflator to about
a 6 percent annual rate from the second quarter of 1977 to the second
quarter of 1978, compared to the 5.6 percent annual rate expected last
February.

Consistent with the median forecast, a bank economist expects

continuing strength in business loan demand to finance working capital
needs, an increase in short-term interest rates of 100 to 150 basis
points by year-end 1977.
Loan demand continues to be strongest for residential and
consumer credit, but is still mixed for business loans.

Banks and thrift

institutions have indicated strong mortgage loan demand, especially for
single-family dwellings, while apartment construction remains generally
weak in the District.

Several savings and loan officials expect their

liquidity will be reduced by the end of this summer, and some expect to
increase borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank to support a high
level of mortgage commitments.

Several large district banks indicate a

strengthening in demand for business loans, although some still report
an irregular and mild upward trend.
Bankers and officials with savings and loan associations see
little evidence of speculation in housing, that is, purchasing of non-owner
occupied housing.

Responses generally indicate builders and lenders have

stepped up construction in anticipation of continuing rising demand for
single-family dwellings.

Some attribute lack of speculation in housing

in this area to a relative balance between supply and demand for housing,
a relatively stable population, and price increases in housing that have
recently averaged about 10 percent annually, considerably less than in
some other parts of the country.

One builder, however, pointed out that

speculation has increased for land in some non-urban areas where values
have been rising rapidly, especially as residents leave locales where
schools have been or will be desegregated.

There appears to be considerable difference between District
banks and savings and loan associations in the use of equity loans and
second mortgages.

Banks do not seem to be promoting equity loans.

over, few banks seek or make second mortgage loans.

More-

Those advancing

second mortgage loans do so only if the bank holds the first mortgage and
if the loan is for home improvements.

Some banks prefer to rewrite the

first mortgage as an alternative to making a second mortgage loan.

Where

made, second mortgages are used for swing loans, for periods of 3 to 6 months.
On the other hand, savings and loan associations contacted are involved in
equity loans and second mortgages, which have been gaining in use in recent
years.

Savings and loan associations seem to be more aggressive in the use

of second mortgages as a source of consumer finance.

One official explained

equity loans are made when used as a swing loan, but second mortgages hav;e
a variety of purposes, ranging from home improvement to financing a college
education.

Another official feels a second mortgage involves no greater

risk than the first; the amount of a second mortgage is restricted to the
difference between the original loan less the unpaid balance, and for a
home improvement loan to the difference between the original value of the
mortgage and the appraised value of the property.
Several bankers have suggested that District farmland prices have
continued to increase despite lower grain prices and the associated effect
upon returns in farming.

Cash rents are also reported as rising in line

with farmland prices, a matter of concern to rural bankers.

Often times

landholders have purchased farmland to enlarge their present holdings which
were purchased at significantly lower prices.

In these situations, the

equity stemming from past increases in farmland prices provides the
base for enlargement.

Other bankers noted some effect on land prices

by buyers who are not presently engaged in commercial agriculture.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Responses to our June survey of business conditions suggest that
further expansion of the Fifth District economy occurred during the past month,
although optimism concerning the prospects for further gains appears to have
been dampened somewhat.

Manufacturing respondents continue to experience

increases in shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders, along with increases
in inventories, particularly of finished goods.

Retailers report essentially no

change in total sales during May and a slight decline in relative sales of big
ticket items.

Retailers noted little change in prices from a month ago but manu-

facturers continue to report widespread price increases.

Although respondents

expectations on balance remain optimistic the fraction anticipating further gains
over the next six months has declined markedly over the past three months.
ments of Directors

Com-

and District bankers suggest the existence of little or no

real estate activity that might be termed

"speculative."

Approximately one-third of the manufacturers surveyed this month continue to report increases in shipments, new orders, and backlogs of orders on
a month-to-month basis.

Reports of declines in these measures of activity are

somewhat more common than in recent months, however.
which

Manufacturers'

inventories,

have been essentially flat over the past several surveys, appear to be

moving upward again.

Current inventory levels remain basically in line with

desired levels, at least when compared to recent months.

Employment by manu-

facturers apparently made widespread gains in May and employee compensation continued a broad advance.

Other prices paid by manufacturers were also reported to

have increased across a broad front.

Current plant and equipment capacity remains

in line with desired levels as do current expansion plans.

Among retailers surveyed there was little change in total sales during
May and a slight decline in the relative sales of big ticket items was indicated.
Retail inventories were unchanged to slightly larger and remain basically in
line with desired levels.

The number of employees of the responding retailers

declined over the month, while employee compensation continued to rise.

Other

prices paid and received by retailers showed little change.
Sentiment among the District's business community, while still generally optimistic, is considerably less buoyant than was the case three or four
months ago.
ipate

About a third of both manufacturing and retail respondents

antic-

further improvement in business, both nationally and locally, over the

next six months.

The fraction expecting improvement, which stood at 75 percent

in March, has declined steadily in each of the last three surveys.
Directors' comments suggest no serious speculation in residential real
estate or farmland in any part of the District with the possible exception of
the Washington-Baltimore area.

Within the latter area, such apparent speculation

as may exist does not appear to be of the same general variety as that reported
in California and Texas.

In particular, it does not seem to involve existing

housing or houses about to be completed.

The single exception seems to be in

Baltimore where restoration of historic houses has recently become quite popular.
There are reports of speculative buying of such properties for quick resale at
a profit.

One banker active in northern Virginia and Maryland also reports grow-

ing speculative activity in land suitable for residential development, but no
activity in residences as such.

Farmland remains in good demand throughout most

of the District but this demand appears to be related more to longer run
ment or development plans than to quick turnover for a profit.

invest-

Contacts with

agricultural bankers around the District lead to much the same conclusion, i.e.,

that there is little, if any, speculative activity in the farm real estate
market at this time.
Reports from the banking community indicate that business loan demand
remains essentially flat at larger banks but somewhat more robust among smaller
institutions.

At least one large bank reports losing business to long-term

debt markets.

Competition for loans is very intense, resulting, in some cases,

in longer maturity offerings and some reductions in the mark up over the prime
rate.

Consistent strength persists in the consumer lending area.
Recent rains have relieved dry conditions and aided crop growth in all

District states except West Virginia.

But soil moisture supplies in areas where

rain has fallen continue to vary widely, ranging from short to surplus.

Heavy

rains damaged the flue-cured tobacco crop in the North Carolina Coastal Plains,
causing an estimated $25 million loss in sales this fall.

The District's peach

crop is expected to be about one-fifth larger than last year's in contrast with
a slightly smaller crop nationwide.

District farm income showed

considerable

strength during the first quarter, rising 12 percent over a year ago.

This

advance reflected a sharp 28 percent upturn in crop receipts and a 6 percent
increase in receipts from livestock and livestock products.

SIXTH DISTRICT-ATLANTA

Decreasing momentum is evident in parts of the District economy.
Despite a rapid pace of single-family home construction, there are few
signs of unusual speculative activity in the Southeast.

Normal construc-

tion and financing practices are being pursued on the whole.
sales gains have become spotty.

Retail

Auto sales still lead the consumer sector

in strength, despite increased uncertainty concerning size preferences.
Tourist traffic has slowed.

Shortages and government actions are disrupt-

ing plans for offshore oil exploration.

Dry weather is curtailing the

District's production of cotton, corn, and soybeans and is worsening herd
depletion in the dairy and cattle businesses.

Florida and Georgia con-

tinue to attract increasing interest as centers for international banking.
In reports from the 44 directors of the Atlanta Bank and its five
Branches, only one report from central Florida finds any concern over
actual excesses in subdivision development.

This development is being

financed with funds obtained from a state in another region.
In the Miami area, a decrease in speculative purchases is noted.
One director notes that speculative activity has been dampened by land use
plans, restrictive zoning, and development restrictions.

Elsewhere in

South Florida, an increase in speculative activity simply reflects a
temporary rush of property development to avoid tighter requirements for
flood insurance, stiffer density restrictions for multifamily housing,
and more stringent insulation requirements under the National Energy
Program.

Neither is there any evidence of increased speculation in commercial or farm property, although normal speculative purchases of land for
property development are taking place.

Banks are limiting the size of

purchased tracts to limit risk exposure and are monitoring the activities
of builders to forestall excessive accumulations of unsold homes.
Financing practices are entirely normal, according to most
reports.

Still, some conditions are noted which may require continuing

attention, including:

extremely easy availability of mortgage financing;

the possibility that builders may avoid lenders' limitations on the number
of homes they construct by borrowing from a number of sources; inducements
to purchase condominium units, including low prices and extremely accommodating terms of credit; and advertising campaigns designed to stimulate
home sales by playing on the customer's fear of future inflation.

A bill-

board, part of an advertising campaign being conducted by local realtors,
inquires:

"Do you want to buy a $30,000 home for $40,000?

Wait

'til

next year."
An inquiry at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta confirms the
absence of unusual real estate speculation in the Southeast.
Retail sales activity has been uneven in recent months.

Most

areas report fairly steady but unspectacular gains relative to last year.
Softening has occurred recently in some areas, while others continue to
enjoy unexpected strength.

Some retailers attribute slowing gains to the

withdrawal of the $50 tax rebate.
Auto sales also vary greatly in strength but are more robust.
Most areas have either noted an increase in sales in May or are holding
even with previous gains.

Some had expected greater strength, and a few

report weaker sales.

Local television spot advertising sales have been

very strong in recent weeks, primarily because of heavy advertising by
auto dealers.

Some dealers report changes in size preferences, with a

shift from large to intermediate cars for new car purchasers, and a strong
preference for small used cars.

Small foreign cars are selling rapidly.

Tourist traffic has receded in central Florida, according to
tourist attractions and motels.

Improved employment levels and more hours

of work per week have reduced the time available for vacations, according
to observers.

Gains in tourist activity are reported in New Orleans.

Although Louisiana's oil and gas industries are experiencing
heavy activity, an otherwise optimistic outlook has been tempered by
shortages and government actions.

Expected increases in drilling activity

may be restrained by shortages of labor, barges, and rigs.

Recent Carter

Administration actions with regard to outer continental shelf lease sales
and gas prices have caused cancellation of drilling permits or plans
involving drilling costs of $31 million.

Local exploration offices and

investors fear running out of drilling prospects.

But both Standard and

Continental Oil Companies have announced 1977 capital spending and exploration budgets substantially greater (23-30 percent) than last year's, and
Shell Chemical Company will expand its Louisiana facilities.
Drought is taking a toll in some portions of the District.
Cotton and soybean plantings have been hampered in Mississippi; dry soil
has already spoiled part of the cotton crop that had been planted.

In

Louisiana, soybean growers face the possibility of a serious seed shortage,
as drought threatens plantings and replantings of a record acreage; seed
prices have already risen dramatically.

Direct losses of the corn crop in

South Georgia and Alabama may reach $227 million, and the surviving crop
will probably provide a low yield.
land in soybeans.

Many corn growers are replanting their

Drought damage to nonirrigated crops in North Florida

may run $4-5 million.
Mississippi and Florida dairymen face poor profit prospects
and are reducing their herds.

A shortage of forage crops due to dry

weather continues to force beef cattle to market at low prices.

With pas-

tureland being converted to soybean production and cattle supplies dwindling,
price increases are anticipated.
The international scope of District banking is widening.

A

newly enacted Florida law removes barriers to transactions of foreign-owned
banks and lifts the documentary stamp tax on all foreign

transactions.

Foreign banks will not be permitted to compete for local deposits or
loans, however.

Several foreign institutions reportedly are considering Miami,

which already claims ten Edge Act banks.

The Toronto-based Bank of Nova

Scotia will soon open an agency in Atlanta, the third foreign bank office for
that city, and the Bank of Tokyo is said to be considering an Atlanta facility.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Seventh District executives and analysts see the expansion continuing
at a good, but not exuberant, pace.

Price inflation is not expected to abate in

any time frame employed for planning purposes.

Retail sales are excellent.

Shortages and stringencies are not yet worrisome.
overall, but varies in strength by product.

Equipment spending is rising

Speculative elements and second

mortgages are not believed to be significant in purchases of single-family homes
or farmland.
Throughout the district employment, retail sales, output, orders, and
order backlogs continue to rise at a moderate pace.

Few if any sectors are de-

clining, but the pace of advance varies greatly among industries and among product lines within industries.
Employers plan to increase hirings in the next several months, including college graduates.

Unemployment is declining gradually in most areas.

There

are complaints about the quality of job applicants.
Retail sales of two large national chains headquartered in Chicago have
been well above budgeted levels in May and June.

Inventories of some items,

mainly hard goods, have been below the levels necessary to maximize sales.

Sales

of appliances, trucks, domestic large cars, and imported small cars have been
especially strong.

Airline passenger traffic and sales of large RVs, on the

other hand, have not matched expected levels.
The upswing in spending on equipment is well grounded, but strength of
demand varies greatly.

For example, construction equipment sales have increased

substantially this year, but only to a slight extent for the larger units using
diesel engines.

A producer of large mining shovels and heavy overhead cranes

continues to produce and ship at a high rate, but order backlogs are being depleted.

Orders for components such as controls, bearings, electric drives,

electric motors, and fasteners are well above last y e a r — b a c k to very high 1973
levels for one company.

Some production managers are unwilling to schedule in-

creases in output, e.g., of construction equipment and heavy trucks, at the level
suggested by more optimistic sales forecasters.
Electric utilities were able to handle demand, one-third above year ago
in the Chicago area, during the extended May heat wave without apparent difficulties.

Electric power also is expected to be adequate when the summer peak

arrives—probably in July.

Long-term planning by electric utilities is handi-

capped by uncertainties concerning future demand, environmental restrictions,
regulations on nuclear plants, and availability of acceptable conventional fuels.
Steel shipments have been at a high level in recent weeks, especially
for motor vehicles and appliances, but increased tonnages also are going to
capital equipment producers.

Order books are somewhat slim for the summer

because of high June deliveries to beat the price hike.

A large Chicago steel

company is going ahead on schedule with "phase one' of its expansion program to
be completed in 1979.

"Phase two' has been deferred because of concern over

steel imports, availability of fuel, and questions as to the level of future
demand—especially from the motor vehicle industry.
Demand for structural steel has begun to revive after a long dry spell.
Firm plans for large new office buildings are coming forward again.

Demolition

has been started in Chicago's Loop to prepare a site for a 40-story b u i l d i n g —
first large new stucture in three years.
space has been absorbed.

Much of the overhang of quality office

Sizable new hotels also are underway or planned.

We are unable to uncover significant elements of speculative purchases

of single-family homes.

Banks and S and Ls are not offering second mortgages,

or "equity loans," except in special circumstances.

A recent report in a

national business magazine that a certain large Chicago bank is about to launch
a heavy promotion of second mortgages is categorically denied.

Most banks and

S and Ls are prepared to renegotiate existing mortgages if homeowners with large
equities need cash.

Consumer finance companies are actively promoting second

mortgages for purposes of debt consolidation, vacations, purchases of recreational equipment, and college costs, but at higher rates than banks are able or
willing to charge.
The market for existing homes and apartments continues strong, but
fairly stable, after allowances for seasonal factors.

Sales of new homes have

declined, according to some reports, partly because of rising building costs,
but also because many builders have "sold out" this year's schedule.
building got off to a late start because of bad weather.

Home

In major metropolitan

areas suitable lots have increased very sharply in price because of limited
availability of sewerage capacity, water, and natural gas.
The farmland boom continues unabated in the district.
desire to expand operations dominate the market, as in the past.

Farmers who
They are able

to bid aggressively because of the ready availability of mortgage credit.
Sharply rising farmland prices have attracted increased interest among nonfarmer
investors, both domestic and foreign.

Nonfarmer investors have not yet become a

significant factor, but their purchases could prolong the boom.

Returns to farm-

land appear to be capitalized at about 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 percent in recent sales,
compared to a traditional 5 to 6 percent.
cash inflows of farmers.

Heavy debts could place pressure on

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Business activity continues to improve in the Eighth District
according to area businessmen.

Consumer spending has been mixed in the past

two months with sales of consumer durables, particularly automobiles, quite
strong and department store sales relatively weak.

Manufacturing activity

continues to register gains in sales and orders over a wide range of
industries.

The home building industry is especially strong in the District

with gains in both single- and multi-family units.

Loan demand at financial

institutions has been sparked by demand for homes, land, and consumer
durables, while commercial and industrial loans remain sluggish at larger
banks.

Sharply rising farm land prices have outpaced the growth of farm

income in the past two years.

Several real estate observers are questioning

whether land sold at current prices can be farmed profitably.

Continuing dry

weather conditions are making crop prospects for the current year more
uncertain than usual.
Sales of consumer durables, such as appliances and cars, generally
continue upward in the District.
be outselling larger models.
been rather sluggish.

In some areas, small cars are reported to

On the other hand, department store sales have

Major department stores in the St. Louis area

experienced only small gains in May over a year ago, not enough to offset
price increases, hence real sales have declined.

Reports from Mississippi,

Tennessee, Arkansas, and Kentucky tend to reinforce this general pattern.
Manufacturing industries are moving closer to capacity as orders
continue to rise.

Representatives of the chemical industry report continuing

strong sales over a large number of product lines.

Heating and air

conditioning equipment sales for the home building industry continue to
flourish.

Firms in this industry expect internal capacity problems in sheet

metal fabricating to develop within the next two years.

Welding and cutting

equipment firms also report strong demand for their products and one such
firm recently started scheduling overtime.

Demand for commercial aircraft

from domestic sources is increasing, but weakness in foreign sales is
expected to offset these gains this year.

Current orders, however, indicate

that commercial aircraft manufacturing will increase substantially next year,
perhaps as much as 35 percent.

A major appliance plant in the District

reports strong orders so far this year and plans to add 1,200 workers to
their work force within two months.

Strong sales gains were also reported by

tools and automobile parts manufacturers.

On the negative side, a local

steel processing firm, has announced that several small plants will be closed
throughout the country.

This move is said to be linked to the sluggish

pickup in overall plant and equipment spending.
Home building remains one of the strongest sectors of the District
economy.

Current sales for single-family dwellings now exceeds the ability

of builders to deliver in the near term, thus backlogs are lengthening.

One

of the chief bottlenecks in expanding housing production is said to be the
availability of skilled carpenters.
practice in the industry.

As a result, overtime is a fairly common

Overtime was made more attractive in the St. Louis

region as a result of the reduction from double-time to time-and-a-half
overtime pay in the recently negotiated wage contract.
Multi-family housing construction is also making significant gains
in some parts of the Distrit.

Surveys conducted in the St. Louis area

indicate apartment occupancy is now in the very high 95 to 99 percent range.

New projects in the St. Louis area so far this year already exceed the entire
production of last year.
programs.

About one-half of these units involve government

In contrast, multi-family construction in the Memphis area is

still quite low, although reports indicate that the occupancy rate is
increasing steadily.

Some signs of a revival of construction in the

commercial area is also being detected.

One St. Louis area observer noted

that while few major projects are underway, numerous small projects are
having a significant impacts

A contractor in the southern portion of the

District reports a number of new industrial projects as well as a number of
new shopping centers are in the planning stage.
Growth of savings deposits at thrift institutions has slowed from
the high rates of a year ago but is still reported to be fairly strong.
Savings deposits at commercial banks have slowed noticeably in the past
several weeks.

Liquidity, however, remains relatively high and loans are

still readily available.
consumer durables.

Loan demand is strongest for homes, land, and

On the other hand, business loan demand at large

commercial banks has continued sluggish in recent weeks.

Mortgage interest

rates have remained generally unchanged in the past month in the St. Louis
area, while bank lending rates have gone up with national rate increases.
Dry soil conditions are again plaguing some areas of the District.
After substantial rainfall in the early spring, there has been little
precipitation for several weeks in some areas.

Most of the spring planting

has been completed, but plantings in some parts of the District have been
postponed due to lack of sufficient moisture to germinate seed.

The recent

dry weather, combined with last year's subnormal rainfall in the eastern
portion of the District, makes this year's crop prospects very much subject

to timely rainfall during the growing season.
Land prices have risen rapidly in the past two years in the
District, despite little or no net income gains in farming.

Reports from the

Delta portions of Arkansas and Mississippi indicate land prices have
increased about 30 percent in the past year alone.

Bankers say these large

increases are difficult to justify on the basis of current returns in
agriculture,,

Reports indicate that the purchasers are largely existing

farmers plus some foreign buyers.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Directors report that district business activity is expanding.
Consumer spending has been quite good.
about the drought.

Recent rains have eased concerns

District manufacturing activity is advancing.

Uncertainty about the Administration's energy program, though, could
curb some capital spending.

Recent increases in loan demand at district

commercial banks reflect an improving district economy.

Residential

real estate values in the district are much higher than a year ago, and
district homebuilding activity is very strong.
Comments from this district's reserve bank directors are mostly
favorable.

Several directors report that consumer spending has been

quite strong in their areas.
spending this year.

South Dakota looks for record tourist

Also, recent rains have helped ease concern about

further effects of the drought in eastern Montana and North Dakota,
although very dry weather still persists in western Montana.

Water

supplies there may not be enough to generate the hydroelectric power
needed for this summer.

And directors say that the prospect of low

grain prices is still a concern in some areas.
District manufacturing activity remains quite strong.

Manufacturers

responding to our second quarter Industrial Expectations Survey foresee
year-over-year sales increases of about 15 percent in the first half of
1977.

Sales increases during this period are expected to be up around

17 percent for durable goods and 11 percent for nondurables.

District

manufacturing employment recently has been increasing quite briskly in
response to this favorable sales activity.

However, most respondents to

this survey view their inventories and plant and equipment to be about
right in light of expected sales activity.

The Administration's energy program may have affected some
capital spending plans.

A director whose firm sells control devices

used in industrial plants and another who is closely associated with
the food industry share similar views.

They both indicate that uncertainties

about the proposed energy program have delayed some capital spending
plans not only in the district but also in the nation.

Many directors,

however, feel that the President's energy program would have little
immediate effect on district farmers and small businesses.
Loan demand has been quite strong throughout most of the district.
Some directors point out that mortgage and consumer lending have been
somewhat stronger than commercial lending.

In the areas that don't

depend on agriculture, rising business activity is the greatest cause of
improved loan demand.

In ag-related regions, loan growth stems in part

from farmers having to refinance existing debt.

However, a North Dakota

director reports that recent rains have helped boost loan demand in his
area by improving the local economy's prospects.
Residential real estate values are climbing rapidly
the district.

throughout

The Minneapolis-St. Paul area real estate market is

described as "hot."

One large savings and loan estimates that home

prices are up about 15 percent from a year ago.

In Sioux Falls and

Rapid City, South Dakota, a director reports, residential real estate
prices are up 25 percent from a year ago.

And our director from North

Dakota describes residential land prices there as "unbelievable."

A

strong demand for housing as well as increasing costs seem to be the
main reasons for these large price increases.

With this strong demand

for housing, a Minneapolis-St. Paul commercial bank reports that large
homebuilders here are looking for a "super" year.

Nonresidential property values are also increasing.
land values are up throughout most of the district.

Agricultural

Land values along

the Canadian border of Montana have been increasing very rapidly.
Several directors report some speculative buying of real estate, but
nothing approaching the high level of speculative activity on the West
Coast.

Finally, our directors are not aware of any district banks and

savings and loan associations making second mortgages for the purpose
of acquiring additional real estate.

TENTH D I S T R I C T — K A N S A S CITY

Discussions with Tenth District savings and loans, commercial banks,
and homebuilders associations confirm the strength evidenced in the homebuilding
sector nationally.

Single-family activity is strong, and while some rise in

mortgage interest rates and terms is underway, it is not yet major.

Evidence

of speculative practices in homebuilding is very minimal in the District as a
whole, and is not viewed with alarm even in those few metropolitan areas where
it was specifically mentioned.

The wheat harvest is now underway in the southern

regions of the Tenth District with a record crop in prospect for Kansas and
with District output expected to exceed

1976 levels by about 15 per cent.

With

prices unlikely to show much strength over the next several months, cash flow
difficulties of some wheat farmers may be aggravated.

While some District

banks reported net gains in agricultural loans, repayments of old loans by
farmers is an apparent reason for a part of the good to heavy
loan demand being reported.

agricultural

Among Tenth District bankers contacted, most re-

ported strong or improving overall loan demand, usually related to factors
specific to their geographical area.
With few exceptions, discussions with Tenth District savings and loans
and homebuilders associations indicated that homebuilding activity was very
strong.

Even where some recent moderation was noted, present activity levels

were still viewed as very strong, while in other instances, such terms as
"super", "fantastic", and "exploding" were used to describe the local homebuilding picture, with prices for new and used homes rising at 8-12 per cent
per annum.

Little evidence of speculative activity was noted generally, and

specific references to such activity were not couched in alarming tones.

Most bankers contacted reported similar views of housing markets and
price developments in their areas, with the outlook very good.

Respondents

attributed the strength in the housing market to inmigration from new industry,
or from growth in established industries—especially
Very little speculation was reported in the District.

energy-producing

ones.

In Albuquerque and

Lincoln, however, respondents mentioned that some houses are being purchased
in their areas for investment purposes.

The Albuquerque respondent

indicated

that he thought these purchases are being financed through the banking system.
Nonetheless, for the Tenth District as a whole, or for specific metropolitan
areas, the "California" phenomenon in homebuilding is not strongly in evidence.
Although some up-creep in mortgage rates and terms is in progress, this process
is not yet viewed with alarm.

However, there were some expressions of concern

voiced by savings and loans at the prospect of future

disintermediation.

The wheat harvest is now underway in the southern regions of the District, and by the end of June, the Kansas harvest will be nearing completion.
Despite the general lack of moisture last fall and winter, production prospects are excellent at this time.

In Kansas, output is expected to approach

400 million bushels, a new record, and about 17 per cent larger than in 1976.
Production levels in Oklahoma and Nebraska will also be up sharply from last
year.

On balance, wheat output in the District will exceed 1976 levels by

approximately

15 per cent.

Nationally, the 1977 winter wheat harvest will probably fall somewhat below that of 1976.

However, because of a substantially larger

carry-

over, total wheat supplies for the new marketing year will be higher than a
year ago.

Hence, wheat

several months.

prices are not likely to strengthen over the next

While this development might aggravate the cash flow

difficulties that many wheat farmers presently have, increased benefits from
existing Government crop programs, such as deficiency payments, will help
cushion the blow somewhat.

At the same time, agricultural loan demand was

reported heavy primarily in Nebraska, with some of the loans being for repayments of prior loans coming

due.

Other District bankers dealing with agri-

culture also reported good loan demand but mostly for repayment of old loans.
One banker in Colorado reported that wheat farmers have repayment problems
and are collateralizing new loans out of increased land values.
Among Tenth District banks contacted, most reported strong or improving
overall loan demand, usually related to factors specific to their geographical
area.

Thus, in the southern and western parts of the District, strength was

related to energy-producing industries, while in the Colorado resort area it
was related to recreation industries.

Bankers in the northern and eastern

part of the District reported strong loan demand from commercial borrowers,
mostly for short-term inventory loans.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Most economic barometers of business activity indicate that the economic
recovery in the Eleventh District is still moving forward at a steady pace.
Department store sales remain strong, and an increase in small-car purchases
is adding to total unit sales.

Manufacturing output and drilling activity in

Texas continue to register gains, but some delivery and -work schedules are beginning to stretch out.

Although total employment remains essentially unchanged,

some shortages of skilled labor are cropping up.

There is no evidence of spec-

ulative buying in Texas in the markets for new homes or agricultural land.
Department store sales are running about lU percent above year-earlier
levels.

Durable goods are selling well—especially home furnishings.

also report an improvement in sales of women's apparel and accessories.

Retailers
Depart-

ment store inventories are generally at desired levels, and retailers remain
optimistic that sales will continue to grow steadily for the remainder of the
year.
While the current strength in automobile sales is in the large- and
intermediate-sized models, dealers report a quickening in small-car sales and
a definite trend back to smaller cars since President Carter's energy message.
Vans and light trucks continue to sell briskly, but used car sales have weakened
in some major urban markets.

New car inventories are lower than desirable for

the more popular models, and their limited availability is holding down unit
sales.
Manufacturing in Texas continues to show moderate gains, and much of
the strength in output is being spurred by demand for construction materials.
Production of construction steel products is up substantially, and demand for

cement is unusually strong.

Producers of lumber mill products think that

rising lumber prices may soften later this year due to a runup in lumber inventories.

Production of oil field equipment is running near full capacity,

and a backlog of unfilled orders for drilling equipment is beginning to rise.
Delivery times for some rig components and specialty tools are lengthening.
Increased drilling activity in Texas accounts for the strength in mining
output, as oil and gas production continues to decline.

Drilling contractors

have a solid backlog of contracts with drilling costs running 10 percent to
25 percent higher than a year ago.

Short supplies of new and used drill pipe

and tool joints, coupled with longer lead times for other rig components, are
forcing adjustments in many drilling operations.
is being pressed into active service.

Older equipment, for example,

Although contractors report no serious

labor shortages, the availability of experienced crews is gradually declining.
Despite little change in total employment in the District, some shortages
of skilled labor are appearing in jobs requiring machinists, mechanics, building
tradesmen, nurses, and secretaries.

The job outlook is good for college students

seeking summer employment in construction-related industries.
The housing market in Texas remains robust, but there is no evidence
to suggest that speculation has taken hold.
continues to grow in line with demand.

The supply of new homes generally

Developers in Houston indicate that

seme projects are being held back by delays in public utility hookups and street
construction.

Second mortgages in Texas are not playing a significant role in

the strong housing market because a homestead statute restricts such loans to
home improvements.
Agricultural land values in the District have increased only slightly
in the past year.

A recent survey of agribankers' opinions as to changes in

average land, values over the preceding 12 months indicated that dryland and
irrigated cropland rose about 2.5 percent to 3.5 percent, while ranchland
declined about 3 percent.

Areas in the District where cotton and soybeans

are dominant crops showed a higher appreciation in land values—particularly
the southern High Plains and Rolling Plains of Texas, South Texas, and northern
Louisiana.
many areas.

Low grain prices tempered increases in land values somewhat in
And ranchland values were stagnated by depressed cash flows and

reduced income from cattle operations.

However, more than a fourth of the

bankers surveyed felt land values will rise this year.
Mortgage financing continues to be covered by the conventional sources
of credit—individuals, Federal land banks, and insurance companies.

However,

several real estate agents report some influx of out-of-state and foreign
capital that has been used directly to purchase tracts of land.

TWELFTH DISTRICT-SAN FRANCISCO

Consumer spending continues to expand in the Twelfth District.

With

a few exceptions, there is no unusual inventory accumulation taking place in
the West.

Demand for aluminum continues strong but Western agriculture con-

tinues to be squezed between rising production costs and depressed output prices.
Real estate prices maintain their rapid climb, especially in Southern California
where housing prices have been rising in excess of one percent per month.

Short

term speculators appear to be playing a significant role in a few areas, and
savings and loans are actively discouraging speculation through more restrictive
terms for the purchase of houses which will not be owner occupied.
Consumer spending continues to expand.

Oregon reports retail sales

up 14 percent from last year with emphasis on big ticket items and airline tickets.
Large auto sales are reported good in several areas.
There appears to be no unusual buildup of inventories in the 12th district, though some industries are cautiously bringing inventory back to "normal"
levels.

The aerospace industry is increasing inventories in line with produc-

tion growth but reports no obnormal accumulation to hedge against inflation or
shortages.

A large electronics producer reports purchased inventories up 18

percent in May over April and work-in-progress inventory up 15 percent from the
first of the year, but claims these are to support higher production levels.
Auto dealers also report larger inventories to support brisker sales.

A large

Oregon clothing manufacturer describes inventory levels as comparable with a
year ago.

There are only two instances of unusual inventory buildups.
in activity

dependent upon coal in anticipation of a coal strike.

One is

The second

is in the wood and paper products industry, where log deck inventories are up
in anticipation of summer forest closures due to fire danger and also because
of depressed export markets.
The agricultural sector seems resigned to a less than good year.
Production costs are up and prices flat in most areas.

It is reported that

farmers in central Washington will be lucky to break even this year.

Though

beef prices have improved somewhat, the industry is still generally depressed,
and two major feed lots in California's Coachella Valley appear to be going
under.

At the other end of the food chain, the Retail Clerks Union is striking

a number of retail food outlets in Washington.
The rapid increase in housing prices continues to be a major focus of
attention in the West.

The hottest markets appear to be the San Francisco Bay

Area, and several countries in Southern California, although some parts of Utah,
Washington and Oregon also report upturns in housing prices.

During the 12 month

period ending March 31, the prices of existing single family dwellings in the
7 county area around Los Angeles rose 27 percent.

In particular, Los Angeles

County homes in the $30,000 plus category a year ago, experienced a 41 percent
increase over the year ending March 31.
District comments explain this price trend as the result of a surge
of post-recession demand confronting a housing supply reduced by the preceding
recession.

Environmental restrictions have also been a factor in the situation,

and in a few areas short-term speculation has pushed up prices.

The influence

of speculation is reported to be greatest in Southern California, with speculators

accounting for an estimated 20 percent of some markets.

One example of this

demand is a lottery recently held by an Orange County (Calif.) developer for
85 low priced

($35,000) homes and 4,435 persons signed up.

However, specula-

tion is not really pervasive in the West; our Idaho correspondent reported
very little in that state, for example.
There has been some concern that financial institutions were aiding
speculation through the promotion of second mortgages, but our reports indicate otherwise.

A number of banks do report that second mortgages are an

increasing share of their portfolios.

This share is still tiny.

Almost none

of this money is reportedly used for real estate speculation; most is used for
home improvement.

A possible exception to this pattern is a large California

bank whose recent survey showed that of all second mortgage loans, 22 percent
was used as down payments on real estate (half of which went for second homes
in mountains, desert dr on the ocean),

34 percent was used for debt reconsolida-

tion and 34 percent for small business capital or additional investment.

Savings

and loans associations in Southern California have tried to deter speculation
by requiring an extra 5 percent down, an extra 1/2 percent fee and an additional
1/4 percent on the interest rate for homes bought by non—occupants.

