CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 9, 1977

SUMMARY *
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.]

The district bank reports indicate that the economy is still
expanding; however, the pattern is mixed. A few banks observed no change
from the previous month. Consumer spending continues up.

Inventory levels

are in line with expected sales except in a few instances. Overall credit
demands are rising.

Some districts pointed to the high loan to deposit

ratios outside the urban areas which reflects the high farm loan demand.
Production generally continues up; however, a number of specific district
problems were mentioned including:

loss of production caused by strikes (New

York, Atlanta, Minneapolis) and declining farm income or harvest problems
(New York, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and
Dallas).
With few exceptions consumer spending continues up across the nation
according to the district reports.

For example, in the Boston and New York

Districts, where little change was observed in the overall economy, some
gains in sales or consumer spending were reported. Other districts reported
consumer buying or retail sales as: up (Philadelphia), further improvement
(Richmond), continues to advance (Atlanta), vigorous (Chicago), some gains
(St. Louis), and very good (Minneapolis).
While inventories are generally at or near desired levels a few
excesses were indicated.

They are being watched closely and those few

excesses reported are not believed to be widespread or burdensome. Also,
some "shortages" continue in the building industry in a few districts.

Typical of the inventory reports were: being watched closely (Boston), in
good shape (Philadelphia), at a desirable level (St. Louis), levels are good
to adequate (Dallas), and at desired levels (San Francisco).

Some inventory

imbalances were reported by New York, Richmond, and Minneapolis.

On the

other hand, Chicago reported shortages of insulation, and shortages or poor
quality of a long list of other building components and of skilled trades
workers.
Credit demand continues generally upward in most of the districts.
There has apparently been no letup in consumer and real estate credit
demands, and a number of districts report a pickup in commercial and
industrial loan demand. Richmond reported commercial and industrial loan
demand to be quite strong.

Indications of rising overall loan demand were

also reported by Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and Kansas City.
Savings inflows were reported to be slowing somewhat in a number of
districts, but no serious disintermediation was indicated.
The high demand for and slow repayment of agricultural loans were
alluded to in a number of District reports. Richmond reported a strong farm
loan demand and further deterioration in loan repayment rates. Chicago
reported significant deterioration in farm credit conditions in recent
months.

On the other hand, Kansas City reported some easing in the farmer,s

cash flow problem.
Further expansion occurred in production during recent weeks, but
the overall pattern was variable. Manufacturing and industrial activity
varied from no change in Boston and Richmond to a rebound in Dallas after a
brief lull. Construction of homes is apparently slowing somewhat from the
high levels of the summer months; however, a pickup was noted in commercial

and industrial building by a few Districts.

Some easing in the rate of home

building was indicated by Minneapolis and Dallas, and San Francisco reported
more caution by developers in putting up blocks of houses. San Francisco,
however, reports a shift from single family to multiple units and
non-residential construction.

Gains in non-residential construction were

also reported by Atlanta and Chicago.
The reports indicate that farm production will be up, gross farm
income will be somewhat higher, and net farm income will be down from last
year. Nevertheless, some districts reported a slight improvement in farm
income expectations in recent weeks. Minneapolis reported an improved
outlook for farm income, and Kansas City, while recognizing a farm commodity
price squeeze, noted recent improvement in the cash flow position of farmers.
Atlanta reported wider profit margins in broiler and egg production.
Indicative of the lower farm income outlook, the last quarterly Survey of
farmland values in the Chicago District shows a decline for the first time
since 1960. This followed an increase of 160 percent during the past five
years.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Most respondents in the First District observed little change in the
level of economic activity in the past month.

There were, however, scattered

reports of reduced capacity utilization.

Consumer spending was strong but has

tapered off slightly during recent weeks.

Industrial production is generally

unchanged although several firms report that capital goods orders and foreign
sales are disappointing.

Inventories are being watched closely.

Retail sales in New England are up, but there seems to have been some
slowing in the rate of growth during recent weeks.

One major retailer reports

that manufacturers are promoting their merchandise more aggressively. This
is seen as a sign of a weakening sales position.
inventories are too high.

There is some concern that

The tourist industry in northern New England did

very well in the foliage season; there were more tourists and they were bigger
spenders.
Most manufacturers report no significant changes in their operating
levels. A few have experienced reductions.

Production for all aspects of the

automotive market is high. Machine tools, automotive plastics and tires are
all selling briskly. Among consumer products, appliances, which are tied to
housing, are doing well.

One firm reports a drastic decline in shoe production;

this is attributed in part to foreign competition.
especially heavy machinery, have been disappointing.

Sales of capital goods,
This is thought to be

due to slow capital spending and the weakness of foreign economies. However,
one large machinery manufacturer reports that capital goods sales, including
exports, are very strong. Manufacturing inventories are being watched closely;
no problems are expected.

Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin were
available for comment this month. Houthakker remains very concerned about
recent above-target money growth. He believes that the existing targets are
appropriate, but if the Fed cannot attain them, he advises the FOMC to raise
the targets so that "the economy will know, at least, what game they are
playing." Houthakker is reassured by recent economic developments:

he expects

real growth to average 4.5 to 5.0 percent next year, he sees some hints that
inflation is ebbing, and he believes the peak in Treasury bill rates is near.
All other respondents believe that a return to target rates of money
growth is unwarranted at this time.

Samuelson noted the consensus forecast

of the 1978 year-over-year growth rate has been reduced by .1 percent each
month.

Given the wane in confidence, the Fed should compromise between increasing

interest rates and returning to its money growth targets. With due regard to
the long-run, overshoots in the money stock should be tolerated for the time
being to avoid repetition of the experience of 1974 of jeopardizing fixed
investment by sharp increases in interest rates.
Tobin believes that the days of puzzling, rapid velocity growth are
over.

Since early 1976, M2 velocity has generally fallen, and Ml velocity

has increased only at a 3 percent annual rate. Given a realistic outlook for
price inflation, the Fed can no longer rely on velocity to make the stated
money targets consistent with output goals. Because the recent acceleration of
money growth has occurred when output growth has slowed, it would be a mistake
for policy to adhere to its money stock targets—the changing link between
money and GNP mandates closer attention to interest rates as a policy guide at
this time. Any further increases in short-term interest rates can be expected
to spill over more strongly into mortgage and bond yields now that the prime

rate is a notch below 8 percent and bills are reaching yields of 7 percent.
The continuing decline in stock prices reflects this concern.
Eckstein claims that "pure monetarism now will lead to disaster."
Policy must consider the state of the economy and credit markets as well as
money growth. Real growth may average 4 to 4.5 percent in 1978 if nothing
upsets the economy, and at this stage of the recovery credit markets are very
sensitive to monetary restraint. Not only is disintermediation a real threat,
but the increasing reliance of business on bank financing means that significant
increases in interest rates or reduced money growth can have a pronounced,
adverse effect on real growth.
Although Solow foresees no downturn in 1978, real growth will average
4 or 4.5 percent, at best. This performance is "utterly inadequate." The
economy needs and could stand 5 or 6 percent growth without rekindling inflation.
Since the proper role of policy is to support a healthy recovery, the announced
money growth targets are "utterly destructive and inadequate." Focusing on
M2 and generously presuming a 5.5 percent rate of inflation, a minimal money
growth target for 1978 is at least 10.5 percent.

Solow is "uncomfortable with

the Fed's forcing the Administration to undertake more fiscal expansion and then
complaining about the size of Federal budget deficits."

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK
Activity in the Second District continues to be mixed and lagging
behind that of the rest of the nation* according to recent comments of directors
and other business leaders. On the national outlook, respondents were generally
encouraged by prospects of continued economic expansion, although many
appeared concerned that the uncertainties of prospective tax and energy
legislation will inhibit capital spending. Within the district, retail
activity posted a moderate gain in October, but inventory levels remained on
the high side. Harvest losses caused by heavy rains in the Western region of
the district are expected to exceed $150 million.

Containerized port activity

remains at a standstill as the dock strike enters its second month.
Department store sales in October apparently met merchants' expectations.

Several leading retailers reported that sales were very strong during

the first half of the month but subsequently waned.

For the most part,

retailing executives attributed the slackening in activity to unseasonably
warm weather, which curtailed purchases of outerwear.

One leading merchant

suggested that part of the slowdown could be the lack of a spillover of
pre-Election Day sales activity into October.

Several respondents indicated

that sales gains lagged the rest of the nation. Despite the softening, the
department store executives looked to the approaching Christmas season with
"cautious optimism."
Outside of department stores, consumer spending on new cars appeared
more robust, although here too the pace appeared to lag the nation.

A director

of a major automobile finance company held a sanguine assessment of automobile

sales, professing no concern over consumer Indebtedness or delinquency rates.
Several major auto dealers reported that sales in October were on target but
lagging national sales.

The higher prices of new models apparently met with

little sales resistance.
Although some inventory imbalances were reported, they did not appear
to be widespread nor unduly burdensome.

In the retail sector, the slowdown

in sales did apparently lead to some buildup in inventories.

One retailing

chain executive attributed his firm's Increase in stocks to over-ordering by
store managers.

None of the retailers contacted felt their stocks to be

seriously out of line with plans, especially in view of the approaching
Christmas season.

In the industrial sector, a chemical executive expected

the industry's inventory excesses to be worked off by the end of the year.
For the most part, respondents felt that businesses' tight inventory policies
prevented any serious or widespread involuntary accumulation.
Pervasive uncertainty over government policies was frequently blamed
for inhibiting capital spending by business.

Several directors reported that

firms were awaiting clarification of the outlook on tax legislation before
framing their capital spending plans. More generally, uncertainty surrounding
a broad range of government policies was cited by the chairman of a major
New York City bank.

One director voiced apprehension over energy and

environmental policies as retarding plant and equipment outlays.

The president

of a major chemical firm mentioned the uncertainty associated with the proposed
social security legislation.

The president of a major New Jersey bank felt

that local business in his area seemed to be more caught up with local
environmental and tax issues than with national policies.

In a similar vein,

the Buffalo directors expressed concern over the high tax burdens in New York
State that tend to limit spending on capital improvements of existing plants.
On a positive note, one Buffalo director reported some acceleration in capital
spending plans among small- to medium-sized firms due to special tax incentives
offered by the State for job-creating capital infusions.
There is a good deal of concern over the farm crop in central and
western New York State. Heavy rain from the middle of September through
October seriously damaged the crops and left the ground too wet to harvest
surviving crops by the customary mechanical means.

Dairy farmers also are

suffering as they are unable to harvest the feed for their herds.

Crop damage

in the thirty-five upstate counties is expected to exceed $150 million.
Another negative factor weighing on the regional economy is the limited
dock strike, which appears to be having an increasing iopact as it enters its
second month.

According to an executive of a leading maritime firm, there

are currently 16 to 20 fully loaded ships tied up in the Port of New York.
There appears little hope for an Immediate settlement though there are some
indications that one many be reached before Thanksgiving.

The lengthy strike

is expected to produce serious difficulties for retailers who offer significant
quantities of imported merchandise for Christmas sale and could spark some
upward price pressures.

The continuation of the strike also has serious

repercussions on Puerto Rico because of the commonwealth's heavy reliance on
imported goods.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District are that economic activity is
expanding, but at an uneven pace. Retail sales are up for the second consecutive month according to executives in that sector, but manufacturing
activity is virtually unchanged from October according to the latest Business
Outlook Survey. For the longer term, both retailers and manufacturers appear
to be more optimistic about future economic conditions than they have been
recently.

Retailers expect sales in real terms to at least hold steady and

manufacturers foresee Increases in employment and capital spending. Commercial
bankers say the demand for consumer loans is very strong, but that commercial
borrowing is mixed.

Interest rates are expected to increase over the next

six months.
Manufacturers responding to this month's Business Outlook Survey say
that general business conditions are only marginally better than they were in
October.

Fifteen percent of the respondents indicate an improvement, while 6

percent say conditions have worsened.

Both new orders and shipments are un-

changed in November, while inventories are down slightly.

This represents the

first inventory decline in nine months. Consistent with these reports, employment, which was up fractionally in October, and the average workweek in manufacturing are unchanged from last month.
Despite the apparent lack of economic improvement at the moment however, manufacturers seem to be getting more bullish about future business
conditions.

About half of those responding to the November survey say they

expect business to get better over the next six months. A similar proportion
anticipates increases in new orders and shipments.

Inventories are

expected to remain unchanged over the period. This optimism is reflected in
hiring and spending plans. Twenty-four percent of the respondents plan to
add to their payrolls by May, and 18 percent expect a longer workweek.

Increases

in capital expenditures are projected at one-third of the firms sampled.
Price increases in the industrial sector continue to become less prevalent. Twenty-four percent of the executives surveyed this month report paying more for inputs, while 15 percent say they are receiving higher prices for
the goods they sell. For the longer term, 85 percent foresee higher prices for
raw materials by May, and 59 percent expect to get more for their finished
products by that time.
Department store sales in the region are up this month according to
area retailers. Current dollar sales are reported to be between 5 and 15 percent above year-ago levels, and generally above anticipated levels as well.
Both downtown and suburban stores are doing well this month. Favorable
weather and a "willingness to buy'1 on the part of the consumer are cited by
retailers as reasons for the strong sales. Overall, inventories are said to
be in good shape, and retailers feel they are in a position to deal with any
unforeseen change in economic conditions which might develop.
Looking at the future, merchants continue to gain optimism but still
remain somewhat cautious.

Those contacted expect to see gains of 6 to 15

percent over year-earlier levels by the end of the second quarter. Uncertainty about future effects of Federal energy policy and possible income tax
changes in Pennsylvania still persists among retailers.

However, they have

not adjusted future plans on the basis of this uncertainty at this point.
Area bankers report that while the demand for consumer loans is
quite strong, business loan demand is still mixed. Current levels of C&I

loans are reported to be between 3 percent above and 9 percent below year-ago
levels. Although one contact says commercial borrowing is slightly above
planned levels, most say it is substantially lower than anticipated. All of
those contacted agreed that borrowing by local businesses was better than
national borrowing at their banks.
For the longer term, bankers foresee little or no change from the
current trend in commercial borrowing. They feel that businessmen are still
very unsure about the future, and therefore will not be willing to commit
themselves to projects that require large sums of borrowed cash. Most banks
forecast at least one more round of interiest rate hikes, pushing the prime
rate to 8-8 1/2 percent by June. The prime is currently 7 3/4 percent at all
of the banks contacted.
Bankers say they have experienced some outflow of savings deposits,
owning to higher short-term interest rates, but that they are not concerned
about the possibility of this becoming a major problem. One contact noted
that higher short-term rates would have more of an effect on the demand for
funds than on the supply, saying that, "if the spread between the commercial
paper rate and the prime becomes much larger, we can expect to see a significant number of borrowers turning to the paper market instead of to banks."

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Growth in real GNP is expected to continue to moderate throughout
1978, according to economists who met at this Bank on November 4. The
economists are skeptical that gains in any major spending sector next year
will exceed 1977. Steel output may be considerably improved from recent
levels, if imports are curtailed as a result of Treasury rulings on dumping.
Thrift institutions report no evidence of disintermediation.
Economists who attended the November 4th economic outlook session
held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland shaded their forecast of real
GNP growth to an annual rate of 4.6% from the fourth quarter 1977 to second
quarter 1978. Moreover, they expect real GNP to increase at only a 3.2%
annual rate in the second half of 1978. The economists were skeptical that
any major spending sector, except for Government, would provide more thrust
to overall activity in 1978 than in 1977. They anticipate consumer spending
to exceed 1977 totals only slightly, but residential construction and
business fixed investment are expected to show smaller gains over the period
ahead than in 1977. While several members pointed out that stimulative
monetary and fiscal actions should result in strong economic growth in 1978,
others expressed concern that these actions would result in higher prices
rather than higher output. Although the group as a whole seemed convinced
over prospects for limited growth, only one of the 27 economists forecast an
outright decline in real GNP, expected in fourth quarter 1978.
The group's view on fixed investment typifies its scaled-down
expectations for economic growth.

In contrast to last June when accelerating

gains in spending in several industries were expected, a leveling out or

reduced gains are now anticipated for 1978. The median forecast anticipates
a 13.2% increase in fixed investment from the fourth quarter 1977 to fourth
quarter 1978, a considerable slowing from the 16% rise for the comparable
year earlier period. One economist pointed out that his company's orders for
capital equipment this year have not been uniformly strong and that a
forecast of slow growth in output, especially in the second half of 1978,
would tend to dampen real gains in capital spending in 1978.

Similarly, the

upswing in machine tool orders in this expansion has not been broadly based
and will apparently peak this year largely because next year's orders for
retooling of autos have already been placed. According to one economist,
capital spending by steel producers is likely to decline because of
negligible growth in retained earnings, inadequate depreciation allowances,
and the industry's inability to raise funds in either debt or equity markets.
Weakness in capital spending by a producer of glassware and packaging
reflects a low return in investment, lack of confidence about current and
future economic conditions, weak prices, and uncertainty over Government tax
and energy policies.
Increased October sales have encouraged retailers and producers of
consumer goods, although they are still cautious over near-term sales
prospects. Department store officials report a sizable sales pickup last
month following September's drop, but they point out that sales levels were
not much above August.

Slow growth in real income should continue to cause

month-to-month fluctuations in sales, according to an economist with a major
department store chain. He also indicated recent sales promotions may have
the effect of borrowing from sales in the fourth quarter. More than usual
sales promotions this quarter will likely be needed to stimulate consumer

spending, according to some officials. Auto producers are guardedly
optltnlstlc over sales for 1978. An economist for a major producer expects
domestic new car sales to amount to 9.3 million units in 1978, about the same
as in 1977. Although sales in October rebounded from September, this
economist expressed some uncertainty because of softer-than-expected sales of
Chrysler and AMC cars, which in turn led to plant shutdowns.

In addition,

some 1978 intermediate-size QIC cars have not sold as well as expected.
Some of the gloom that has dominated the steel industry in recent
months appears to be eroding as a result of a recent Treasury ruling that
affirmed dumping of steel in the U.S. by Japanese producers. An immediate
effect of the ruling has been a sharp increase in steel plate orders by
domestic producers. According to an economist with a major steel producer, a
higher volume of orders is booked for November than at a comparable period in
October, and orders for December delivery are higher than at a comparable
period in November. Four large steel producers in the District have filed
separate dumping complaints involving a variety of steel products. Because
Treasury rulings probably will be made by the end of March 1978, some
Japanese steel producers will not make commitments on steel prices after
February 1978. The result of these rulings could sharply curtail steel
imports, which could fall to 10-to-12 million tons in 1978 compared with an
estimated 20-million-ton annual rate of imports in recent months. Should
this occur, one steel economist predicts steel earnings in 1978 would
improve, and steel operations would rise to close to capacity in the second
half of 1978, compared with the present operating rate of about 73% of
capacity. Some steel officials also seem buoyed by the recent bottoming out
in steel operations this quarter, in contrast to the continued slide that

occurred late last year.
Thrift institutions report no signs of disintermediation in recent
weeks, despite narrowed yield spreads between rates on time deposits and
money market instruments. Deposit flows in October and early November have
been strong in both passbook and time accounts. Although some officials
anticipated lessened growth in deposit flows next year, they have not cut
back commitments. Loan demand for single-family dwellings remains strong,
and revival in multi-family units, especially apartments, seems to be
strengthening as a result of recent boosts in rent prices.

Some S&L

officials believe the higher proportion of deposits in certificates will
enable them to cope with the effect of disintermediation better than they did
in 1973 and 1974. Also, liquidity for some is still considerably higher than
legal requirements, and several indicate ample opportunity to Increase
borrowings, if needed.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Overall manufacturing activity in the Fifth District remains relatively stable judging from responses to our latest survey. New orders apparently firmed slightly in the past month and manufacturers' inventories remained
essentially unchanged. Manufacturing employment among our respondents was
also unchanged although average weekly hours declined somewhat. Prices paid
and received by manufacturers, including employee compensation, continued
upward. While the respondents still foresee little Improvement In the overall
level of business activity over the next six months, prospects for their respective firms have apparently picked up since last month.

Some isolated cases of

production losses due to natural gas curtailments have arisen. One of our
respondents in the stone, clay, and glass group and a fertilizer plant, both
in North Carolina, have reported such curtailments.

Bank credit at large Fifth

District banks has grown rapidly in recent weeks, with sustained real estate
lending and new strength in business lending accounting for most of the growth.
Our latent farm credit survey indicates that farmers* many of whom have suffered
from drought damage to crops, are not finding it difficult to get needed eredtt.
Responses to our survey of manufacturers suggest a modest further
expansion of shipments in the pastttonthalong with a pickup in the volume of
new orders. Over forty percent of the manufacturers report a rise in orders.
Meanwhile, backlogs of orders were essentially unchanged, as were inventories
of both materials and finished goods. Nonetheless, current stocks remain above
desired levels at over one-fourth of the firms reporting. Manufacturing employment
was stable over the month, but nearly one respondent in five indicates a decline
in weekly hours worked. Prices, particularly those paid by manufacturers continued to rise.

Current plant and equipment is viewed by most respondents as about
right, but there remain several who feel it excessive in their individual
cases. There are now a few manufacturers, however, who feel current expansion
plans should be enlarged. Expectations for the level of business activity
over the next six months continue to lack the optimistic tone of a few months
ago, although nearly one-third of our respondents look for some pickup in the
level of production in their respective firms over that time period.
On balance, the textile Industry appears to have experienced a somewhat broader gain in new orders than the other manufacturing groups*
also held up relatively well for this group in OcMber.

Shipments

Also, we received the

most favorable reports from the furniture industry in some months. The improvement reported by our furniture Industry respondents is also consistent with
Information recently made available by the industry which Indicates a pickup
in business beginning in late summer. Responses from the chemicals industry are
a mixed bag, while activity among *primary metals producers tm apparently las*
buoyant than in recaps monbha.
Scant reports from the retail sector suggest some farther improvement
in sales and in the relative sales of big ticket items.

Inventories at retail

remain in line with desired levels. The outlook for business over the next
six months remains cautious.
Demand for commercial and industrial loans appears to be quite strong,
with the largest Increases in such loans occurring in the retail and wholesale
trade sectors. There have also been recent gains in borrowings by utilities.
Real estate lending contiftufed undiminished^

Consiifter installment

loans, however, have weakened of late. Time and savings deposits of large
District banks, net of negotiable CD's, show very little growth. At the same
time, private demand deposit balances have continued to increase along the

strong upward trend maintained through the year. Acquisitions of negotiable
CD's have been large when measured by recent standard*.
With depressed farm income levels in many areas of the District,
replies to our third quarter farm credit survey reveal that bankers are
experiencing a fairly strong demand for farm loans, further deterioration in
loan repayment rates, and Increased renewals and extensions of existing loans.
Supplies of loanable funds at commercial banks are generally ample, however,
and regular farm customers apparently are not finding it difficult to get
needed credit. Reportedly, numbers of farmers in some areas have qualified
for drought disaster loans from the SBA and/or the FmHA, thereby reducing the
demand for farm loans at banks*
Also in the agriculture sector, marketings of flue-cured tobacco have
been 12 percent under a year ago. Thus, despite higher prices, the value of
gross sales for the season has so far been some $65.6 million, or about 6 percent,
below last year.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
The District economy appears to be on pretty solid footing despite
a preponderance of strikes and continuing weakness in the farm sector.
Consumer spending continues to advance. Lending activity is heavy; and
deposit inflows have been moderate but slowing. Nonresidential construction shows spotty strength but the promise of strong gains. The tourist
industry is flourishing in some unexpected areas.
At least 13,500 workers (in addition to the longshoremen) have
been striking major District employers, keeping hundreds of other employees
off the job as plants ceased operations. Lockheed-Georgia's 5,000 machinists joined California counterparts in a walkout that closed the Marietta
plant. A dispute over production standards evolved into a 4,500-man
strike at GM's Doraville, Georgia, facility. The Port of New Orleans
reopened in mid-October as the general strike ended. Longshoremen are now
working conventional cargoes but still striking containerized vessels.
Grain exports have been caught in the bottleneck.

The Savannah port, where

shipments were already sluggish, is operating at 40 percent of capacity.
Most Florida ports have been only slightly affected by the strike because
of the low proportion of containerized shipping. The Tampa port, however,
has been badly congested, largely because of increased phosphate exports.
As yet, disintermediation has not been significant at District
financial institutions.

Savings and loans' net savings inflows are off

only slightly from near-record levels. Nonpassbook time deposit inflows
have slipped at member banks, but total deposits maintain moderate growth.
However, our Fiscal Agency Department notes increasing security sales, a

rising proportion of tenders of checks drawn on savings and loans, and a
jump in telephone Inquiries about rates.
Loan demand continues brisk.

One Atlanta bank attributes rapid

growth of credit card loans to a voluntary willingness of consumers to
carry more credit card debt.

In Tennessee, the most recent reports from

large commercial banks indicate that uncertainty over usury enforcement has
sharply reduced extensions of consumer instalment credit, particularly
direct auto loans.

But a heavier volume of single-payment loans may be

offsetting reduced instalment credit. An economist from the Atlanta
Federal Home Loan Bank expresses concern that high mortgage demand has
caused associations to overcommit, even on the basis of current inflows. A
director reports that some S&L's in southwest Florida have extended their
maximum allocations of commercial loans.
A regional commercial developer points to backlogged demand as the
stimulus for heavy current and near-term leasing activity, particularly of
warehouses and offices. He notes keen competition for rather scarce highquality, developed, income-producing properties, but expects only moderate
commercial construction until rents rise enough to produce adequate investment returns. An increasing number of his customers for new developments
are local governments or private coalitions of investors interested in the
renewal of downtown areas.

Office space is becoming scarcer in Atlanta and

Miami, two cities previously plagued with extensive vacancies.
As for industrial investment, opinions of directors and other
business leaders about current activity and prospects are widely mixed.
A Tennessee director surmises that low stock price/earnings multiples have
made acquisition of small existing companies a more economical means of

expansion than Investment in new facilities.

One large construction firm

which specializes in pulp, paper, and energy boasts a record backlog of
contract work.

The Southern Company, which supplies about half of the

District's electrical power, complains of a lack of new industries but
(reluctantly) plans capital expansion of its own to help meet surging
residential demand and the more moderate additional requirements of expanded existing industrial facilities.

One director notes that small

projects are keeping many contractors busy in the Jacksonville area, but
the paucity of large projects threatens the existence of large-project
construction firms.

In central Florida and Louisiana, announcements for

both new industries and expansions of current operations continue very
heavy. Plans for several huge electric-generating plants have boosted
District nonresidential construction contracts to record levels three times
this year.
Most areas continue to enjoy strong retail sales, with auto sales
showing substantial year-ago increases and many dealers still complaining
of low inventories.

Clothing sales have been quite good in places. One

director contrasts recent local increases in television advertising volume
with the apparent hesitance to make ad commitments at the national level.
Though we have seen no evidence as yet of a slowing of the overall sales
pace in Tennessee, the credit slowdown has cut into used car sales rather
sharply and swelled dealer inventories.
Harvests have been nearly completed despite unfavorable damp
weather. Field losses have been large.
and yields disappointing.

Cotton quality has been reduced

But the tobacco marketing season closed with

huge volume and record price.

Citrus processors have bid up the price of

the scanty Florida orange crop sharply in "panic buying." Gains in the hog
market continue to surpass expectations.

Wider profit margins are stimulat-

ing broiler and egg production.
Tourist traffic has been lighter than usual in the off season of
Atlantic Coast beaches and only slightly heavier at central Florida attractions, with little extra-seasonal gains expected this fall. However, a
rising stream of Latin American visitors has shored up tourism and trade in
some parts of the state, particularly downtown Miami.

On the Gulf Coast

beaches, especially in Mississippi, and in the inland areas of Georgia,
Alabama, and Tennessee, solid gains in tourism have been reported. Upcoming conventions should boost this industry's revenues in Miami, New
Orleans, and Biloxi.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
With the agricultural sector a notable exception, the economic outlook
in the Seventh District appears to be generally healthy. Retail sales are reported to be vigorous in virtually all categories.

Capital outlays are still

increasing, and perhaps at a somewhat faster pace, but the picture varies greatly
by product. Except for continued stringency in residential building materials,
supplies of goods are ample. Agricultural credit conditions have deteriorated
significantly in recent months.
for large business loans.

Demand for credit is generally strong except

Interest rates have strengthened moderately.

Concern expressed in the third quarter that the expansion might be at
or near a peak has largely dissipated. Most executives and analysts share the
opinion that activity will continue to grow, at least through the first half of
1978. Ready availability of virtually all purchased materials is encouraging
business firms to closely control, even reduce, inventories. However, holdings of
fuel oil and propane are very large, and will be maintained at high levels.
Major retailers report sales to be at good levels, and they plan on a
strong Christmas season. Hard goods continue to lead, while fashion-type apparel
is relatively weak. Home improvement items, automobile supplies, refrigerators,
electric ranges, microwave ovens (many from Japan), dryers, and disposers are
doing especially well.

Instalment credit is being used freely, indicating con-

sumer confidence, and delinquency experience is excellent.
The slowdown in auto deliveries in September partly reflected the delayed
availability of some new models.

These were introduced in early October, and

apparently were well received. The strength of the auto market varies greatly by
model. Periodic shutdowns of various district plants have been required to con-

trol stocks of less popular cars, while other models are in short supply. Inventories of popular imports are down sharply, which may be holding back sales.
The uptrend in sales of heavy trucks and trailers leveled in September
and October. Opinions differ as to whether this lull is only temporary. Sales
of light trucks, many to consumers, continue strong.
The auto industry, at least the two largest producers, are in the midst
of massive programs to downsize cars. Orders from the auto companies are largely
responsible for strength reported in machine tool orders, especially presses and
transfer machines. Originally concentrated in equipment, auto industry capital
spending programs now include a substantial commitment to new structures and
expansions of existing buildings to be ready in 1978, 1979, or later. There are
fears that the third and fourth ranking auto producers cannot finance the capital
outlays required to produce the mix of cars that will meet federal rules.
Most producers of capital equipment report orders to be "good but unspectacular."

Our impression is that the general picture is somewhat better than

a few months ago. Among the strongest types are machine tools, construction
equipment, freight cars, well-drilling apparatus, fluid power, and electric
motors. Farm equipment and heavy mining equipment are very weak. Orders for
mining equipment and replacement parts have been hurt by the iron miners' strike.
Many homebuilders complain that shortages of insulation have delayed
completions by a month or more.

Some have been unable to provide the extra heavy

insulation they had promised home buyers. Housing analysts expect that starts
in 1978 will be about the same as this year with apartments somewhat higher and
one-family units somewhat lower. Aside from insulation, there are complaints
of shortages, or poor quality, covering a long list of components.

Substitutions

often have been necessary. There is a general shortage of really skilled build—

ing trades workers, with consequent reports of "shoddy" construction.
Real estate transfers continue at a high level, about 30 percent above
last year. A wave of condominium conversions of rental units in buildings large
and small, new and old, is in progress with a substantial volume of funds required to finance purchases by (often reluctant) renters. Meanwhile, rents are
gradually rising to a point that is encouraging promoters of new apartment buildings. Mortgages funds continue to be generally available, but some S&Ls have
raised their basic rate from 8.75 to 9 percent. Usury ceilings are no longer a
threat in Illinois because a flexible formula is used now.
Nonresidential construction activity is improving.

Office buildings

lead the uptrend, but industrial building also is picking up. Virtually all new
plants or plant expansions are located in outlying areas or smaller towns. Outlays to build or repair highways and highway structures, and to build sewer and
water systems, are rather strong, but the rest of the public sector, especially
school buildings, is weak.
Our latest quarterly survey shows a decline in farmland values for the
first time since 1960. In the past five years these values had increased by 160
percent. The overall decline for the district for the third quarter was 1 percent, but reports by states range from an 8 percent decline for Illinois to a A
percent rise for Wisconsin.
Farm credit conditions have deteriorated markedly in recent months with
rapid loan growth, slower loan repayments, increased loan renewals, and reduced
bank liquidity. Almost half of the rural banks view their loan-deposit ratios
(now averaging 64 percent) as "excessive." This is about double the normal
proportion expressing this view.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS
Economic activity in the Eighth Federal Reserve District continues
upward, although the rate of increase has slowed from the rapid advances
early this year.

Some gains in consumer spending have occurred since last

summer. Manufacturing activity continues at a high rate, but with only
modest gains in recent weeks. Businessmen are generally satisfied with the
current level of inventories.

In some cases inventories have been increased

to reflect anticipated increases in sales, but reports indicate that cautious
inventory policies are being followed.

In the financial sector, demand has

been brisk for all types of loans. Crop yields in the District are generally
excellent and, on the whole, harvesting has proceeded ahead of schedule.
Consumer spending continues to increase relative to year ago levels.
Gains in sales since the summer months have been primarily in softgood items,
but big-ticket items, such as furniture, appliances, home improvement items,
and automobiles, have continued to sell at the relatively high midsummer
rates.

Strong Christmas holiday sales are anticipated by department store

representatives, and gains over a year ago are expected to be at least as
large as those posted in recent months.
Inventories at both the retail and manufacturing levels are reported
to be at a desirable level, given current sales expectations. Retailers note
inventories are sufficient to accommodate some increases in sales, but they
believe overstocking for the Christmas season has been avoided. A
manufacturing representative of a capital goods firm noted that inventories
have been built up for certain items in anticipation of future increases in
sales. While these inventories are now considered to be at a healthy level,

it was noted that a decline in sales from expected levels could substantially
alter this appraisal. One clothing manufacturer reported a greater than
preferred level of finished goods at the manufacturing level, but this
situation was improving rather than worsening.

In home construction,

inventories of unsold homes are quite low and some backlogs of buyers still
exist.
A recent slowing in savings inflows has been detected by financial
institutions.

Savings and loan association representatives report that

recent slower gains in savings deposits may be the result of rising market
rates relative to rates offered by financial Intermediaries. Commercial
banks have experienced Increases in total savings deposits, but most of the
increases were in higher-yielding time deposits and large certificates of
deposits.
Demand remains strong for most types of loans. Home mortgage loan
demand is still quite strong for this time of year. Earlier this year
mortgage lenders had difficulties in keeping up with the incoming
applications for loans, but the rush has subsided. Instead, lenders are now
actively seeking loans. Business loans at larger commercial banks have
picked up after several months of sluggishness. A representative of a large
commercial bank noted that demand for loans by large corporations was greater
than it had been for some time. Also, further gains in consumer, real
estate, and agricultural loans were registered in recent weeks.
Manufacturing activity continues at a high level. Strength
emlnatlng from the housing sector is noted by several manufacturers. A major
appliance manufacturer, for example, noted that contract sales to the housing
Industry have continued brisk, and that appliance sales at the retail level

have held up better than anticipated.

Suppliers of building materials, such

as heating equipment and connector plates, report sales on a seasonally
adjusted basis are still quite vigorous. A representative of a capital goods
firm pointed to substantial increases in orders from a year ago, and further
gains are anticipated next year. On the other hand, an apparel manufacturer,
serving mostly rural areas, reports little change in sales in recent months
as a result of lower farm incomes. Also, despite generally good sales of
chemicals, sales of some fibers and plastics have been less than expected,
partly reflecting sluggish export markets.
Crop yields are reported to be excellent and harvesting of crops has
continued at a generally satisfactory pace in the District. Cotton picking
is well ahead of normal and rice harvesting is virtually complete. On the
other hand, soybean harvesting has been held up by rainy weather and in some
areas of the District fall planting of wheat has been halted. Harvesting of
some crops is not likely to be resumed until freezes permit farm equipment to
be moved into the fields.

NINTH DISTRICT—MINNEAPOLIS
While still fairly strong, economic activity here shows some
signs of slowing. Consumers are still spending well in areas not hurt
by the iron ore strike or agriculture's problems. And farmers' income
outlook has actually improved somewhat recently. But some directors are
now concerned about excessive business inventories and an apparent
slowdown in homebuilding.
Consumer spending still strong
The district's strength and its two major weaknesses are still
reflected in reports about consumer spending.

Overall, retail sales

have been very good and are expected to remain so through the holiday
season. But the three-month-old iron ore workers' strike is depressing
income and spending in northeastern Minnesota and the Upper Peninsula of
Michigan.

People in areas dependent on agriculture have not had much to

spend either:

directors from North and South Dakota say farm-related

retail sales there have been only fair or "spotty," and about half of
the rural bankers responding to our October survey of ag credit conditions
said farmers were spending less than last year.
Ag outlook improved
Spending in rural areas may increase somewhat because farmers'
income prospects improved recently. Rain and insects did not hurt crops
as much as expected so farmers have more to sell than they thought.
They are getting more for their crops too: because of rumors of better
demand here and abroad, grain prices have stopped falling and some have

actually turned up. Further price improvement is likely since the
Russians' poorer-than-expected wheat harvest has been officially confirmed. More money will also be available from the government; the new
farm bill's target price on wheat could bring district farmers as much
as $300-350 million in subsidies this December.

Including government

payments, farm receipts from crops this year are now expected to at
least match last year's level.
Directors see these developments—especially the subsidies—as
helping rural banks' current liquidity problems.

Because farmers have

so far had little money to repay loans or save, rural bank liquidity is
tighter than usual.

In our October survey of rural bankers, 35 percent

called their loan-to-deposit ratio "high," more than the 29 percent in
July. The share with 70 percent or more of their deposits loaned out
increased from 36 to 42 percent. And in October a quarter of the bankers
were referring more than the usual number of loans to nonbank credit
agencies.
Concern about inventories and homebuilding
The weak ag sector looks a little better this month, but some
directors see signs of slowing in the district's relatively strong
business activity.
Although not yet indicating a widespread sales slowdown,
directors report some unexpected business inventory buildup. Directors
say the demand for pulp and paper in eastern Montana has weakened enough
to put inventories 25 percent above a year ago. And excess copper
inventories are depressing activity in Upper Michigan.

Several other

directors report inventories somewhat high but not yet a problem. One
says customers of his major manufacturing firm are cutting orders at the
slightest sign of weaker sales.
Housing activity appears to be slowing here too. Total residential
building permits in the district are still far above last year and the
1972 record level. And directors see strong homebuilding in Montana,
South Dakota, southwestern Wisconsin, and Minneapolis-St. Paul. But
Minneapolis-St. Paul realtors say the demand for housing there has
weakened recently. And directors note less building in North Dakota,
parts of Upper Michigan, and central Minnesota.
Some directors think homebuilding will slow further because
less mortgage money will be available.

Though right now funds are still

generally adequate throughout the district, directors in Montana and
South Dakota are concerned about high short-term interest rates drying
up funds in their states. A Minnesota director associated with the
housing industry actually expects disintermediation to cut this region's
residential construction 15 percent next year.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Economic conditions are generally good in the Tenth District, except
in agriculture, and even there some improvement is observed.

Directors and

business economists believe the expansion will continue at a slow-to-moderate
rate, held back largely by business reluctance to invest when there is so
much uncertainty.

A combination of price increases and government payments

has increased cash flow to farmers, although the squeeze continues. Loan
demand is up sharply in most banks, and expected to rise more rapidly
than deposits in the month ahead.
According to Directors contacted, the major stumbling block to
business fixed investment continues to be uncertainty about Federal Government policies and regulations.

This is also the refrain of economists

employed by businesses in the District.

For the most part, Directors and

business economists do not believe that developments in recent weeks have
jeopardized the outlook for moderately slow growth in the economy in the year
ahead.

Of those who offered comments on the rise in short-term interest rates,

all but one economist felt the increases were necessary to fight inflation.
With only a couple of exceptions, businesses intend to go through
with the purchases of plant and equipment that they had planned earlier.
General business conditions are observed to be good throughout the District,
except in areas especially dependent upon sales to grain farmers.

"They

aren't buying anything," says one Director, who also notes, "This credit
thing isn't getting any better out here (Kansas).

The banks say they

have gone as far as they can go, and some have told the farmers to consider selling some land."

Some signs of an easing in Tenth District farmers' cash flow problems are beginning to be observed.

For the first 7 months of 1977, cash re-

ceipts from farm marketings increased 1.5 per cent over year-earlier levels
for District farmers. Wheat and corn prices have slowly increased above
summer lows, although they are still quite depressed. Additionally, in
the District states, 222.4 million bushels of the 1977 wheat crop have
already been placed under Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) loans. In
most instances, the net proceeds to farmers of these loans have exceeded the
market price of the wheat.

Substantial quantities of 1977 corn are also

expected to go under CCC loans, again with net loan proceeds for many
of the loans likely to exceed cash corn prices.

Of the $1.2 billion in

deficiency payments the Nation's wheat farmers will receive late this year
under the target-price program, an estimated $501 million (42 per cent
of the total) will be paid to wheat farmers in the Tenth District states.
Payments will average almost $19 for each acre of wheat harvested in
these states during 1977. Finally, fat cattle and feeder cattle prices
are presently almost 13 per cent above year-earlier levels, while hog
prices are currently 33 per cent above year-earlier levels. Thus, although
the farm-price squeeze continues, District farmers are experiencing some
modest improvement in cash flow.
The monthly survey of Tenth District bankers indicates that, for
most respondents, loan demand is up sharply.

Strength of the individual

bank's loan portfolio reflects the economic diversity of the District.
Construction loans for residential building, especially one-family homes,
are reported strong in the Denver and Lincoln areas, while energy-related
loan demand is reported strong in Oklahoma and in Denver.

Other respondents

indicate that inventory loans and correspondent bank loans are contributory
factors in the strength of loan demand.
Most respondents dealing in agricultural loans say that, in general,
new agricultural loans are simply extensions of old loans.

One Denver banker

feels that some of these loans have become illiquid, especially in overlines from rural banks to large banks.

One respondent mentions that the

agricultural loan market was very tight in September, but has since eased
due to the harvest being near completion and to the sale of grain inventories.
A majority of respondents expect loan demand to increase more
rapidly than usual during the next month, although none expect strong
agricultural loan demand. The expectation of strong loan demand in the
future is reflected by the raising of prime rates to 7 3/4 per cent, an
action taken by all but one banker surveyed. Almost all bankers expect
future loan demand to outstrip deposit inflows, requiring them to use
CD's as well as nondeposit sources of funds such as Fed funds.
Most bankers report that time and savings inflows had slowed
or stopped in October.
mediation.

Only a very few report any evidence of disinter-

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Economic indicators suggest that business conditions in the Eleventh
District are continuing to strengthen, and Directors, businessmen, and bankers
contacted this month remain generally optimistic.

Industrial output has re-

bounded after a brief lull. The rate of unemployment declined slightly in
September, and Directors report that skilled labor remains in short supply
in most urban areas. Housing starts eased some recently but still remain at
a high level. Automobile dealers report that new cars are selling especially
well, and retailers are very optimistic concerning Christmas sales this year.
Most businesses indicate that inventory levels are good. Total bank loans
continue to show good growth, although bankers generally indicate continuing
disappointment over the strength in commercial and industrial loans. Farm
incomes are down somewhat due to lower prices for crops.
The 1978 model automobiles are being well received. All auto dealers
interviewed report higher sales of both fleet and consumer cars this year, and
several dealers indicate they have experienced record sales during this introductory period. Price increases seem to have had little impact on purchases.
All dealers report a strong demand for intermediate- and large-size cars with
optional equipment. Many dealers report an exceptionally high volume of large
luxury car sales, and Ford dealers indicate they could sell twice as many
Thunderbirds as they can get. Nevertheless, smaller cars, such as Ford's Fiesta
and GM*s Chevette subcompacts, are selling extremely well. Most of the dealers
have very low stocks of 1977 models, and inventories of 1978 models are down,
especially on some of the hottest selling models.

A "good" volume of orders was placed at a recent showing of women's
spring apparel at the Dallas Apparel Mart. Most "buyers—largely from, small
retail outlets—are cautiously optimistic about the prospects for future sales.
Some bookings resulted because retailers feel that apparel costs may rise
significantly next year when wage adjustments, stemming from the increased
minimum wage, work into production costs. Retailers report consumers continue
to be highly sensitive to price increases. Sales in rural communities are
off because of depressed farm incomes, but sales are expected to strengthen
somewhat when the government begins to disburse deficiency payments. Another
factor that is affecting current sales is the unseasonably warm weather for
this time of year.

Inventories of winter merchandise are high. And if un-

seasonal temperatures persist, retailers may be forced to cut prices before
Christmas to reduce stocks.
Prospects for retail sales for the remainder of the year are very good.
Most retailers contacted indicate that Christmas sales this year are well
ahead of last season, and in some stores, sales have already exceeded even
their optimistic forecasts. Price increases have not averaged more than the
general rate of inflation. Inventory levels are good to adequate at most
establishments.
Interviews with District bankers and Directors reflect that total loan
demand is continuing to strengthen but more slowly than expected. Real estate
and consumer loans appear to be the main areas of strength at most banks, although some banks in Dallas and Houston report some further growth in loan
demand from energy-related industries. Bankers note that there still is no
evidence of a rising volume of machinery purchases, oil field equipment excluded.
Machinery manufacturers are holding inventories at low levels.

All bankers contacted indicate that disintermediation as a result of
recent increases in short-term interest rates probably has been small or nonexistent thus far.

Some shifting of funds from savings deposits to large CD's

was noted, however, and most of the contacts feel that disintermediation would
occur as time deposits mature and short-term rates continue to rise.
Cash receipts from farm and ranch marketings for the District states
in the first eight months of this year were 2 percent above the same period
a year earlier.

Although showing a cumulative gain of 6 percent, receipts from

crop sales have slowed considerably as prices for cotton, soybeans, and corn
have fallen sharply.

Prices for wheat, oats, barley, and grain sorghum have

strengthened somewhat in the past two months but remain well below levels a
year ago.

As a result, crop sales are also likely to decline further in coming

months despite a bumper cotton crop.

Because of low market prices, a significant

portion of the 1977 cotton and grain crops will likely be placed under the
nonrecourse loan program of the Commodity Credit Corporation.

Livestock sales

this year have lagged year-earlier levels, but receipts probably will increase
during the remainder of 1977 with a small rise in fed cattle marketings and
strengthening cattle prices.
match last year's level.

Altogether, cash receipts for 1977 may only

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRAilCISCO
The Western economy is still growing, but with a few weak spots.
Retail sales are mixed - strong in some places, sluggish in others.

Inventories

are generally at desired levels. The industrial picture is also mixed—
many industries growing nicely but problems in pulp and paper, aerospace and
oteel.

The current kingpin of the Western economy is construction, where single

family building continues strong, but multiple unit and commercial appear
even stronger.
lending.

Demand continues strong for both construction and mortgage

While there is concern about disintermediation, little has been

observed.
Retail sales appear uneven in the West.

Some areas report strong

sales, particularly in small cars, while others report sluggish sales. Third
quarter retail sales were up 14.5 percent in Utah and 14.0 percent in Idaho
over a year ago.

Food sales in Seattle are a bit weak, due partly to the

fact that the Boeing strike involves some 2 1/2 percent of the total Seattle
work force. Also, a national clothing manufacturer located in the district
reports mediocre sales.

Inventories appear to be generally at desired levels.

The Western industrial picture is mixed.

The forest products industry

is generally in good health, except for the pulp and paper portion which was
declared by one director to be a "disaster area."

Alumimum orders have leveled

off temporarily, but there is said to be fundamental growth in the demand for
aluminum from the food and transportation sectors,' so that output next year
is expected to increase beyond a rather good 1977. Aerospace is hampered
by strikes at both Boeing and Lockheed.

Steel production in Oregon is said

to be depressed by foreign imports, but overall, Oregon manufacturing continues

strong as Indicated in the rising employment figures.
ventures were noted in the Pacific Northwest.

Two new food export

One is an operation which has

begun to ship a planeload of live beef to Japan each week, and the other is a
project by a large Seattle food distributor to fly fresh meat and produce to
a new supermarket in the Middle East.
Directors from Utah and Idaho claim not to be experiencing a pause
in their economies.

Most firms are said to be far out-stripping their level

of output of the previous year.

Significant employment gains in construction,

mining and manufacturing are cited for Utah.
Construction appears to be the sector of strength in the Western
economy. While average unemployment rates remain high, there is virtually no
unemployment in construction.

Some areas are actually reporting shortages

of such skilled workers as electricians, carpenters and plumbers. However,
there have been two shifts taking place:, one is the diffusion of the construction
boom from California to other Western states and the other is a shift from
single family units to multiple units and non-residential construction.
Southern California reports an end to the lotteries and overnight
sellouts of subdivisions, and developers are becoming a bit more cautious
by putting up smaller blocks of houses at a time. Homes are remaining on
the market longer and there is more price bargaining.

While the level of

single family construction continues high, the real growth in Southern California
has been in commercial and industrial construction, which for the first 9
months of this year was up 110 percent over the same period last year. Even
this rapid growth has apparently not kept pace with demand, for a shortage
of prime, new office space is said to be developing.

Construction of multiple

family units is experiencing growth through California —

100,400 multiple

unit permits were taken out in September, the largest number since February.
In Utah, 1977 home building is estimated to be up 47 perment over
last year. There, as in several other areas, shortages of such building
materials as insulation, cement and sheetrock have been reported.

In Oregon,

residential construction continues strong and the previously sluggish nonresidential sector took off in August at a level 300 percent higher than
a year ago. Portland, in particular, is said to have experienced more rapid
expansion of commercial construction in the past three months than ever
before in history.

One observer listed over $300 million worth of hotel,

office and hospital projects currently underway in the Portland area.
Consistent with the strong pace of construction and real estate sales,
the demand for both mortgage and construction is described as "high," "brisk"
and "strong" all over the district, though some areas report a leveling off
in demand.

Reports from Southern California, in particular, note that while-

mortgage demand is still strong, it is less than in the first half of the year
when real estate speculation was at its peak.

It is explained that most of

the pent-up demand for homes has run its course and consumers have become
slightly more cautious about incuring additional debt.
A number of directors addressed the question of disintermediation,
but only one felt he had observed any signs of the phenomenon having actually
begun. While banks in smaller towns felt there would be no problem until 90day Treasury bill rates hit 7 1/2 to 8 percent, large California banks felt
6 1/2 percent would be enough to trigger a mild degree of disintermediation.
Still, even one of these larger bankers observed that a prolonged or extensive
shortage of

mortgage credit similar to 1969 and 1974 is not expected because

financial institutions are more liquid now and interest rates.are not expected
to reach double-digit levels.

