CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 15, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 22
Eighth District-St. Louis page 25
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 28
Tenth District-Kansas City page 31
Eleventh District-Dallas page 34
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 37

*

SUMMARY

[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
The overall impression that emerges from this month's district
comments is that while the severe weather in many parts of the country and,
to a more limited extent, the spreading effects of the coal strike, have
somewhat weakened the economy's momentum, the interruption is likely to be
only temporary.

The retail sale outlook remains good, with merchants

generally expecting a strong spring season.

The underlying demand for housing

• continues at a high level, although some concern was voiced over an actual
or potential rise in mortgage rates.

Business inventories generally are still

in line with sale expectations, and there were signs of a strengthening in the
business capital spending sector.

Concern over inflation continues, reinforced

by the implications of the coal negotiations.

The demand for business loans

seems to have strengthened, on balance.
The impact of the coal strike on production and employment appears
to be limited so far.

Cleveland thus reports that electric power shortages

have affected employment in its district only "minimally" and far less than
indicated in widely publicized estimates, and notes that its eeonomic respondents .were "unconcerned" about the long-range effect of the strike.

Richmond

reports further curtailment of energy supplies to commercial and industrial
users, but expects losses in terms of employment and production to be small if
coal shipments are resumed shortly.

Atlanta notes that so far only from

Tennessee and Alabama have reports of strike-related "significant" disruption
of production emerged, although it feels further curtailments might induce

massive layoffs if coal shipments are not forthcoming quickly.

According to

Chicago, the coal strike began to adversely impact output in late February,
but the effect so far has been "relatively minor", largely confined to Indiana,
and is expected to be quickly reversed after the strike is settled.

St. Louis

also reports only "relatively minor" effect from the strike, and, indeed, sees
modest gains in manufacturing activity in recent weeks.

Minneapolis feels the

strike is not affecting industrial activity in its area, as do New York and
Boston, although concern was expressed in those two districts over the potential
adverse impact should the strike be prolonged much longer.

That for the present

underlying manufacturing conditions remain firm, however, is suggested by the
number of reports of increases or continued strength in manufacturers' shipments,
new orders, and the growing backlog of orde.rs, emanating from, among others,
Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, Dallas and St. Louis.
Consumer spending continued to be depressed by inclement weather over
large parts of the country, with more than half of the districts mentioning
this as a factor.

Retailers, however, generally remain relatively optimistic

about the near-term outlook.

Boston thus reports that retail sales in New

England have weakened, but that bad weather was "undoubtedly" a contributing
factor, while New York notes that consumer spending in that District appears to
be shaking off its "winter doldrums" with retailers throughout the District
looking to a strong spring season.

Similar sentiments are expressed by several

other banks, including Philadelphia, Cleveland, St. Louis and Kansas City.
Richmond sees continued improvement in total sales, with retailers remaining
optimistic.

Atlanta reports year-to-year sales

gains of 10 to 15 percent

in most areas of that District, and a rise in late February in retail sales is
reported by Dallas.

Minneapolis characterizes consumer spending as "good to

normal", except in rural areas particularly hard hit by cold weather, and while
San Francisco reports that unusually heavy rains have dampened sales in Southern
California, consumer spending remains strong in the northern part of the state.
While bad weather also hampered construction activity in a number of
areas, underlying demand in that industry appears to remain strong according
to those banks that comment on this subject.

Atlanta thus reports that recent

high rates of residential construction have not been able to keep pace with
demand, while St. Louis reports that demand for new homes continuesat a high
level.

Cleveland notes that while bad weather has depressed housing activity

in its District, demand for mortgage money continues strong, as do Minneapolis
and Dallas.

Some concern was expressed

in several districts, however, that

rising mortgage interest rates associated with a weakening of deposit inflows at
thrift institutions might eventually reduce mortgage demand.
Business inventories by and large remain in balance.

Retail inven-

tories thus are characterized as "well under control" by Boston, and at or
near desired levels by Richmond, Dallas, Kansas City and St. Louis.

Some

respondents in the Chicago, San Francisco and Cleveland districts felt inventories to be too high, but others too low.

Retailers' inventories in the New

York district were regarded as a bit on the high side.

At the manufacturing

level, inventories in general appeared to be in line with expected sales, although Chicago reports a buildup in farm equipment inventories and there remains
a widespread feeling among Richmond manufacturers that current stocks exceed
desired levels.
There were indications of some improvements in business spending

on plant and equipment.

Boston thus reports increases in machine tool orders,

while Atlanta notes that tool and diemakers axe enjoying excellent business.
A steel economist in the Cleveland district sees signs of "accelerating"
orders from capital good producers.

Chicago reports an expected rise this

year in business capital outlays, both for equipment and structures,while
Philadelphia characterizes the capital spending plans of its respondents as
remaining strong.
Concern continued to be expressed over actual and prospective increases in prices and wages.

More specifically, Chicago expects the "very

large increase" in compensation which the eventual coal settlement will entail
to stimulate wage demands in other industries.

Minneapolis reports that the

coal negotiations have already affected wage demands in that district, while
respondents in the Cleveland district expect a sharp rise in coal prices this
year.
The demand for business loans is reported as strong or on the upswing
by several banks, including St. Louis, Dallas, Chicago and Philadelphia, but
as flat or below expectations by San Francisco and New York.
demand for consumer and other types of loans were mixed.

Reports on the

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

First District respondents remain encouraged about the performance of
the New England economy.
national situation.
weather.
well.

There is, however, significant concern about the

Retail sales have weakened, but this is attributed to poor

Inventories are well under control.

Manufacturers appear to be doing

Loan demand is moderately good and expected to improve.
Retail sales in New England have weakened but bad weather was undoubtedly

a contributing factor; so it is difficult to determine the underlying trend in
consumer spending.

A representative of a large department store chain believes

he sees the beginning of more long lived slowing in retail sales.

However, in

northern New England the tourist industry and all the retail outlets associated
with it are faring very well.

Also, New England telephone companies report a

very active installation business, a phenomenon which they feel is indicative
of general economic health.

Retail inventories are low and no problems are

expected in this area.
In the manufacturing sector, most reports are favorable.

In northern

New England the electronics and plastics industries are enjoying healthy
demand; backlogs for machine tools continue to grow.

Large employers in the

high technology fields in Massachusetts are also reported to be doing well.
One large producer of instruments has a nine month order backlog.

Another

reports that they are still below capacity but that order backlogs are significantly above this time a year ago.
defense purchases.

The region continues to benefit from large

The one negative note, a mild one, came from a supplier to

the tire industry; sales of a key ingredient in tires are down 10 percent from
a year ago.

Other chemicals made by the same company are also off slightly.

As yet, New England has not seen any effects of the coal strike, although there
is some concern about what will happen next month.
Loan demand at commercial banks is fairly good and is expected to get
better.

According to one of the region's largest banks, domestic loan demand

is not as strong as desired, but there is substantial optimism about 1978.

A

medium-size bank in northern New England reports that commercial loan demand
is very strong, although there has been some seasonal weakening in construction
loans.

Installment loan business after a brief slump has picked up.
Conversations with consultants following national industries indicate

that, aside from the coal strike, shortages are not going to be an issue in
1978.

There are some shortages of fine coated papers but these can .easily be

dealt with by turning to imports or- heavier grades.

One manufacturer reports

difficulties getting electronics components, particularly those from California.
In the steel industry, cutbacks in capacity combined with continued recovery
could produce shortages of certain products after 1980; however, at present
only oil and gas drilling equipment is in short supply.

In addition, despite

its dependence on coal, the steel industry is not any more likely to be affected
by the coal strike than are other industries in the mid-west.

Coke stockpiles

are substantial and electric power cutbacks will limit production before coke
availability becomes a constraint.

In petrochemicals and most of the paper

industry the problem is overcapacity.

Among these consultants there is

considerable concern about the impact of higher interest rates on the housing
industry.

One lumber specialist claims that when rates on Treasury bills reach

6 percent, there is a marked effect on housing and consequently on the lumber
"industry.

In the energy sector, the natural gas situation has improved.

last year was better than expected and this experience combined with price

Production

increases has led at least one energy expert to increase his production
forecasts for 1978.
Professors Houthakker, Eckstein and Solow were available for comment
this month.

All respondents agree that the dollar cannot be successfuly

"defended" on foreign exchange markets unless the imbalance in our trade and
capital accounts is corrected.

Moreover, the recent decline in the dollar's

exchange rate represent a normal market response to our foreign deficit.
In time, the declining dollar will encourage foreign demand for our exports
and discourage our demand for imported goods; in this manner the recent
depreciation of the dollar will bring our accounts back into balance.
According to Eckstein, many businessmen fear that the defense of unrealistic
dollar exchange rates will ultimately lead to exchange controls and further
import restrictions.

Although Houthakker recognizes the need to temporarily

settle disorderly conditions which may arise occasionally on exchange markets,
he recommends selling gold rather than accumulating large debts in foreign
currencies.
Due to the coal strike and the winter weather, Eckstein expects
2.4 percent real growth during the first quarter of this year.

Much of the

lost activity will then be regained in the second quarter when growth will
exceed 6 percent.

Despite this acceleration, Eckstein expects that real GNP

will average only 4 percent growth during 1978, and there is a 45 percent
chance that weak demands or a credit crunch in the second half of the year
could push the year's expansion close to 3.5 percent.

He believes it is

important for the Fed not to be misled by the "snap-back" in activity during
the coming months, the problem for 1978 is to avoid losing too much momentum.
Solow is surprised by the sharp decline in the reported unemployment
rate since the end of 1977.

The slow economic growth suggests that policy

should not become tighter; with low rates of capacity utilization and the
modest growth forecasts for 1978, the Fed should still be concerned about maintaining the recovery and regaining full production.
Neither Houthakker or Solow believe that the recent behavior of the
wholesale price index and the consumer price index warrant reaction from the
Fed.

It is inappropriate to address problems of food shortages with aggregate

monetary policy. Recognizing that food prices are highly volatile, especially
during periods of adverse weather, Houthakker has not changed his forecast of
inflation, 6 to 7 percent for 1978.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District has still not fully recovered the momentum it lost earlier in the year when the harsh winter weather
beset the region, according to recent accounts of directors and other business
leaders.

Retailers reported that, while their sales had picked up in February

and early March, adverse weather continued to act as an impediment.

Retail

inventory stocks are regarded as being a bit on the high side, but merchants
foresee a strong spring season and plan to run down their excess stocks then.
Meanwhile, the coal strike does not seem to have had much effect on production in the district.

But businessmen doubt that this immunity will continue

if the strike lasts very much longer.

On the financial side, although busi-

ness loan demand has remained sluggish at large banks in the district, some
see a modest strengthening in the coming months.
Consumer.spending in the district appears to be shaking off its
winter doldrums.

Downstate merchants reported a pickup in their sales in

February and early March, following the abrupt downturn in January.

They

generally felt, moreover, that the gains would have been even bigger if
there had been more of a let-up in the weather.

Elsewhere in the district,

retail sales appear to have been fairly flat, though signs of an increase
in consumer durable purchases were reported in the Buffalo area.

Throughout

the district, however, retailers remain confident and look forward to a
strong spring season.
Inventory stocks at retail establishments are reportedly running on
the high side.

A director of this Bank suggested that the high inventories

were due in part to the prevailing optimism regarding the sales outlook.

Indeed, many retailers did mention that they are expecting strong retail
sales in the spring and that this turnover will bring their inventory stocks
into balance with sales.

Furthermore, among the merchants who were queried,

none expressed concern about excess inventories.

Outside of the retailing

sector, inventories were viewed as in line with sales.
Among those people who were contacted, few felt that their business
operations had been hampered thus far by the coal strike.

One business

economist, who monitors the national economy, thought that the strike was
having harmful effects nationwide.

But neither he nor anybody else mentioned

specific harmful effects that the strike had had on businesses located in the
Second District.

At the same time, it was generally agreed that a prolonga-

tion of the coal strike would soon begin to constrict business activity in
the region.
Responses to the mid-February Quarterly Survey of Bank Lending
Practices suggest that business loan demand in the Second District was weaker
than anticipated in the mid-November Survey.

Although nine of the 16 reporting

large banks had expected moderate strengthening, only five respondents indicated
such gains while one reported much stronger demand.

The remaining ten banks

reported the strength of loan demand as unchanged since mid-November.

Data

for large weekly reporting banks in the Second District generally indicate
a flat picture of loan demand with seasonally unadjusted commercial and industrial loans (excluding bankers' acceptances) rising by $14 million to $37,248
million from November 16, 1977 to February 15, 1978.

At New York City large

weekly reporters, the comparable change was a decline of $171 million to $32,048

million.

Seasonally adjusted data for these New York City banks show an

increase of $54 million to $32,177 million in commercial and industrial loans
between November 16 and February 15.
In spite of weaker than anticipated loan demand reported in midFebruary, half of the surveyed banks expected moderately stronger loan demand
in the three months ending in mid-May.

However, six of the respondents an-

ticipated no change in loan demand, while the remaining two expected demand
to be moderately weaker.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications from the Third District are that economic activity is
generally sluggish.

Manufacturers report only a weak increase in business

activity, and continued in£lement weather has taken the steam out of retail
sales.

Over the next two quarters, manufacturers look for renewed expansion

in their sector, but retailers say unresolved tax policies and inflation
raise unanswered questions about the next six months.

Area bankers report

stronger business loan demand in March, but they too are uncertain about future
conditions.

They foresee an increase in interest rates, along with the

possibility of disintermediation.
Manufacturers responding to the latest Business Outlook Survey
indicate some improvement in business conditions in March.

In terms of specific

indicators, new orders and shipments are both reported to be higher in March,
while inventories are stable.

On the job scene, factory work forces are

essentially unchanged for the fifth straight month, but the average workweek
is reported to be slightly longer.
Comments by Directors of this Bank are consistent with these reports.
They indicate that despite bad weather and the nationwide coal strike, business volume is holding up well.

One director, representing the energy industry,

attributes the negligible effects of the coal strike to several factors,
including the flow of non-union coal into the area.

Moreover, as we move into

a low power usage season, the demand for coal tapers off, making shortages less
serious.
For the longer term, Business Outlook Survey respondents still look for
gains, but the proportion of respondents expecting improvement continues to diminish,

as it has done since the beginning of 1977.

In the current Survey, less than

half of those polled forecast a pickup in business activity over the next two
quarters, compared to almost 90 percent a year ago.

New orders and shipments

are projected to increase, but again by a shrinking percentage of respondents.
Moreover, there is less optimism among manufacturers about the employment
situation than there has been since September.

The size of factory payrolls

is expected to increase only fractionally over the next six months, with
virtually no change in average weekly hours worked.
however, are still strong.

Capital spending plans,

Over 40 percent of the respondents to the Survey

report plans to increase expenditures on plant and equipment between now and
September.
Price increases in the industrial sector are becoming more prevalent.
In this month's Survey, half of the respondents report paying higher prices
for inputs, while over one-third say they are charging more for their finished
products.

As for the future, manufacturers look for continued price hikes.

About 75 percent of those surveyed say they expect to pay more for raw
materials by the end of the summer, and about 70 percent plan to increase the
prices of the goods they sell.
Current retail sales are reported to be flat or slightly ahead of
last year, according to merchants contacted this month.

These levels are

generally at or marginally below planned sales volume for this period.

Retailers

point to weather as the major cause of depressed sales throughout the first
quarter.

They say, however, that lost sales should be made up, at least in

part, in the spring buying season.
Retailers are unsure about the level of future sales.

They say that

unresolved tax policy and the uncertain course of future inflation disallow

any definite position.

Should a tax cut be instituted and inflation not

worsen, merchants look for some gains in real sales over the next six months.
Commercial bankers in the area say that consumer loan demand is
weaker than it has been recently.
as expected.

Business borrowing is stronger, but about

Bankers attributed the departure from the recent sluggish trend

in business loan demand to several factors.

They believe that executives

generally expect higher interest rates in the future and are attempting to
take advantage of current rates.

Moreover, at least one bank in the region

is offering fixed-rate, short-term loans.

Contacts at that bank say the

recent increase in borrowing there is, in large part, the result of that
program.
For the longer term, contacts were uncertain about the future
course of business loan demand.

Current projections over the next two

quarters range from "no change" to "moderate expansion."
Area bankers say that higher short-term interest rates have had only
a negligible effect on deposit flow at this time.

They do, however, antici-

pate significant disintermediation should short-term rates rise another 50
basis points—and bankers expect that they will.

Inflationary pressures, off-

set somewhat by slower economic growth,, are expected to push interest rates
up over the next six months, with a prime rate (currently 8 percent at all
of the banks contacted) at 8 1/2 percent by September.

Despite the possibility

of deposit outflows though, a credit crunch similar to that of 1974 is not
foreseen, because banks are generally more liquid now than they were at that
time.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The coal strike and unseasonably cold weather have continued to hamper
production, sales, income, and distribution in the Fourth District.
effects of the coal strike on employment have been minimal.

Indirect

Economists who

attended this Bank's recent meeting on the economic outlook still expect growth
in output *&t about a 3.8 percent annual rate and a 6 percent rate of inflation
from the fourth quarter 1977 to the fourth quarter 1978.

Retailers have

experienced spotty sales for the past several weeks but remain relatively
optimistic that sales will pick up from recent low levels.

Savings and loan

associations have not cut back commitments or loans despite continued softening
in deposit flows.
Electric power shortages have affected employment in the District
minimally and far less than indicated in widely publicized estimates.

Some

manufacturers, as in the case of steel, have had to stretch out production to
protect energy supplies.
and heating.

More typically, they have cut back on hours, lighting,

In some cases, they are diverting production to other plants not

affected by the power shortage.

Moreover, many manufacturers have resorted

to alternate power sources, especially their own power generators.

Estimates

indicate that industrial layoffs have affected perhaps 3,5000 to 5,000 of the
1,650,000 manufacturing workers in the District.

Utilities in Ohio still have

coal stocks that range from 35 to 55 days' supply, not much less than a month
ago, and the only utility that has a mandatory curtailment is the smallest
one in the state that serves portions of southern Ohio.

Utilities in the

Pittsburgh area have the lowest coal supplies and are operating with mandatory
curtailment, ranging from 10 percent to 25 percent.

Other utilities are

reluctant to estimate when mandatory controls might he imposed, given the
highly fluid supply situation and flexibilities of large industrial users.
Manufacturers generally claim they can continue to operate without major
layoffs even, if 25 percent power cutbacks are mandated, and some assert they
can adjust to as much as a 50 percent cutback because of backup power and
conservation measures.
Economists who attended this Bank's quarterly meeting on the
District's economy earlier this month were unconcerned about the long-range
effects of the weather and coal strike.

The median forecast of 29 economists

shows continued expansion throughout the year, with a 4.3 percent annual rate
of gain in real GNP during the first half of 1978, followed by a 3.4 percent
rate in the second half.

Although the economists do not expect a credit crunch

in 1978 despite increased demand, some viewed the probability of a crunch and
recession in 1979 as very high.

Several also expect continued upward pressure

on interest rates in 1978, with the Federal funds rate rising to 8'percent in
the fourth quarter of 1978.
Retailers still anticipate some spring rebound that would boost sales
from weakened first-quarter levels, although expected gains are not likely to
be as strong as in the final quarter of last year.

Strengthening from lows in

January has been spotty partly because of frigid weather in February.

Some

retailers also point out that a letup in sales was expected after last quarter's
surge in sales.

Inventories have been raised to unacceptable levels because of

unexpectedly slow apparel sales, according to an economist with a major department
store chain.
Eight automotive producers and suppliers forecast that domestic new
car sales in 1978 would range from 8.3 million to 9.0 million units, with imports

amounting to 1.7-1.9 million.

Another economist placed total new car sales

this year at 10.9 million units.

He acknowledges that sales have been running

somewhat below that projection because of bad weather, the coal strike, and low
public response to GMC styling of intermediate cars.
to revise his expectations downward at this time.

Still, he is reluctant

For the longer term, he

expressed concern that imports from Japan may seriously threaten domestic
producers and sees little prospect for relief from a high level of auto imports
from Japan over the next few years.

According to his estimates, Japan has a

large capacity to build cars especially for the export market and has a sizable
cost advantage estimated at $650 per car over United States auto producers.
This year, for example, Japanese motor vehicle production is expected to be
stepped up to about 9.3 million, an increase of 800,000 from 1977.

Virtually

all this increase can be exported.
Bad weather depressed housing activity in the District again in .
February, but demand for mortgage money continues to be strong.

Although

savings and loan associations are increasingly concerned over further slowing
in deposits last month, they are not cutting back on commitments.

Liquidity

continues to shrink, and a few associations indicate that they are virtually at
the ceiling of reserve requirements.

They will be required to step up their

borrowing and to increase their use of the secondary mortgage market to support
mortgage loan activity.

Some lenders are less apprehensive about commitments

and lending prospects because they hold a higher volume of certificates than
they did in 1973.

An economist with a Federal Home Loan Bank in this District

believes that certificates are providing some protection against rising interest
rates.

His estimates show that, if savings and loan associations had the same

deposit mix as prevailed at the beginning of 1973, the slowdown in savings

deposits would be at least $3.5 billion larger than otherwise.

He expects

1.8-1.9 million new housing starts this year.
Several District officials and economists consider inflation of
greater concern than the power shortage.

Despite some potential benefit to

domestic steel producers, reference pricing of steel will raise prices, according
to some producers of steel fasteners and metal, products.

Higher priced steel

would cause users to raise prices for finished products, which already are at
a competitive price disadvantage with foreign supplies.
Coal prices are expected to rise sharply this year.

An economist with

a large coal producer estimates that a 37 percent contract settlement for the
coal industry would raise the price of utility and industrial steam coal about
9.4 percent in 1978 and another 4.6 percent next year.

In addition, environ-

mental regulations will boost coal cost by $2 per ton.

On the other hand, prices

of crude oil, according to an oil economist, can be expected to increase less
than the assumed 6 percent underlying rate of inflation this year because of
ample capacity and slow growth of demand.
Steel economists are still relatively optimistic that.production and
shipments of steel products will be about 10 percent stronger than last year.
Because production at some mills is being stretched out to protect coke supplies,
orders for this quarter are running ahead of production and shipments. While
uncertain about the effects of reference pricing of steel, economists expect
steel imports to fall from 19 million tons last year to about 14-18 million
tons this year.

One economist, who sees signs of accelerating orders from

capital producers, believes the industry may be operating close to capacity by
the year-end.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Despite some continuing disruptions from weather and strike related
energy curtailments Fifth District business activity made some further advances
over the past month.

Responses to our survey of District manufacturers suggest

continued improvement in the volume of new orders and further increases in
backlogs of orders as well as a minor rebound of shipments.

On a less favorable

note, however, expanding inventories and rising prices were increasingly widespread.

In addition, retailers apparently experienced another good month in

terms of total sales.

In spite of these improvements, however, the expectations

of manufacturers deteriorated further in February.

Judging from our survey

responses, the general outlook is now weaker than at any time since last October.
A major factor here seems to be the continued uncertainty regarding coal and
other energy supplies over the short-term.
Of manufacturers responding to our survey nearly 40% report increased
volumes of new orders in the past month and nearly as many report larger backlogs
of orders than a month earlier.
level of shipments last month.

In addition, almost one-third report a higher
Nonetheless, inventories of materials and finished

goods generally expanded over the month and there remains a widespread feeling
that current stocks exceed desired levels.

Employment among manufacturers surveyed

apparently declined slightly during the latest survey period and the average work
week was essentially unchanged.
In the retail sector, survey responses suggest continued improvement
in total sales and in the relative sales of big ticket items.

Inventories at

retail were unchanged over the past month and are now generally in line with
desired levels.

Among respondents from both the manufacturing and retail sectors
reports of rising prices continue widespread.

Over half of the manufacturers

surveyed report increases in prices paid over the past month.

With respect

to the outlook for business activity over the next six months, retailers
remain basically optimistic.

Manufacturers show considerable disagreement.

But approximately one-half of the manufacturers surveyed anticipate little or
no change in activity over the next six months while the rest are about evenly
divided between expecting worsening and improving conditions.

Much of the

uncertainty among manufacturers appears to be linked to growing concern about energy
availability.

Resolution of the coal strike could result in a significant

improvement in attitudes among manufacturers, although some respondents believe
that business currently being lost because of energy curtailments will be difficult
to make-up later.
In the past week several utility companies in the District moved into the
second phase of emergency plans in an effort to cope with dwindling coal stocks.
In general, this meant further curtailments of energy supplies to commercial and
industrial users.

It is not clear at this point what these curtailments will

involve in terms of employment and production, but it appears likely that losses
will be small if coal shipments are resumed in fairly short order.
Bank credit activity in the Fifth District over the past several weeks,
after accounting for seasonal influences, appears moderate.

Real estate lending

continues to be depressed as a result of a weather related slow down, while
consumer lending has essentially leveled off.

Regional businesses, however,

have increased their borrowings from District banks.

At weekly reporting banks,

lending to regional firms is concentrated in the intermediate and short-term
categories.

Demand for credit by large national firms is soft.

In the agricultural sector, estimated total cash receipts from farm
marketings in 1977 show the District figure about 5 percent below the 1976 level
as against a gain of about 1 percent nationally.

This comparison would seem to

suggest that the proportion of farmers with cash-flow problems may be somewhat
larger in the District than in the nation as a whole.

A 3 percent increase in

District livestock receipts only partially offset an 11 percent decline in
cash income from crop marketings.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

With the return of milder weather, business activity generally resumed a moderately strong pace.

Used car sales have spurted rather suddenly

as new auto purchases have risen falteringly.

Fervent housing demand has

thinned inventories, aroused speculation (notably by foreign investors),
and broadened the rise in mortgage interest rates.
dustries show signs of reviving.

Several sluggish in-

Weather-related supply disruptions and

overburdened transport systems may yet result in lost sales, however.

If

coal shipments are not forthcoming quickly, TVA curtailments will induce
massive layoffs in a large portion of the District.
Only from "Tennessee and Alabama have we heard reports of significant
disruptions of production because of the coal strike.

These include short-

ening of work hours, the closing of a mobile home production plant, and the
idling of barges and tow boats.
holding 1.7 million tons.

TVA seems to be in the most dire position,

At one million tons, it will impose mandatory

industrial curtailments of 30 percent.

Though its recent award of contracts

for one million tons of western coal gave cause for hope last week, the
drain on its supplies has accelerated and rail transport problems have dimmed
prospects for timely deliveries.

The 30-percent cutback would result in

estimated layoffs of 75,000 workers in 1,200 industries, spreading to 136,000
if it lasts longer than a month.

Alabama Power, with a 40-day supply, will

curtail service by 10 percent if stocks dip to 35 days by imposing a 20percent reduction in the operating hours of schools, businesses, institutions,
and plants.

Voluntary curtailments requested by both TVA and Alabama Power

several weeks ago have been rather ineffective.

No other District utilities

have asked for even voluntary cutbacks in consumption.

Consumer spending has improved with the weather, with most areas
recording year-to-year sales gains of 10-15 percent or better.

Several

directors report that big-ticket sales are outpacing soft goods, but at
least one notes strong sales of soft goods, particularly women's apparel,
and some weakness in home fashions and appliances.

A food chain owner

(director) comments on the lack of consumer resistance to higher priced
food items.

Weather-related production losses have put deliveries of spring

and summer apparel behind schedule and could result in lost sales with
Easter so early this year.
The new car sales picture is still unclear.

Florida directors

complain of sluggishness, blaming high prices and downsizing.

But demand

has revived modestly in areas that were afflicted by harsh weather, and two
regional distributors of domestic makes realized rather strong year-overyear advances in February.

Except in Tennessee, where usury restrictions

have hampered financing, used car sales have been universally described as
very good.
Reductions in savings inflows to thrifts are still relatively
moderate in the District, but the advance in mortgage rates has spread;
many lagging S&Ls have moved to 9 1/4 plus two points.

Shrinking demand

deposits have accounted for all of a recent slowing of bank deposit inflows.
In a constitutional referendum, Tennessee voters elected to turn over the
fixing of interest rate ceilings to the legislature.

More flexible statu-

tory limits should permit finance companies, who have virtually ceased
lending in the past six months, to operate profitably in the state.
Recent rapid rates of housing construction have not been able to
keep pace with demand.

Home inventories are generally thin throughout the

District.

In Broward County, Florida, a scarcity of rental housing may

force prospective renters to buy and thus deplete stocks of midpriced condominiums to shortage levels by midyear.

Speculative buying of land and

homes has accelerated sharply in South Florida.

Foreign buyers, largely

Canadian and Latin American (characterized by one director as "desperate to
buy"), have provided a sizable portion of speculative funds.
Business leaders report signs of strengthening in several slow
industries.

A large steel producer sees a revival of demand this year, with

the impetus to come from the oil industry and manufacturers of home appliances.

Phosphate shipments should be heavy this spring, as backlogged

deliveries to the North augment rising orders, if the rail car shortage
permits.

Tool and diemakers are enjoying excellent business.

have been buoyed by a surge in foreign purchases.

Truck sales

Three large companies

badly in need of work (Offshore Power Systems, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics,
Ingalls Shipyards) have been awarded contracts of late.

Florida hotels and

tourist attractions have been unusually hectic as result of northern storms
and ad campaigns.
Job growth continues to be substantial.

Complaints of shortages of

skilled labor are becoming more common and widespread.

However, recently

announced layoffs unrelated to either the weather or the coal strike will
displace at least 1,500 workers in the region.
Further increases in citrus prices have slowed sales; the Florida
Department of Citrus estimates that consumer demand is off from last year
by at least one-third.
be inadequate.

Still, carryover for next year's season will probably

The current crop is in very good shape, but harvests are

proceeding quite slowly (perhaps deliberately).

Strong cotton demand from

the Far East has been taking up some of the domestic slack; Mississippi
growers are likely to expand acreage by more than the USDA's January planting
intentions survey indicated.

A director expects demand to support the rising

level of egg production despite sharply higher prices.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Business activity in the Seventh District was depressed by severe
weather conditions in both January and February.

The coal strike began to

register an adverse impact on output in late February, but this influence is
still relatively minor, and largely confined to Indiana.
very pleased with recent sales, but others are not.

Some retailers are

There is evidence that

consumers are holding back on purchases of autos and other big ticket items.
Business capital outlays are expected to rise this year, both for equipment
and structures.

Demand for farm equipment is conspicuously weak.

The long

severe winter has hampered construction activity to an abnormal degree.
Demand for credit appears to be strengthening, especially for bank loans to
larger businesses.

Interest rates are expected to move at least moderately

higher as demand for credit increases while savings inflows to thrift institutions remain slow.
Knowledgable business managers in the district believe that the coal
strike negotiations have been "bungled."

The pact presented to the miners

for ratification took away some benefits won earlier, and attempted to place
unacceptable penalties on wildcat strikes.
observers.)

(These views come from management

Nevertheless, a settlement is expected soon with various key

sections rewritten.
All affected activities are expected to rebound after the coal strike
is settled.

However, the experience adds to inflationary pressures.

prices have been paid for substitute fuels, mostly imported.
ments in production processes have been necessary.

Premium

Costly adjust-

The eventual settlement

will entail a very large increase in compensation, which will stimulate

demands in other industries.
Utilities in Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, and Wisconsin have not requested
users to cut power usage.

(Some companies have taken voluntary steps, however.)

This favorable situation reflects extensive use of nuclear facilities, western
coal, deliveries of non-union coal,- and, in the case of Michigan, extensive
purchases of power from Ontario.

A utility serving 70 percent of Illinois'

population reports that k6 percent of its sendout since January 1 has been from
its nuclear plants.

This company has activated some oil-fired peaking units in

order to sell power to the East.

Larger units used during the summer are out

of service for heavy maintenance.
The electric utility serving Lake and Porter Counties in Indiana asked
for a 15 percent voluntary cutback by the big steel plants and oil refineries
located there.

This request was accommodated by increasing self-generation,

which normally supplies about 50 percent of the needs of these companies.

Else-

where in Indiana, industrial customers were cut back 25 percent, starting
February 20.
closed.

Commercial lighting was reduced drastically, and some schools

Industrial users have met the curtailment by added self-generation,

stringent conservation,

and, in some cases, by layoffs or 4-day weeks.

It

is believed that some companies are holding back on layoffs hoping that curtailments will soon be lifted.

As of noon, March 13, further curtailments,

perhaps to a drastic 50 percent, have not been ordered.
Layoffs directly related to the coal strike in this district, thus
far, appear to be confined to Indiana.

On Monday, March 13, the Indiana Labor

Department counted 6,600 layoffs directly related to the coal strike, 5,^00
indefinite and 1,200 for the day.
Indianamanufacturing employment.

The total is less than 1 percent of
A number of employers indicated that the

situation could soon become more critical.

The Indiana layoff total included

600 steelworkers involved in coke oven operations.

Abnormally large stocks of

coking coal had been laid down before the strike, including imports from Europe,
but even this has proved to be insufficient.

If coking coal does not begin to

move to the steel mills in the next few weeks, output of finished steel will
begin to be affected significantly.
One very large retailer reports that sales rebounded rapidly in all
regions after the recent blizzards.
ous picture.

Another retailer reports a much less vigor-

The first company reports that inventories are low, while the

second says they are high.
sales recently.

Both companies report added strength in apparel

Both report a decline in the ratio of credit sales, reversing

the trend of earlier months.
Purchasing agents report renewed upward pressures on prices.

As of

April 1, Chicago area truckers are expected to apply for, and obtain, a 15 percent boost in rates.

Wage scales will rise over 10 percent on that date, and

costs of fuel, maintenance, new equipment, workmen's compensation, unemployment
insurance, and other insurance have increased substantially since the last rate
increase.
Farm equipment inventories are mounting despite reduced production
schedules.

Tractor inventories are the highest in seven years.

To stimulate

sales one manufacturer now offers a two year warranty on large tractors.

Some

dealers guarantee replacement of new equipment if breakdowns occur during a
critical period.
A producer of materials expects a substantial rise in nonresidential
construction this year.

New orders for structural steel support this view.

Home builders expect shortages of insulation and wallboard again this year.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Business managers in the Eighth District remain optimistic about
further economic gains, despite some setbacks this winter as a result of
unfavorable weather and the coal strike.

Retail sales, in recent weeks

reported to be at about year-ago levels, are expected to resume growth as
normal weather returns.

Inventories are considered to be satisfactory.

Some

losses in manufacturing production have occurred because of the weather and
the coal strike, but orders in most industries indicate that demand remains
relatively high.

Construction activity in the District has also been

hampered by the weather, but demand for new homes continues to be strong.

In

the financial sector, business loans at larger banks increased substantially
in recent weeks, and moderate increases have occurred in most other loan
categories.
Retail sales in recent weeks have been affected adversely by
unusually cold and snowy weather.

St. Louis department store representatives

indicated that sales have about equaled year-ago levels.

Some sales gains,

however, were registered in areas, such as Little Rock, where weather
conditions were not as severe as in St. Louis and Louisville, for example.
Automobile dealers report sales were good on days with normal weather and
that overall sales have been running near year-ago levels.

Retailers were

generally optimistic that the current slump in sales is temporary and that
sales gains will occur when the weather improves and the coal strike is
settled.

Current inventories at the retail level are considered to be

satisfactory given the expected increases in sales this spring.

Retailers

noted, however, that this assessment would change rapidly if the expected

sales gains are not forthcoming.
Major utility companies in the District report that coal stockpiles
have tended to stabilize in the past few days.

This reflects some voluntary

cutbacks in electrical power usage, greater incoming coal shipments, and the
burning of larger quantities of higher-priced oil and natural gas.

Only

voluntary reductions in electrical power usage have occurred so far.

With

the tendency of coal stocks to stabilize and the prospects for additional
coal supplies as a result of the Taft-Hartley injunction, the "crisis"
situation appears to have eased somewhat.

None of the utilities contacted

indicate mandatory curtailments are in prospect in the near future.
The effects of the coal strike on employment and production have been
relatively minor in the District.

A zinc processing plant in the St. Louis

area, which had a special contract with the utility company, chose to shut
down its operations rather than pay a higher rate for energy.

Also, a local

chemical firm closed a phosphate and a textile plant as a result of the coal
strike.

Earlier this month, a major automobile assembly plant was expected

to shut down due to a lack of parts as a result of the strike.

However,

conditions have apparently improved in areas where the automobile parts are
manufactured and the shutdown is not foreseen at present.
Despite the threat of power cutbacks and bad weather, manufacturing
activity appears to have made modest gains in recent weeks.

A representative

from a major chemical firm noted strong sales for agricultural and industrial
chemicals, textiles, and plastics.

An appliance firm representative reported

some production losses due to adverse weather, but that orders were strong,
partially reflecting the strength in homebuilding.

Other products showing

strong sales include paper and boxboard, heating equipment, pharmaceuticals,

clothing, and recreational equipment.
The demand for new homes continues at a high level.

Bad weather,

however, has hampered construction work, and some lengthening in order
backlogs for new homes has resulted.

The backlog of new home orders is now

estimated to be 60 to 90 days in the St. Louis area.
continues- to be of the single-family type.

Most home construction

In Memphis, the vacancy rates on

apartments, which was very high in 1975 and 1976, are now reported to be
falling rapidly, but rents have not adjusted upward sufficiently to encourage
apartment construction.
The dollar volume of commercial and industrial loans at larger
District banks has increased sharply in recent weeks.

The volume of real

estate, consumer, and agricultural loans has been growing rapidly for more
than a year.

Mortgage loan demand is reported to be excellent at savings and

loan associations, reflecting the large amount of construction.

Time and

savings deposits registered sizable gains at commercial banks and savings and
loan associations, but S and L's report gains are somewhat below those
registered in 1977.

Interest rates on most types of loans have remained

generally unchanged from a month ago.

Recently, a constitutional amendment

was passed by the Tennessee voters which removed the 10 percent interest rate
maximum from the state's constitution and placed the power to set usury
ceilings with the legislature.

This limit has been an important factor in

reducing the availability of credit in the state and in the relatively low
earnings of some Tennessee banks during years of relatively high market
interest rates.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Despite the coal strike, economic activity in the Ninth
District is fairly strong, and most of it will probably stay that way
into the spring.

The coal strike has not hurt this region because it

relies little on eastern coal.

Unless the strike produces secondary

effects, district manufacturers should maintain their substantial firstquarter sales gains.

Consumer spending has been good to normal except

in western rural areas, and retailers expect strong sales this spring.
Consumer demand for mortgages is still high too, but recent increases in
mortgage terms caused by slowing deposit inflows could reduce housing
somewhat.
Because little eastern coal is used in this region, the coal
strike is not affecting output in the Ninth District.

Most of this

region's coal comes from western fields which have not been shut down
during the United Mine Workers' strike.

Consequently, this region's

utilities and other coal users currently have not had to reduce operations.
But the coal negotiations have already affected wage demands
here, and if the strike lasts much longer it could affect other economic
activity.

A large union currently negotiating with a major food processing

firm cites the Carter-supported wage package in the coal talks as justification for demanding a very large wage increase this spring.

Also, if

the strike continues for several weeks, district manufacturers may have
problems selling goods in eastern markets and getting inputs produced in
strike-affected areas.
So far, though, with no unusual energy supply problems,
district manufacturing sales seem to be up substantially from a year

ago.

In mid-February manufacturers responding to our quarterly survey

thought their first-quarter sales would be up about 11 percent from a
year earlier.

Sales of durable goods were expected to be up 13 percent

and sales of nondurables up 9 percent.
If the coal strike ends soon, sales should remain well ahead
of a year ago, and inventories should be adequate into the spring.

In

February, district manufacturers expected a 12 percent increase in the
second quarter with durable goods sales up 15 percent and nondurable
goods sales up 7 percent.

In light of their present and anticipated

sales, manufacturers were generally satisfied with their inventories.
Consumer spending so far this year is also quite good over
much of the district.

Auto dealers in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area

- indicate that sales are holding up fairly well, even though midwinter is
usually a slow time of year.

Retailers in the Twin Cities say non-

durable goods are selling about as well as they usually do at this time
of year.

Directors from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and north-

western Wisconsin report fairly good retail spending in their areas too.
But in rural areas of the district's western states, retail
sales are down more than seasonally.

Directors from Montana, North

Dakota, and South Dakota report that severe winter weather has been
holding back retail sales gains in their areas.

The weather has affected

sales of both durable and nondurable goods.
Despite these weather-related problems, retailers throughout
the district are optimistic about the second quarter.
St. Paul, retailers expect the usual good spring sales.

In MinneapolisBesides the

normal seasonal pickup, retailers in western areas think they will make
up some of the durable goods sales put off by bad first-quarter weather.
Consumer demand for housing has remained strong, but because
of tighter mortgage terms it may weaken soon.

District S&Ls still

report a high level of mortgage loan commitments, indicating a sustained
demand for housing.

However, slower savings inflows reduced the supply

of mortgage funds recently.

To help offset that slowing, some S&Ls

increased their borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.

And,

because of the tighter supply of funds and the sustained mortgage
demand, most S&Ls raised mortgage interest rates and tightened other
mortgage loan terms.
may slacken soon.

If this tightening continues, district homebuilding

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Tenth District retailers report that a second winter of bad weather
has reduced sales to about the level of 1977's first quarter.

While a rebound

in demand is predicted for spring, slow deliveries due to continued bad weather
or the coal strike might result in the loss of sales.

Auto dealers, too, report

sales about equal to last year—a surprising result considering the national
decline in auto sales.

On the agricultural front, both near-term and futures

prices for grain crops have been advancing, but the likelihood of ample supplies
may point to lower prices later on.

Loan demand in the Tenth District has been

mixed, with large city bankers reporting weak demand, but bankers in outlying
areas reporting strong demand, especially for cattle feeder loans.
Due to the repeat this year of the severe winter weather, dollar retail
sales in the Tenth District have about equaled the levels reached in the same
period in 1977.

Though the timing varied across metropolitan areas, sales in

either January or February were generally worse than last year, with the other
month offsetting this decline.

While the Denver area has not experienced bad

weather, reports from retailers there were mixed.

Most District retailers feel

that, while March sales have been unsatisfactory to date, a strong month is
possible if the weather improves.

Looking ahead, spring sales are projected

to increase 6 to 20 per cent over last year.

However, fears of a fall slow-

down in the economy were expressed by some respondents.
Inventories at District retailers appear to be at desired levels
despite the effects of the weather-induced sales slowdown.

Nevertheless,

several retailers reported problems in obtaining supplies from the East
and certain hard-hit areas of the Midwest.

One respondent also noted a

problem in obtaining shoes from Ohio and Indiana due to coal strike-related
energy cutbacks.

Though not yet serious, a much longer delay in receipt of

spring fashions could cause a loss of sales.

One respondent also expressed

concern about the negative impact on retail hiring that the rising minimum
wage has had and will have on his industry.
Tenth District auto dealers report that, on balance, unit sales are
averaging about the same as last year.

Those who report a decline in sales

point to the bad winter weather as the major factor.

One dealer also

mentioned that the weather has tied up rail cars and, thereby, has reduced
sales by delaying delivery from manufacturers.
that, with spring, sales will "take off."

However, most dealers expect

Additionally, some dealers men-

tioned that tax refunds will soon start increasing the purchases of new cars.
As to auto size and features, it appears that small and intermediate cars are the bfist sellers, with extensive options included.

It also

seems that imports are facing stiffer competition through heavier advertising
of domestic small cars and more small cars being offered for sale.

Although

there is some short-term pessimism, dealers are all extremely optimistic
about sales expectations for the rest of the year.
Futures market prices for major Tenth District grain crops advanced
during the past month.

However, near-term price advances exceeded those of

the more distant contracts for soybeans and hard winter wheat.

March soybean

futures advanced sharply (94 cents per bushel) while advances of 7 cents per
bushel were recorded for hard winter wheat and for corn.
accounted for these price increases.

A number of factors

Among them are increased livestock

feed consumption in the United States, CCC loan participation by wheat and corn
producers, grain transportation problems associated with severe winter weather,

and decreases in production estimates for southern hemisphere crops.

However,

grain stocks data, winter wheat condition reports, and planting intentions for
these grain crops all point to the likelihood of very ample supplies for 1978.
Thus, recent price gains may give way to lower prices later on.

On the subject

of the farm strike, one Bank Director noted that the strike was having very
little effect in his area and that he expects "...all of the farmers to be back
at work come spring."

According to this Director, the cold, wet winter has

resulted in very good prospects for the wheat crop but, simultaneously, has
caused ranchers to lose up to 30 per cent of this spring's calf crop.
Most large city bankers contacted in the Tenth District report weak
loan demand.

This contrasts with strong loan demand in outlying areas.

Demands for cattle feeder loans have been heavy at both small and large banks,
with large banks also reporting continued strong demand for natural resource
and energy development loans.

However, unusually severe weather conditions

have had an adverse impact on consumer, real estate, construction, and other
business loans at the larger banks.

Credit conditions at Nebraska banks,

which were extremely tight last fall, have eased considerably, as small banks
continue to pay down correspondent loans that were used to finance agriculture.
Deposit growth is strong at most banks contacted.

Demand deposits are up

sharply, but time and savings deposit trends are mixed.

Small banks report

strong time and savings deposit gains, but most large banks report only
moderate increases or declines.

One large bank reports extremely rapid

savings growth, due to the offering of small denomination bearer CD's.
Large negotiable CD's were reduced at large banks in response to their weak
loan demand.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Directors and "businessmen report that economic activity remains
strong in the Eleventh District.

Consumer spending has picked up with

department stores and auto dealers reporting large sales increases.

Manu-

facturing activity has moderated slightly although durable goods industries
continue to post strong performances.

A further slowing in net savings

inflows to banks and savings and loan associations was recorded in February.
Despite higher mortgage rates, residential builders are optimistic that
activity will continue near last year's pace.

With the planting season

approaching, a lessening of farm strike activity is anticipated by agribusinessmen.
Sales at department stores and auto dealerships rose rapidly late
in February.

Some of the gains were apparently the recovery of sales lost

during recent periods of bad weather.

Department store executives say that

sales in coming months will show large gains over recent months and will be
approximately 10 to 15 percent above year-earlier levels.

Auto dealers

report that customer acceptance of the 197$ models is good and that there is
no more than the usual price resistance.
attributed to the effects of bad weather.

Recent weakness in auto sales is
The outlook for new car sales is

described as "favorable" with some dealers adding that sales will be as
"good as ever."

Inventories at most retail establishments are near desired

levels.
Manufacturing activity remains strong, although the pace has slowed
since the fourth quarter of last year.

Many respondents complain of declining

productivity as marginal workers are hired to fill skilled positions.

To

ease the effect of rising labor costs, some manufacturers are installing
more automated equipment.

Output in such durable goods industries as fabri-

cated metals, lumber and wood, ana machinery is up substantially as their
products remain in strong demand.
industries.

Heavy backlogs of orders exist in many

However some metal fabricators report that recent new orders

have been erratic or weak.

Primary metal producers report only modest growth.

Copper and zinc smelters describe their situations as "very bleak."

Current

operations are only marginally profitable, and the only investments being
made are pollution control equipment required by law.
Drilling activity and drilling equipment manufacturers are still
operating at capacity and near record paces.

Supplies of tubular goods are

expected to remain tight well into the second quarter and spot shortages of
some sizes are possible.

Additions to manufacturing capacity are being planned

that will be sufficient to meet the expected growth in demand and should
ease the supply situation somewhat.
remains sluggish.

Nondurable goods manufacturing activity

The apparel industry, squeezed by rapidly rising production

costs and by stiff competition from imports, is in an unstable position with
some firms closing plants.

Some jobs are being "exported" as more American

apparel manufacturers start up plants in other countries.
for chemicals is good for the first half of the year.

The sales outlook

Capacity utilization

is generally in the 85-90-percent range for most chemical producers.
Deposit growth at banks continues to slow, and some switching from
savings accounts into CD's is reported.

Bankers expect deposit growth to

remain slow for the next several months, but report they do not expect disintermediation to become a problem.

Loan demand remains strong although some

slowing of consumer loan growth occurred in February.

Since the second

quarter of 1977» business and consumer loans have shown exceptional strength,
outpacing historical rates during comparable periods of time.
The 9 1/2 percent rate set last month at most savings and loan
associations on conventional mortgage loans appears to have slowed the pace
of mortgage lending, however, some S&L's report turning down more loan requests
last month than in previous months.

S&L's are reluctant to commit funds

until their liquidity position is improved.

Net savings inflows slowed sub-

stantially in February from January and remain below year-earlier levels.
S&L's are finding that nondeposit sources of funds continue to tighten as
well.

Borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Bank is becoming more expensive,

and the secondary market has become an unprofitable source of funds as
yields there have risen above 9 1/2 percent.
Residential construction firms expect activity to remain near last
year's level despite higher mortgage rates.

Construction of multi-family

.units is expected to pick up as vacancy rates continue to fall.

Many major

home builders have two to three months of business on their books.
Texas currently appears to be a focal point of the American
Agricultural Movement.

Although the farm-strike movement has gained much

publicity recently, agribankers and agribusinessmen
in future protest activities.
crops in South Texas.

anticipate a slowdown

Many farmers have already begun planting

And with planting dates approaching over the rest of

the District, most protesters are expected to return to the fields to
prepare their cropland for plantings.

However, the exact impact of the

farm-strike movement on planted acreage at this time remains uncertain.
There is some concern that striking farmers may make reprisals on nonstrikers, but no specific cases have been reported.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO

Retail sales are reported strong in most parts of the District, though
the coal strike in Utah and heavy rains in Southern California have weakened
sales somewhat.

Th6 inventory picture is mixed with some excess inventories

reported in Southern California due to rain-depressed sales and thin inventories in the Pacific Northwest due to slow shipments of goods from the
Northeast.

Western industry continues to grow, w.ith aluminum and a e r o s p a c e

doing particularly well.

While consumer and real estate loan demand

rcnains strong, business loan demand is still flat.
While retail sales in Northern California appear to be running up to
12 percent above year-ago levels, sales in Southern California have been
dampened by unusually heavy and frequent rains.

Grocery stores in that area

report sales to be both less than last year and less than planned.

Retail

sales of non-durables in the Los Angeles area are very slow due to bad
weather, and year-to-year declines of 10 percent in weekly volumes are not
unusual.

However, in dry weeks sales activity shoots ahead.

This start-

stop pattern has made inventory management rather difficult and there are
some reports of excess inventories.
In the Portland area, retail sales remain strong.

One large chain

reports January and February sales to be above year-ago levels by 16 and 12
percent respectively.

One large department store complained that delays in

the shipment of goods from the weather-ravaged Northeast were keeping its
inventories a bit thinner than desired.

While domestic auto sales in

Oregon remain slow, sales of foreign autos is beginning to pick up.

A large

food distributor reports retail food sales in Seattle to be disappointing in
January and February, and is rather puzzled by it.

In Idaho, a depressed farm sector has held back r e t a i l
non-durables and autos.

s a l e s of both

Several shopping centers in Utah report retail

."les to be running about 8 percent above year-earlier levels and auto sales
are also reported to be very strong.

The coal strike does appear to be

holding down retail' sales in a few parts of the state.
The Western industrial picture is one of continued growth.

Production

in the aluminum industry continues to grow and the near-term outlook both
in the West and nationally-is excellent (assuming a quick end to the coal
strike).

Both the primary aluminum industry as well as many aluminum fabri-

cating plants are reported to be operating at wall-to-wall full capacity.
Boeing reports both a large backlog of'aircraft production commitments as
well as a very.high rate of new orders.

It is increasing its rate of pro-

duction through a reduction in unused capacity, though it does anticipate
some difficulty in finding an adequate number of technical, skilled
production workers.

The two largest employers in Utah, Kennecott Copper and

United States Steel, report that production continues at a high level,
though there is some concern about a prolonged coal strike.

Oil drilling

is very active in Utah and some very successful finds have been made in
eastern Idaho and western Montana and Wyoming.

Standard Oil of Indiana is

putting a $5 million well in the middle of the Great Salt Lake.
A strong note of concern was expressed by a large builder that production costs in housing were rising at a rate of 2 percent per month and since
these costs make up roughly half of the final price, that housing prices
were rising at a minimum of 1 percent per month.
impossible to build moderately-priced housing.

It is becoming almost

Loan demand in the West appears to be stronger than in the nation as a
whole.

Since the beginning of the year, while lending by large banks fell

off by 0.5 percent nationally, it rose by 1.5 percent in the West.

Most of

the western strength was in real estate and installment lending—business
lending was virtually flat.
expects this

The president of a large bank holding company

6-week trend (of both the West outperforming the rest of the

country and the flatness of business loan demand) to continue throughout the
year.

The president of another large bank reports loan demand to be strong

in all areas except large corporate accounts.

He also reported, with some,

concern, a 1 percent (seasonally adjusted) decline in personal savings
between January and February.
One Southern California bank reports that while auto loans are down
1.5 percent, real estate loans are up 4.8 percent and master-charge loans
up 11.5 percent, since January 1.

While most areas report strong real estate

and consumer loan demand, a few reports of weak consumer demand attribute this
to slow auto sales.

Loans to small and mid-size businesses appear to "be

growing modestly in some areas, but the only report of strong business loan
demand comes from a bank in Alaska.

Some concern was expressed in Idaho

regarding a lower quality of loans due to the depressed agricultural

situation.

