CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

October 11, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District-Dallas page 32
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]

The tone of District reports is one of high employment of resources,
accompanied by high operating rates in basic industries, shortages and
lengthened deliveries, and generally tight labor markets.

Upward price

pressures remain intense. There is also an undertone of uncertainty and,
indeed, concern over a slowdown or recession next year.

Perhaps best

illustrating the uncertainty are mixed comments on consumer spending and
residential construction.

On the other hand, capital spending and

nonresidential building appear to be stronger than earlier expected.

Credit

demands are somewhat mixed, with softening noted for both C&I and mortgage
loans.

Crop prospects are generally favorable.
District reports frequently mention continued expansion in

manufacturing activity and high utilization of capacity. New York notes some
producers appear to be nearing limits of capacity.

Both Chicago and Cleveland

are relatively optimistic about steel production this quarter, which if it
matches last quarter, would amount to about 85 percent of capacity, far better
than a year ago.

Some Districts expect slowing in business early in 1979

(Philadelphia, Minneapolis and Dallas).
Accompanying high levels of utilization in manufacturing and construction
are reports of shortages of materials and labor.

Districts report shortages of

industrial and construction-delated materials, ranging from cement (Chicago,
Mineapolis and San Francisco) to drill pipes (Dallas). While shortages may not be

a widespread problem, some Districts note stretching out of deliveries
(Boston, New York and Kansas City).

Similarly, complaints of labor

shortages in a variety of industries are also noted (Boston, Chicago,
Kansas City and San Francisco).
Still, uncertainty and concern mark comments about economic prospects
over the short term.

New York, for example, points out that respondents

expect slower economic growth in the next half, but not a recession, and
Chicago reports that pessimism is widespread in that area.
A majority of Districts indicate that retail sales have softened
or have shown slower growth in recent weeks than earlier in the summer.
Slower sales of major appliances are noted in some Districts (Boston, Chicago
and Kansas City).

Still, there are some exceptions to slowing tendencies.

New York, Atlanta, Dallas and San Francisco report larger increases in sales
in the past month than in the previous month.
views concerning prospective sales.

There is also a mixture of

Retailers are optimistic in New York,

Richmond, Minneapolis and Dallas, but those in Boston and Cleveland see
further deterioration in sales.
The pace of housing and mortgage loan demand throughout the District
appears to have softened.

High mortgage rates, high housing prices and in

some cases, more selective lending terms account for the lessened pace.
Chicago, for example, notes that houses over $100,000 are selling more slowly
than earlier in the summer.

In California, mortgage demand generally exceeds

supply, but in other parts of the West, high mortgage rates seem to have
slowed demand.

The investment sector provides more encouraging developments.

Plant

and equipment spending and nonresidential construction appear to be either
accelerating or stronger than generally expected.

Chicago reports that

producers' durable goods sales appear stronger now than earlier in the year
and that office building construction in that city is in a full-fledged boom.
Atlanta notes that inflationary psychology has given an additional boost
to an already large volume of nonresidential construction underway.

Dallas

also indicates construction of new plants and expansion of existing ones
already exceeds all of 1977 and that the boom in oil and gas drilling
continues.

San Francisco remarks construction is still booming in most

parts of that District.
Several Districts characterize inventory policies as cautious (New
York, Atlanta and Minneapolis) or at about desired levels (St. Louis), but
there are also reports of excess stocks, especially at the retail level
(Boston, Cleveland, Richmond and Dallas).

Also, inventories held by steel

distributors are believed to be higher than desired (Cleveland and St. Louis).
Continued strong upward price pressures for a spectrum of industrial
materials are reported in a number of Districts.

Reports show continued

widespread and substantial increases in prices (Philadelphia, Richmond and
Kansas City).

Atlanta stresses a fear of double-digit inflation has contributed

importantly to the latest strength in consumer spending, capital investment
and housing.
Credit demands are generally strong, but softening tendencies have
surfaced in several Districts.

Slower growth in C&I loans is reported in

some Districts (Boston, Cleveland, Atlanta and Dallas).

Boston considers

the slowdown temporary, while New York comments that commercial banks are
generally optimistic over growth in loan demand through the first half of
1979.

They point out a "spill-over" loan demand from regional banks in the

form of loan participations.

Latest increases in interest rates apparently

have not slowed loan demand except for mortgages.

The prevailing view seems

to be that consumer installment and business loan demand has not yet slowed
in response to higher rates (New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Minneapolis and
San Francisco) but some other Districts express some concern over higher
rates.

Boston and Philadelphia see some signs of disintermediation and

Chicago points out that recent increases have convinced some of the
"inevitability" of a slowdown or recession next year in response to tightened
credit markets.
Crop output in key farm belt regions is generally described as
ranging from good to record harvests.
good.

Kansas City reports corn yields are

St. Louis expects an above average crop sufficient to depress prices

from a month-ago.

Chicago expects a record year for corn and soy beans.

On the other hand, Richmond and Dallas complained that dry weather has
affected output of some crops.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

At their most recent meeting several Directors of the Boston Bank
remarked that their own Roundtable discussion of business trends was
becoming monotonous because of little change in their view of economic
conditions.

Directors and other Red Book respondents report continued

healthy but not rapid economic growth with retail sales, employment, and
commercial loan demand all doing nicely.

Although there is no evidence of

widespread shortages, certain labor markets are becoming quite tight and
there are reports of stretch outs in delivery times of certain materials.
A Vermont banker reports that loan demand is very strong in his
state and that he is beginning to have to turn customers away.

This bank

expects credit conditions to become considerably tighter and is making plans
for rationing available funds. A large Boston bank reports that while
commercial loan demand increased very strongly earlier in the year there
was some slowdown in August.

The chief executive officer of this bank believes

that the August slowdown was only a temporary reduction in the longer term
growth trend. He indicates that the bank has considerable liquid resources
overseas and expects to be able to meet the anticipated increase in loan
demand with no difficulty.

Overall deposit flows remain fairly strong,

although there is some evidence of disintermediation in savings and NOW
accounts.
A local manufacturing conglomerate reports some slowdown in the
sales of its household appliances subsidiary and expects a leveling off
later this year as a result of the anticipated drop in new housing activity.

A division of this corporation which produces auto-related products is
expected to see strong sales throughout the remainder of this year and
well into 1979. A chemical manufacturer also reports that sales to tire
producers have retained strong momentum.
An executive of a diversified local retailer indicates that sales
across most merchandise lines remain very strong and that she would be very
optimistic except for hearing continual forecasts for a slowdown.

The

chief executive of a large dry goods chain reports that although sales
remain strong and above his firm's plan, he is somewhat concerned about
inventories.

While his stores do not have serious inventory overhang, it

is higher than desirable and some adjustment will be necessary.

He feels

this pattern is also the case for other retailers, as well as for some
manufacturers.
Although no Red Book respondents reported significant production
problems as a result of an inability to obtain materials or labor, there are
signs of a general tightening.

A monthly survey of New England purchasing

managers found some difficulty in obtaining certain types of steel and
aluminum as well as electronic components.

The operator of an employment

agency reports increased difficulty in finding people.

Similarly a

Connecticut director indicates that many labor markets in that state are
becoming increasingly tight because of expanded manufacturing activity,
much of it defense oriented.
Professors Eckstein, Houtakker, Samuelson and Solow were available
for comment this month.

With the exception of Houtakker, none sees any

justification for further interest rate increases at this time. The
majority argued that the Fed must allow for the lags in the monetary control
process by waiting for evidence of the impact of past rate increases before
pushing rates up further.

While there was general agreement among the

respondents that a more stringent voluntary wage and price control program
is unlikely to have a significant effect on the rate of inflation, opinion
was divided on whether such a policy should even be attempted.

Solow feels

that it could be marginally successful if properly applied, but Houtakker
worries about its effects on the resource allocation mechanism and
Samuelson fears it might induce a round of preemptive wage and price
increases.
According to Eckstein, the recent figures suggest that the economy
is passing through a phase of the credit cycle that in the past has always
preceded a credit crunch.

Events are unfolding more slowly than usual

this time, but he warns that the present calm on the money markets need
not persist.

Eckstein believes that rates are already high enough to greatly

increase the risks of a crunch due to an exogenous shock to the system, so
the the Fed must be cautious about increasing rates still further at the
present time.
Houthakker argues that the growth of the money supply has yet to
show any evidence of restraint.
accommodating inflation.

As a result, he feels that the Fed is still

Houthakker is dubious about the effectiveness of

wage and price guidelines, noting that inflation cannot be reduced by a
policy that suppresses competition.

He finds the August foreign trade figures

most heartening, especially the strong growth in exports.

It is

Houtakker's view that with the depreciation now showing up significantly in
the trade data, it is possible that the dollar has finally bottomed out.
Concerned that the Fed has been "painted into a corner" by its
emphasis on money growth targets, Samuelson urges the Fed to allow some
slippage in the money supply rather than risk a needless recession.

He

thinks that an appropriate policy is to aim at no less than 3 percent
real growth, but that the recent interest rate increases may prevent such
an outcome next year.

Samuelson is critical of those advocates of incomes

policies who see them as an excuse for another dose of "wild cats" fiscal
and monetary stimulus.
Less critical of voluntary controls than the others, Solow believes
that a set of wage and price guidelines is worth trying.

However, since he

expects the program's effectiveness to be directly proportional to the
President's commitment to it, Solow feels that guidelines would prove
harmful if announced and subsequently ignored. With respect to interest
rates, Solow can see no justification for the recent increases, and is
disappointed with the Fed's continued fixation on M^, despite the wide range
of uncertainty surrounding the causes of its movements.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
Business activity continued to advance in September at a moderate
pace, according to recent comments of directors and other business leaders.
Retail sales turned in a respectable performance despite the newspaper strike,
and retailers seem to be guardedly optimistic about their prospects for the
rest of the year.

Elsewhere in the regional economy, business activity

appears to be advancing nicely. While most respondents appear satisfied
with current and near-term sales, businessmen are still keeping a tight rein
on inventories.

Indeed, in some cases, inventories reportedly are so lean

that they have resulted in some stretching of delivery schedules.

Looking

ahead, there is an emerging consensus among respondents that the pace of
business activity will slow down next year.

Capital spending is expected

to hold up while consumers become more tight-fisted.

The recent firming in

business loan demand at the New York City banks is also expected to continue.
Retail sales in the Second District chalked up healthy gains in
September.

Merchants in New York City reported that their sales were running

slightly ahead of last year's pace.

They felt that sales would have been

even higher had it not been for the city's ongoing newspaper strike.
Especially hard hit by the strike have been the sales of big-ticket durable
goods, since they depend more heavily on advertised sales-promotions than do
other consumer goods. Also, stores in Manhattan have been the ones most
affected by the strike.

Elsewhere in the Second District, and especially

in New Jersey, retail sales have been fairly strong across a broad line of

goods.

Neither retailers nor bankers professed to be worried about the

much-publicized buildup of consumers' indebtedness.

Almost without exception,

the delinquency rates on consumer loans are reportedly remaining at
comfortably low levels; and most consumer creditors feel that their
customers are currently managing their debts quite well.
Outside of retailing, business activity appears to be advancing at
a moderately brisk pace. Most businessmen who were contacted echoed the
assessment of one upstate manufacturer of machine tools that business was
"good" and there were "...no clouds hanging over the economy—except for
inflation." Many businessmen feel that what is needed in the fight against
inflation is a comprehensive and well-coordinated program. At the same time,
they are also very disturbed about the proliferation of government rules
and regulations, which result in nonproductive costs and delays.

In any

event, while there are no apparent shortages in materials, some producers
appear to be nearing the limits of capacity.

Nevertheless, virtually none

of the directors or businessmen contacted anticipated a material change in
the pace of capital spending.

For example, one upstate manufacturer indicated

that his firm was now bumping up against capacity ceilings for both brass
and aluminum mill products, but does not plan to expand plant and equipment
outlays at this time.

When asked about the economic outlook for the next

year and a half, most respondents foresee a slowdown in the rate of economic
growth for the first half of 1979—but not an outright recession.

As a rule,

this projected slowdown is seen as the result of belt-tightening by consumers,
with little attendant change in the rate of capital spending.

Business loan demand in the Second District is expected to retain
its recent strength according to a survey of loan officers and economists
at major New York commercial banks.

The respondents were generally optimistic

concerning the near-term business loan outlook despite rises in interest
rates and competition from U. S. offices of foreign banks. All respondents
confirmed receiving "spillover" loan demand from regional banks which
primarily took the form of loan participations.

There was disagreement to

what extent these referrals reflect the increasingly "loaned up" positions
on the part of the regionals or the size of individual loans that sometimes
are too large for a single regional bank to handle for either legal or
policy reasons.

In any case, respondents assigned varying degrees of

importance to spillover loans in boosting New York loan demand.
The majority of respondents gave optimistic forecasts of loan growth
through the first half of 1979. All those questioned said that increases in
interest rates have not yet affected loan demand.

Everyone acknowledged

loan competition by U. S. agencies and branches of foreign banks. However,
some uncertainty was voiced concerning how much of this business was with
traditional customers and whether the loans to nontraditional customers were
similar in quality to those loans usually made to large domestic firms.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELHIA
Indications from the Third District are that current business
conditions are good overall.

Continued growth in the industrial sector and

expanding employment are being reported.

For the longer term though, manu-

facturers expect the economy to slip somewhat.

Retail sales are mixed for the

second month in a row, causing some merchants to believe the pace of consumer
expenditures may finally be slowing down.
quarters are varied.
strong in October

Sales forecasts for the next two

Area bankers say business and consumer loan demand remains

and look for slow and steady growth through early 1979.

Interest rates are rising and are expected to peak in the first quarter.
Although no serious disintermediation has been observed, bankers are concerned
that it may become a problem in the future.
Manufacturers responding to the October Business Outlook Survey say
the industrial sector continues to expand at about the same pace as last month.
Supporting this claim, Survey respondents indicate higher levels of new orders
and shipments and fractional growth of inventories.

The continued expansion

has given local employment a boost for the eighth consecutive month, with
substantially larger payrolls reported in October as well as a marginally
longer workweek.
Looking ahead six months, manufacturers continue to foresee a worsening
of the business climate.

Nearly one-third of the respondents this month

expect a decline in general economic activity by the end of the first quarter.
Consequently, new orders and shipments are projected to remain at their current
levels and a fractional trimming of inventories is planned.

Factory work forces

are expected to hold their current levels over the period but a slight decline

in the length of the average workweek is planned.

A Director of this Bank, whose

business is in the manufacturing sector, takes issue with the view that a turndown is imminent.

His business is currently strong, and he sees no recession

until at least 1980.
On the price front, over half of those surveyed this month report paying
higher prices for raw materials, while less than one-third are charging more
for their finished products.

For the longer term, 80 percent of the respondents

foresee continued increases in the cost of inputs, and 57 percent plan to hike
the prices of the goods they sell.
Retail sales are mixed in October, according to local merchants.

Reports

of current dollar sales range from "just about even" to 14 percent above yearago levels.

Retailers at the lower end of the range say their sales are

slightly below planned volume while for those at the upper end, sales are
about 3 percent over anticipated levels.
good shape.

Inventories are reported to be in

Contacts at the stores experiencing sluggishness in October cite

several causes for the poor performance including uncertainty among consumers
about the strength of the economy and the possibility that "the consumer may
finally be reaching the end of his credit rope."

It should also be noted

that sales volume last year at this time was extremely high, making large
gains this year difficult.
Looking ahead to the next six months, local merchants have widely
varying expectations.

Although some are fairly optimistic and look for first

quarter sales to be as much as 11 percent higher than year-earlier levels,
others are more conservative in their projections and expect to simply match
early 1978 volume.
his forecast.

None of the retailers contacted has assumed a tax cut in

Local bankers say loan demand remains generally strong this month.

Con-

sumer loans continue to grow and C&I loans are reported to be 1 to 7 percent
over year-end figures.
levels overall.

Business loan demand is slightly ahead of planned

Bankers contacted say they have seen the underlying demand for

business loans grow slowly and steadily over the past several months, so that
unconventional loans are less necessary.

As for the future, bankers look for

continued strength in loan demand over the next two quarters.

One contact

feels that part of this continuing demand growth will come from the retailing
sector.

This person anticipates a slowdown in retail sales in the near future

and, as a result, an increased demand for funds as retailers find it necessary
to finance excessive inventories.
The prime rate at all of the banks contacted in October is 9 3/4 percent.
Interest rates are expected to rise again in the near future, and to continue
their climb through the first quarter of next year.

All bankers contacted

expect to see a prime of at least 10 percent by year-end, and a first quarter
average of 10 or 10 1/4 percent.

They look for a peak early in 1979 that

could go as high as 11 percent.
Higher interest rates appear to have begun to take their toll on deposit
flows.

Although no one contacted sees a serious disintermediation problem yet,

bankers are worried about a slow but accelerating runoff in time and savings
deposits.

The variable-rate money market certificate is mentioned as a primary

force in counteracting possible deposit erosion as a result of high interest
rates.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Economic prospects for the Fourth District this quarter are mixed;
retailers are cautious over sales prospects, while steel shipments and
production will likely match those of last quarter.

Inventories of some

types of retail goods and steel are generally higher than desired, but
cutbacks are not expected to affect output and employment.

Some letup in

business loan demand is noted, though mortgage loan demand remains strong.
Retailers and producers of consumer goods remain cautious in their
expectations for consumer spending over the next few months.

Sales have

been described as disappointing, and some retailers expect further
deterioration during the balance of this year.

Another official with a

national chain still expects year-over-year gains to slip to a 7- to 8percent range, down from 10-percent gains during the summer and 9 percent
in September.

However, a major producer of soaps, detergents and personal

products notes larger year-over-year gains for its products, although
total retail sales have been disappointing and are expected to continue
to be so because of steady erosion of purchasing power. According to an
official with a major appliance producer, sales have picked up sharply in
the last several weeks, partly in response to promotions.

Still, mass

merchandisers—especially Sears, Penney's and Ward's—have cut back orders
for early 1979 in expectation of reduced consumer spending.
Pockets of excessive inventories of some retail goods have surfaced in
recent months.

Retailers are concerned over heavier-than-desired inventories

of general merchandise, despite efforts to tighten control of stocks.

Consumer response to the 1979 model automobiles cannot be
ascertained for another several weeks until the newly designed Ford and
Chrysler cars have been on the market.

Some GMC dealers are pleased with

the initial consumer response to downsized cars, on the market only since
early October.

Some dealers report a short supply of 1978 standard-size

cars.
Prospects for steel production this quarter remain uncertain because
of imports and inventories.

Nevertheless, steel economists expect that

shipments and production this quarter will be only slightly below the
third quarter.

Mills have recently been operating between 85 and 90

percent of capacity.

Orders from the auto industry are heavy.

However,

demand from the construction industry has eased seasonally, and demand from
steel distributors has weakened because of large inventories, especially
of imported steel.

Liquidation of these inventories depends on the next

round of trigger pricing.

One steel economist expects that a 10-percent

trigger price increase might prompt distributors to cut their stocks of
lower priced steel.

Such a price increase would push foreign steel prices

above some domestic levels, probably resulting in a long-awaited drop in
steel imports.
Commercial and industrial loan demand has tended to flatten recently,
according to a few of the largest banks in the District.

Increased

competition from commercial paper is largely believed responsible for this
slowdown.

In a related matter, two of the nation's largest tire producers

had their ratings on commercial paper lowered from A1 to A2 because of a

highly leveraged capital structure in one case and a possible recall of
some tires for the other producer.
Mortgage lenders remark that the volume of mortgage applications is
still relatively strong, although softening seasonally.

The prevailing

mortgage rate for an 80-percent loan is about 9 3/4 percent plus 1 point
although rates in some areas are as high as 10h percent.

Deposit flows at S&Ls

have been strong, particularly because of the 6-month certificate.

This

unanticipated strength has improved the liquidity position of several S&Ls
in recent months.

A $500 million association reported that deposit flows

in September were the best so far this year, although passbook savings
have been negative for the past several months.

S&Ls apparently will

continue to promote the certificates, even with a runup in the cost of
funds, as long as mortgage loan demand remains strong.
There is little sign that consumer or business spending is being
curtailed as a result of further increases in interest rates. Mortgage
lenders are generally pleased that higher rates have not shut off
availability of credit, although there are some scattered signs that
mortgage rates above 10 percent have hampered demand. A large District
bank notes that higher interest rates have had no impact on sales of bigticket goods.

Rates on installment loans for autos have shown little

increase because of competition from auto finance cost.

Borrowing terms

have not tightened, and may in fact have eased as maturities are lengthened.
Businesses have not curtailed spending for inventories or capital equipment,
especially where cash flows are still sufficient for the bulk of financing
needs.

Some comment, however, that continued increases in rates could

hinder acquisition plans or spending plans in another 6 months.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Reports from Fifth District businessmen remained basically positive
in early October.

Results of our latest survey indicate continued expansion

of shipments and new orders In the manufacturing sector and of sales in the
retail sector.

Manufacturers also report month to month increases in backlogs

of orders, number of employees, and weekly hours worked.

It appears that

credit demand in the District continues strong, although there are signs that
the composition of demand is changing somewhat.

Business lending has recovered

from a short slump, and expectations are that such lending will accelerate.
Real estate loan demand is healthy but moderating, and consumer instalment loan
demand is matching its recent strength.
In the manufacturing sector activity remained firm in September as
shipments, new orders, and order backlogs all were higher over the month.
Better than a quarter of the manufacturers surveyed experienced a pickup in
orders while more than one in three expanded shipments.

Inventory performance

was mixed as stocks of finished goods were down and materials on hand rose
slightly.

Total inventories remain, on balance, somewhat above desired levels.

Our directors generally substantiate this view of inventory positions although
one cites instances of tight inventory control having impaired sales performance
in some firms.

Manufacturers are, by and large, comfortable with their current

plant and equipment capacity and there appears to be little sentiment for altering
current expansion plans.
Retailers surveyed this month report widespread gains in sales and slight
increases in relative sales of big ticket items.

Inventories at retail stores have

grown in recent weeks but remain only slightly above desired levels.

Our directors

have noticed little change in retail sales in recent weeks, but several feel
that consumers are poised for a fall buying spree once cool weather arrives,
Concerning the automobile component of retail sales, Fifth District directors
expect fall sales of new models to be only slightly weaker to unchanged from
recent levels.
Manufacturers and retailers continue to report increases in prices
paid and received.

Such Increases continue widespread among manufacturers

but their incidence among retailers declined slightly over the past month.
Manufacturers remain basically pessimistic concerning the six month outlook
for the national economy and for their respective local economies.

There seems

to be no consensus, however, on the outlook for production in individual firms.
Retailers participating in our survey expect little or no change in the level
of activity nationally, locally, or in their respective firms over the next two
quarters.
Commercial and industrial loans by Fifth District banks have exhibited
strength in recent weeks, with extensions of large banks concentrated in trade
and service industries.

Bankers report that sharply higher rates on business

loans have not discouraged borrowing.

All of our banker directors report that

they expect the credit needs of their business customers to be moderate to
strong in coming months.

Higher mortgage rates and more restrictive lending

terms are clearly having an effect on the real estate loan market. Demand
for mortgage loans has moderated, although only slightly.

Commercial banks

appear to be referring greater numbers of prospective mortgage borrowers to
thrift institutions.
Liquidity at area banks has been diminished but Fifth District bankers
seem to feel comfortable with their liquidity, given the vigorous state of
credit demand.

Better grade prices and improved quality have continued to produce
all-time high general average prices on most flue-cured tobacco belts in
recent weeks.

The season average price through September 28 was $134.39 per

hundred pounds, 12.5 percent above the comparable period a year ago. Meanwhile,
gross sales have been 13 percent higher, with the value of these sales up 28
percent.

With weather conditions generally dry during the month of September

soil moisture supplies are rated as mostly short to very short throughout much
of the District.

The dry weather has reduced yield prospects for peanuts,

soybeans, and corn and has slowed the pace of the peanut harvest. Pastures
have declined and are now in mostly fair to good condition.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
An acceleration of activity has created further pressures on
prices and supplies.

The possibility of wage and price controls has

undoubtedly begun to influence pricing decisions in some industries.
Although businessmen expect inflation to accelerate next year, their
cautious control of inventories has kept stockpiling to a minimum.

The

"inflation psychology" is thought to have contributed significantly to
the latest strength in consumer spending, capital investment, and housing
markets.

Financial institutions are uneasy with the rising cost of money

and automatic transfers on the horizon.
Business leaders in several major District cities have noted a
variety of problems with short input supplies and slow deliveries.

The

latest list of shortages includes parts for aerospace and communications
equipment, light-weight trucks, castings, aluminum alloys, and paper for
telephone directories.

Deliveries are reported to be "very bad" for auto

parts and many building materials.

Lead times are longer for office

equipment, tools, and some steel goods and finished textile goods.

On

the other hand, there seems to have been some improvement in deliveries
of wood, aluminum, aluminum containers, and insulation.
A poll of business leaders revealed that businessmen take the
possibility of wage and price controls much more seriously than they did
four months earlier.

Quite a few suspected their suppliers, particularly

manufacturers of building materials and steel makers, of raising prices
in anticipation of controls.

The fear of controls has been openly

acknowledged in one industry whose product prices have been escalating

rapidly—food processing.

Food processors have been raising list prices

and discounting; food retailers, who reportedly consider the threat of
controls less ominous, have raised prices in line with the increase in
list, blocking the pass through of lower wholesale food costs.

One

contact remarked that next year's large union wage settlements would
certainly bring on controls if something else doesn't before then;
another thought that the mere mention of controls in the papers touches
off a wave of price increases.

Still, there remains a number of business-

men who feel that rising costs, not the fear of price controls, are the
primary reasons for recent price increases.
The consensus 1979 inflation forecast of these business leaders
was "we'll be lucky if it's not double-digit."

Many offered predictions

of increases in prices in their own industries-steel to rise 9 to 10
percent, shipping industry costs to gain 11 percent, costs in the soft
drink industry to advance 8-1/2-11 percent, and the teamsters to get a
33- to 37-percent compensation hike.
In the face of such inflationary prospects, there is little
evidence of businesses stockpiling to beat price increases.
policies remain conservative.

Inventory

The inflation's psychology's impact can be

seen in investment decisions and consumer behavior, however.

Equipment

suppliers find buyers moving up purchases; builders see projects coming
off the drawing boards after long delays.

Whether for this reason or

others, the past month brought a rash of announcements of large building
projects, both commercial and industrial, that will add substantially to
an already sizable volume of nonresidential construction under way.

Consumer spending growth picked up in August and in September
after the early summer slowdown.

A remarkable number of contacts in a

wide variety of consumer-oriented businesses noted that the higherpriced, higher-quality goods and services have been selling best.

Auto-

mobile sales have been reasonably good, although late arrivals of 1979
models and thin carry-overs of 1978's restrained sales of new domestics
in many areas.

Red Book contacts characterize the younger consumer as

motivated almost entirely by expectations of higher prices, ready to buy
everything now that he can afford or meet the payments on, and having
little use for savings.
High prices and expensive money have yet had little effect on
housing markets in the rapid growth areas, but the end of the boom is in
sight.

Forecasts of a slowdown in 1979 are nearly universal, and some

call for a sharper downturn than was anticipated earlier in the year.
Sales and starts have already tapered off in many slower-growing areas,
where unsold inventories are rising and builders and lenders have virtually ceased speculative ventures.

There is some evidence that mortgage

lenders have become more selective.
As business loan growth has slowed, banks have experienced
exceptionally strong credit demands from consumers for both mortgages and
consumer instalment loans. Auto loans of 42 and 48 months are common;
one director reported that banks in his area are now offering 60-month
loans.

The financial community appears to be troubled by three recent

developments.

The new CDs have been of considerable help in maintaining

deposits, but with T-bill rates approaching state usury ceilings on
mortgage rates, many thrifts fear being priced out of the mortgage markets.

In Tennessee, where the usury ceiling is most difficult to skirt and
applies to corporate loans as well, bankers are debating how much longer
they can afford to pay the maximum rate on six-month certificates.

Some

say they won't hestitate to stop offering them if rates rise further;
others feel they must hold onto these accounts and hope for a decline in
rates because of stiff competition for deposits.

Apparently, some banks

have already suffered losses of funds because they were unwilling to pay
the going rates. With the advent of automatic transfers at hand, bankers
are struggling to develop satisfactory pricing schemes.

Many view the

service as tantamount to interest-bearing checking accounts and expect
earnings declines like those that New England banks experienced with NOW
accounts.

There is some feeling that offering the service is "practically

mandatory."

A further concern is the uncertainty surrounding the regula-

tions that will implement the Community Reinvestment Act.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The uptrend in business plant and equipment spending appears to have
taken the leading role in the expansion while consumer spending has moderated.
Pessimism is widespread among executives, lenders, and consumers, but no significant general weakening is expected through year end.
to rise.

Housing activity continues to exceed expectations, but the market

appears to be softening.
speed.

Employment continues

Meanwhile, nonresidential construction is picking up

Record c o m and soybean crops are expected.
Recent increases in short-term interest rates have convinced some

observers that a slowdown or recession is inevitable next year as tighter credit
policy begins to "bite."

Tighter policy is accepted by most executives as

necessary to slow inflation, except for those in the housing industry.

Some

executives state privately that wage and price controls lie ahead, despite disavowals.

They believe associated market disruptions will endanger economic

growth.
Comments on the proposed natural gas bill, which is expected to pass,
are highly critical.

The extremely complicated measure will create a

"bureaucratic nightmare."

Regulation of intrastate sales of gas is expected

to increase interstate shipments and slow needed shifts to other fuels.
Although results vary by store, total retail sales appear to have
advanced at a slower pace in the past month or two. Weakness has hit major
appliances, especially refrigerators, freezers, washers, and dryers.

Produc-

tion has been cut back.
Despite a disappointing rate of sales in September, the market for
motor vehicles is still believed to be strong—in the 15 million per year range.

Some models of cars are in short supply.
autos out of September schedules.

The recent rail strike cut 1*5,000

(A long strike obviously would be disastrous.)

Auto makers are boosting prices on large cars in greatest demand, while they
hold the line on small cars, to help meet CAFE mileage requirements.
with k2 and 1*8 month car loans has been very good.

Experience

Even longer terms are under

experimentation.
Overall, the producer goods sector looks stronger than earlier in the
year.

Output schedules for diesel engines, heavy trucks, freight cars, and con-

struction equipment have been increased.
into next year.
labor.

Machine tool backlogs stretch well

Bottlenecks are largely restricted to castings and skilled

Some companies would add shifts if enough skilled workers and managers

were available.

A large auto firm reports that over 90 percent of its large

capital outlays are for mandated fuel and emission standards, rather than for
expansion, or even better productivity.
Commercial and industrial construction activity is expanding.
building construction in Chicago is in a full-fledged boom.
announced for luxury apartments and large hotels.
is accelerating as vacant space declines.

Office

New plans have been

Building in industrial parks

Two large regional shopping centers

have been announced for the Chicago area, the first in several years.
The cement shortage has remained serious.
operating on short weeks.

Ready mix plants have been

Sizable public and private construction projects

have been slowed, or even postponed, because of concrete allocations.

The

situation is particularly severe in the Chicago area, because the Illinois
Waterway has been closed for repairs, the normal channel for many barge shipments of cement and aggregate.

Alternative transportation is judged prohibi-

tively expensive for large users.

Record crops of both corn and soybeans are virtually assured.
late plantings, harvesting is on normal schedules.
private credit to carry harvests.

Despite

Many farmers will need

Only 25 percent of corn production in

Illinois is eligible for CCC loans.

The proportion is U5 percent in Iowa and

30 percent in Indiana.
The "pack" of fruits and vegetables has been below expectations.
production is lagging despite apparent high profitability.

Pork

These developments

suggest continued upward pressure on food prices next year.
A major steel producer sees no sign of demand weakening as it did last
year.

In fact, order lead times have extended into January on cold-rolled

sheets for the auto market.

(Steel needs for autos will decline next year be-

cause of downsizing.) Orders for structurals and plates are improved, but lead
times have not extended.

More steel is going to service centers, which mainly

supply the construction and equipment industries.
Transactions in homes appear to be declining as a result of higher
prices and continued high interest rates, which eliminate more and more buyers.
Homes priced at $100,000 or more

and lower-priced homes in less desirable loca-

tions are selling more slowly. After easing in midsummer, mortgage availability
tightened up again in September.

S&Ls are able to attract funds through MM3s,

but they are increasingly uneasy about their growing dependence on such highcost funds.
Demand for labor continues strong.
a huge business.
several years.

Executive placement firms are doing

This year's college graduates had the best choice of jobs in

Unemployment claims continue below year ago in most areas.

Surveys of hiring plans show that more firms expect an increase in employment
than a decrease.

Help-wanted ads in Chicago newspapers are running close to

30 percent above year ago, a wider margin of gain than in earlier months.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District continues to grow according
to reports from area businessmen.

Consumer spending is expanding moderately.

Inventories are generally at or near desired levels.

Loan demand continues

up and savings inflows into financial firms remain at a relatively high
level. Manufacturing activity is expanding, and occasionally shortages are
reported.

Inflation continues a major concern.

Crop production prospects

are generally good.
Consumer spending has expanded moderately in recent weeks following
a lull in the late summer. One major chain store reported that sales in
recent weeks were running about nine percent above year ago levels, while
another reported little change in overall sales during the past four months,
and only a two or three percent growth is expected for 1978. Sales by a
major retailer of shoes were 10 to 12 percent above those recorded a year
ago. Automobile orders are reported to be coming in well and another year of
high automobile sales is expected.
Most respondents indicated that inventories were at or near desired
levels. A representative of a major department store chain reported that a
number of large department stores had started a move to place more control on
inventories which may eventually involve some inventory reduction. A
distributor of fabricated steel products reported that inventories were
relatively high, but at a desired level. Inventory shortages were reported
in a few lines of goods including cement, lubricating equipment, and pumps,
and paper is expected to be in short supply by the end of the year.
With few exceptions, manufacturers note continued expansion. A

manufacturer of lubricating equipment, pumps, and other industrial equipment
reported that orders were 10 percent ahead of a year ago and that inventories
were low. A leading chemical producer reported that textile orders continued
to be abnormally high, and that plastics are off seasonally but not as much
as expected. Export orders for agricultural chemicals are very strong. A
boxboard manufacturer reported a recent pickup in business following an
August lull. Other areas of strength reported were juvenile furniture,
sporting goods, fabricated steel products, and products used for mining coal
and uranium. On the other hand, construction, especially of residential
housing, may be declining somewhat, and some weakness was reported in
industrial chemicals, automatic controls, and resins.
Businessmen in the area continue to speak of inflation as a major
concern.

Sharply rising prices were reported for a number of industrial

raw materials and paper products.
Demand for credit is strong throughout most of the District and
especially strong in the smaller communities. An Arkansas banker reported
that almost all loans there are being made at the legal maximum rate of 10
percent and that consumer lending is being discouraged.

Extension of mortgage

credit in Kentucky continues unabated even at a 9.5 percent rate and a 25
percent down payment.

Loan demand has increased somewhat in recent weeks in

the larger centers, including St. Louis; however, demand here is still
somewhat less than in the outlying areas.

Counter to the general trend of

credit demand, applications for home loans are apparently down in the St.
Louis metropolitan area from a year ago. Home mortgage rates at 9.5 to 10
percent are unchanged from a month ago.
With the exception of a few areas which suffered from drought, above

average crops will be harvested in the District.

The c o m , soybean, and rice

crops are generally good and harvesting weather favorable.

Lack of rainfall

resulted in below average crop yields in southwest Arkansas, western
Kentucky, and parts of southern Illinois. Nevertheless, the unexpected size
of most crops was sufficient to depress average crop prices from month ago
levels.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
No significant changes in either the economic or financial condition
of the Ninth District were observed this month.

The vital signs of the region

are favorable, and respondents to this month's Redbook inquiry are basically
optimistic.

Inflation continues as the major economic concern, since current

interest rates are doing little to slow loan demand.
Throughout

the

district,

industrial

as "reasonably favorable" to "very good."

production

is

characterized

A gradual slowing of growth rates

is expected, in part because comparisons are now being made with months which
were very good last year.
The heady pace of residential construction has moderated slightly
as compared with last year.

But commercial construction activity remains

hectic.
Ag production is proceeding nicely this year.

Record small grain

crops are reported in North Dakota. The excellent yields and higher ag commodity
prices, especially for livestock and dairy, should improve farm incomes this
year.

Grain hauling was somewhat impeded by the rail strike, but this was

not a serious problem.
Inventories are characterized as "normal" to "manageable," and virtually
no one is seeing any buildup.

Our observers consider an inventory induced

turndown very unlikely because of the conservative stocking policies being
followed by area businesses.
There are still some reports of cement shortages, but the problem
is not as acute as it was last month.

Retail sales are generally reported as "normal," "good," or "strong"
throughout the region.

There are spot reports of softness in nondurables,

but big ticket items are strong and auto dealers are happy.

Most observers

think retailers are quite optimistic about the fourth quarter.
ment

in ag earnings

is

sustaining

implement

sales

and

The improve-

otherwise

boosting

economic activity in rural communities.
Ag banks

in the district continue to report heavy loan demand and

little deposit growth.
this year.

Apparently farm receipts are coming in a bit

late

Grain is being put in storage, cattle are not yet moving in Montana

(although some handsome contracts have been drawn), and set-aside

payments

haven't been made.
But

this situation should change soon, so deposits at rural banks

are expected to show growth in late October and in November.

Ag loans are

now being repaid, but expectations of strong loan demand next year are widespread.
Money market certificates-of-deposit are still selling well throughout the district. These instruments don't account for a significant percentage
of consumer time deposits here, but they have helped stem the erosion that
was seen earlier this year.
Throughout

the

district

we

are hearing

reports

that

loan

demand

has not slowed despite high nominal interest rates. With the current inflationary
psychology,

borrowers

apparently

are

attempting

to stay ahead

of expected

price increases.
Big

businesses, which

cite

inflation

as

the economy's number one

problem, are finding that their low inventory positions are giving them the
liquidity

they

need

to

finance

internally.

It seems obvious, then, that

the nominally high interest rates are not so high that they pose any kind
of threat to district economic activity.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Business activity continues to be strong in the Tenth District.

The

volume of consumer purchases at retail stores is growing, some labor markets
are tightening, and prices are rising rapidly.

Inventories at retail stores

are viewed as satisfactory, as are materials inventories of manufacturers.
Fall planting and fall harvests are both progressing well on the District's
farms.

Loan demand at commercial banks remains strong, and deposit growth

is moderate.
Most Tenth District retail stores surveyed are reporting sales
increases (dollar volume) about 10 to 12 per cent ahead of year-ago levels.
Sales of men's and women's apparel, appliances, and furniture have shown the
greatest strength.

However, there seems to have been a softening in con-

sumer purchases in recent months, as inflation worries apparently are having
an effect on buying.

Most retailers are passing on cost increases to their

customers, in order to maintain profit margins.
reported to be satisfactory.

Inventory levels are generally

Those stores with growing inventories are chiefly

in areas with rapidly growing sales.

The outlook for the rest of the year

and the first half of 1979 is mixed.

Those companies with stores in areas

with booming economies (i.e., Denver and Kansas City) are especially optimistic.
Compared to this time last year, prices for most major industrial
inputs are up approximately 8 to 10 per cent, according to Tenth District
purchasing managers.

During the past three months, the August steel price

increase has contributed to a 5 to 8 per cent increase in major inputs for
the small appliance, machinery, and agricultural equipment industries.
Reactions toward anticipated price increases for the remainder of the year

are mixed, with those industries which rely on primary metals products
expecting increases ranging from 2 to 6 per cent.
Input material availability is beginning to present some problems,
as lead times are lengthening in all industries contacted—particularly in
the aerospace, agricultural equipment, and office and computing equipment
industries.

For the aerospace industry, this problem is particularly acute

and is expected to worsen throughout the year.

For the other industries,

purchasing agents have been able to adjust for the lengthening, thereby
avoiding any significant availability difficulties.
Currently, material inventories are at satisfactory levels.

Over

the past few months, inventory expansion has occurred in the aerospace,
agricultural equipment, and machinery industries.

This action is partly a

hedge against possible ill effects from another hard winter, and partly the
result of expectations for strong future demand.

These industries expect to

continue their inventory expansion for the remainder of the year.
Skilled labor for the aerospace industry is in short supply, and
plant operations are at full capacity.

The small appliance industry is

experiencing some difficulty in finding assembly line workers, but is still
operating at near full capacity.

The remainder of the industries contacted

are experiencing no real difficulties with labor supplies or plant capacity.
Planting of the new winter wheat crop is progressing reasonably well,
although hampered by a lack of moisture in some areas.

However, most observers

expect that the planting process will be completed fairly soon and that the
new crop will probably be reasonably well established before it goes dormant
for the winter.
The dry weather has been conducive to the harvesting of fall crops

in the District.

Though the harvest is running a little behind normal, good

progress is being made.

Generally, corn yields are good, especially in

Nebraska where a very large crop is expected.

The prospects for soybeans are

somewhat spotty in the District, because of the weather problems that were
encountered last spring.

Many people remain quite concerned about the avail-

ability of storage and transporation facilities.

Most commercial facilities

are full, but new on-farm storage may alleviate most, if not all, of the
potential storage problems.
Most bankers contacted in the Tenth District report that loan demand
remains strong, with particular strength in the demands for agricultural and
real estate loans.

Demands for commercial, consumer, construction, and energy-

related loans are also reported as moderate to strong.

Nearly all bankers

contacted raised their prime lending rates last month and expect further
increases before the end of the year. Most have followed the money center
banks to current prime rates of 9 3/4 per cent.

About one-half of the bankers

contacted have either tightened other lending terms recently, or expect to
do so in the near future.
future loan demand.

Yet most bankers expected no problems in meeting

However, some may cut back on real estate loans.

Deposit growth is moderate at most banks contacted.

Demand deposits

are flat or up moderately; savings deposits are flat or down slightly from a
year ago due to higher interest rates and shifts to money market CD's; and
time deposits are generally up over a year ago.

With the possible exception

of demand deposits, deposits are expected to grow moderately in the near future
due to crop harvests, higher cattle and grain prices, and a boom in energyrelated industries.

Most bankers contacted will offer automatic transfers

beginning November 1 but do not anticipate a strong response immediately.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The Directors and businessmen surveyed this month report no
significant change in the strong pace of economic activity in the Eleventh
District. Auto and department store sales continue to grow.

Low inven-

tory levels have limited new car sales somewhat, although inventories at
department stores are more than ample.

Manufacturing activity also remains

strong, and construction of new plants and expansions is well ahead of
a year ago.

Loan demand at both banks and savings and loan associations

appears to have slowed from the peak rates recorded earlier this year,
while deposit inflows continue to grow moderately.

Our October survey

of agribankers indicates funds available for farm loans are in short supply.
Auto sales are up across the District and could be even better
if dealer inventories of 1978 models were larger.

Bargain hunting for

1978 cars is on the rise, but early sales of the 1979 models are strong.
Several dealers also note that used car sales have picked up recently
in response to higher new car prices.
Department store sales remain 12 to
ago.

percent ahead of a year

Many merchants, however, appear overly optimistic as to prospects

for sales, and excess inventories have developed at a large number of
stores.

Several stores are using promotional efforts to reduce excess

inventories.

Others, however, appear willing to carry heavier than

normal fall inventories into the Christmas season.

Much of the strength

in department store sales at the present time is centered in sportswear
and sporting equipment.
and appliances.

Other goods selling well include home furnishings

High production levels remain the norm for the manufacturing firms
surveyed, "but many respondents expect a significant slowing in business
next year.

Higher materials and labor costs and declining productivity

continue to be cited as major problems, but they have not had any visible
impact on output.
expand.

In fact, the District's industrial base continues to

An electric utility, for example, reports that there were more

new plants and expansions constructed in its service area during the first
eight months of this year than for all of last year.

Much of the growth is

in the electronics, oil field equipment, and auto-related industries.
While several large chemical plants are under construction, some plant
expansions have been delayed in light of the large amount of new capacity
coming on stream.
The boom in oil and gas drilling activity continues in the District,
but the current surplus of natural gas in the Texas intrastate market has
reduced the number of active rigs in South Texas.

The current high level

of activity has produced numerous equipment shortages including drill pipe.
A major oil field equipment manufacturer reports that a shortage of cobalt
used in alloyed steel products is developing.
Industry sources describe production of petrochemicals as "good."
One respondent, however, indicated output may have peaked during the second
quarter and expects a moderate decline in sales and continued soft prices.
Benzene is the only major chemical that is in "extremely" short supply.
Lending activity of District banks appears to have settled back
to a moderate rate of expansion compared to the record rates of growth
in the first half of the year.

With liquidity levels high at most banks,

loan officers are becoming more aggressive in seeking out new borrowers.

In the face of rising interest rates, however, bankers are particularlyeager to make short-term loans.

But many expect interest rates to

peak in the next few months, and some indicate that they may begin
moving into long-term contracts in the near future.

Total deposits

at most banks continue to grow slowly, although demand deposits declined
slightly in conjunction with the September 15 tax payment date.
Mortgage lending by S&L's remains strong but has backed off
from the frantic pace experienced several months ago. A further gradual
slowing in mortgage demand is expected.

Savings inflows continued to

grow at a moderate rate in September, but inflows remained below yearearlier levels.

Insurance company and foreign money are reported to

be available in large amounts for real estate financing and purchases.
Preliminary findings from our October survey of agribankers
indicate that funds available for farm loans are in short supply and
that few bankers are actively seeking new agricultural loan accounts.
Interest rates for all categories of farm loans have climbed rapidly in
recent months with the- general rise in interest rates and with expanded
demands for feeder cattle and operating loans.

Financial conditions in

the livestock sector are much improved from a year ago.

However, crop

farmers are in a much worse position than last year as much needed rains
arrived too late to raise yields to normal levels in many areas.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
The economic health of the West appears to be somewhat stronger than
reported last month.

Retail sales are up due both to a back-to-school surge

and a Boeing-led boom in the state of Washington.

Construction continues to

expand in most parts of the District, and perhaps a bit too strongly in
southern California.

Several industries report increased export sales due to

the decline of the dollar. Mortage interest rates have begun to move up another
notch in California and many observers feel that this will be the peak for this
phase in the cycle.
Growth in retail sales is generally stronger than reported last
month, due partly to a back-to-school surge and a population boom in the state
of Washington.

The largest department store chain in southern California re-

ports that sales in the first two weeks of September are up 18 percent from
year-earlier levels.

Elsewhere in southern California, retail sales were re-

ported to be growing at a rate of 10-15 percent over the past two months.
Oregon also reports strong consumer spending.

But Washington appears to be

turning in the strongest performance with retail sales running 30 percent
above a year ago.

Much of this is due to a Boeing-led economic and population

boom—car registrations are up 20 percent from a year ago.

Domestic auto sales

are reported strong all over the District and there is an actual shortage of
new trucks in southern California.

Imported auto sales are somewhat weaker.

Construction is still booming in many parts of the district and is
felt by one director to be "too strong for a healthy industry" in southern
California.

Most of the strength there is in non-residential, but there are

still reports of condominium developments selling out before the foundations
are laid.

One builder-director expressed serious concern about construction

costs which he claimed to be advancing at 1 percent per month, due to declining
worker productivity and rising input (expecially land) costs.

Furthermore,

many labor contracts expire in spring and he fears substantial wage increases.
Shortages of skilled workers, cement, air conditioning, electrical equipment,
tile, wood and assorted other materials are reported in this southern-California
construction boom.

While construction elsewhere in the District remains gen-

erally strong, Idaho does report a slow-down due to a shortage of funds caused
by interest rates bumping against the State's usury ceiling.
The effect of the dollar's decline on western industry is mixed. Naturally, a number of industries neither buy nor sell abroad and have thus been
fairly well insulated from international currency movements.
affected either on the input or output side, or both.

Others have been

The aluminum industry

notes increased costs for imported raw materials but no stimulation of export
sales.

The forest products industry has noticed a significant rise in their

sales abroad—much stronger than would normally be expected at this phase in
their export cycle.

A major chain saw company related that its foreign sales

have increased nicely due to its increased competitiveness with its chief competition, which is located in Germany.
increase in export sales.
the media

An electronics firm also notes a strong

In the opposite direction, a director involved in

related that foreign auto dealers in Washington are increasing their

promotional activities to counter resistance to higher prices.
Most California S&L's have raised their prime loan rate for residential
mortgages from 9 3/4 to 10 percent.
mid-August.

The former rate had been in effect since

This move was explained as an adaptation to the higher costs re-

sulting from a significant transfer of funds from passbook savings into the
higher-interest money market certificates.

At this writing, banks had not joined

in the increase, but there is every indication that they will.

Our bank

directors in California generally report stronger mortgage demand than they
can satisfy, so something must give in the near future—either a weakening in
demand or an increase in rates.
Elsewhere in the District a slight softening in mortgage demand
is noted and often attributed to high mortgage rates. Most feel that mortgage
rates have peaked, but there is a split between those who feel that rates will
remain at their present, high plateau for some time, and those who see a decline before the end of the year.

The former group argues that the high cost

of money will keep rates up despite any weakening in mortgage demand.

Some

of this group also doubts that any significant weakening in demand will continue, because consumers continue to perceive home ownership as one of the
best hedges against inflation.
Our non-bank directors were generally unperturbed by high money market rates.

Both a large clothing manufacturer and a large forest products

producer claimed to be net lenders in the money market and were thus positively
affected by the hike in rates.

Kaiser Aluminum noted that its investment

plans would be changed only in reaction to a significant change in long-term
rates.

There were, however, several reports of efforts to reduce inventory

levels as a result of high short-term rates.

And one university noted that

with the high rates coming in summer, which is their peak seasonal borrowing
period, they had had to postpone several projects.

