CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 13, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 22
Eighth District-St. Louis page 25
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 28
Tenth District-Kansas City page 31
Eleventh District-Dallas page 34
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 37

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.]

Business conditions in most districts continue to improve, but
more signs of weakness are cropping up. Most "businessmen look for a
slowdown in economic activity next year.

Christmas sales are slightly

ahead of a year ago. Production in manufacturing continues to advance
slowly; no significant shortages, excesses, or bottlenecks have developed
yet. Bank lending is expected to increase at a faster rate despite
higher interest rates and tighter restrictions on terms for loans.
Money market certificates continue to provide substantial amounts of
funds to banks and S&L's. Home building has begun to weaken. Net farm
income has risen sharply with higher farm prices and bumper crops.
Most districts report the dollar volume of Christmas sales is
running slightly ahead of a year ago, and much of the strength is in
soft goods since purchases of big ticket items other than autos are
generally slowing. The biggest sales gains are on the West Coast where
California's Proposition 13 property tax cut has helped to boost consumer
spending. Early holiday sales were slowed by warmer than normal weather
which dampened consumer enthusiasm for shopping, but sales in some areas
are expected to rebound before Christmas. Heavy promotions account for
much of the strength in sales reported by New York, Atlanta, and Dallas.
Retail inventories are high, according to most districts, but
remain within manageable limits. Philadelphia, however, reports stocks
at national chain stores are beginning to accumulate at unplanned rates.

New York, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, on the other hand, indicate
sales are reducing inventory levels.
Hew car sales are strong in the Chicago, St. Louis, Dallas, and
San Francisco districts but are running below year ago levels in Atlanta.
Sales of trucks and used cars are growing also. Most reports indicate
new car inventories are adequate, but new trucks are in short supply.
Manufacturing output continues to rise, although the rate of
increase is slowing. High levels of capacity utilization are reported
in many districts, but no major bottlenecks have developed. Boston
reports a slippage in the number of small firms reporting increases in
new orders, and Philadelphia and Richmond indicate factory payrolls have
leveled off. Manufacturers' inventories are fairly well balanced.
However, Richmond and St. Louis indicate stocks are excessive, and a
cutback in reorders for consumer goods in the Cleveland district has led
to involuntary additions to stocks. Atlanta and Chicago, on the other
hand, report a tightening in factory inventories.

Shortages of materials

and labor continue to be confined largely to construction, but some
easing in the supply of building materials was noted by Dallas and San
Francisco. Price increases for major materials should be more widespread
next year according to Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas City.
Despite higher interest rates, bank loan demands continue to
increase, and liquidity positions of most banks remain adequate to meet
foreseeable requirements. However, bankers are becoming more selective
in approving loan applications, and St. Louis reports a number of small
outlying banks are loaned up.

Money market certificates of deposit continue to be a major
source of funds for banks and S&L's, and most existing certificates are
being rolled over as they mature. Deposit inflows continue weak in time
and passbook accounts, and some disintermediation is noted at banks by
Philadelphia and at S&L's by St. Louis.
Construction activity remains at a high level, as a weakening
in home building is being offset by increases in nonresidential construction. Residential construction is slowing as a result of substantial
tightening in mortgage markets. Home building in New York state remains
moribund, and an increase in that state's usury ceiling is not expected
to reduce a heavy backlog of mortgage applications or increase sales
significantly.

Condominium sales are bright spots in the housing markets

in the Chicago and San Francisco districts as conversions have continued
to rise.
Higher farm prices and bumper crops, except for cotton and
peanuts, are raising net farm income.

Improved financial conditions for

farmers and ranchers have led to substantially higher land values in the
Kansas City district. Shortages of railroad cars have delayed grain
movements from farms according to Minneapolis.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Red Book interviews in the First District indicate that although overall
economic trends remain very strong some softness has begun to appear in a few
areas. The District's factories are operating at very high levels with
occasional shortages of particular types of labor and materials appearing.
After some slowdown earlier, demand for credit is increasing strongly at commercial
banks across the region. While sales in general are reported to be very strong
some retailers are not seeing the increases they expected.
The Chief Executive Officer of a large department store chain in Boston
reports that sales in the last week of November and the first week of December
were much softer than expected; up to this time sales over year-earlier figures
had been very good. Furthermore, his conversations with associated retailers
in other parts of the country indicate that this pattern may be duplicated
elsewhere. This particular chain has had somewhat higher inventories than
desirable for the last few months and thus will face an even more difficult
adjustment process if sales continue to lag. However, Directors from Vermont
and Connecticut report that retail sales continue to grow strongly in those
states.
A manufacturer of chemical products used by the tire industry indicates
that their plants are operating at record levels. However, a manufacturer of
higher priced refrigerators, ovens, and other consumer durables reports some
slowdown in sales from earlier in the year as well as more aggressive-price
competition.

Similarly a survey of small businesses across New England indicates

that while shipments are at very high levels there is some slippage in the
number of firms reporting increases in new orders.

A large money market bank in Boston reports that commercial loan demand
has resumed a strong upward trend after some slowdown earlier this fall. This
bank is one of those offering a split prime rate with a discount for smaller
businesses. The Chairman of the Board of the Bank reports that they decided
to offer the split rate because it was very well received when they did so in
1973 and will cost them no more than 2 p e r

share. A commercial banker in

Vermont reports very strong loan demand and indicates that his bank has
begun to ration credit. Other northern Hew England bankers also report very
strong credit demand.
While there is no indication of widespread difficulties in obtaining
materials some spot shortages are in evidence. A summary of New England purchasing
managers indicates that delivery lead times are stretching out for electronic
components, motors, valves and for some types of steel, aluminum, and paper
products. No dramatic shift in price increases has been observed. However,
the President of a large chemical company reported putting price increases into
effect much sooner than normal because of a concern that the price guidelines
may be administered more stringently later in the year. Manufacturers in almost
all parts of New England report difficulty finding certain types of labor,
particularly electronic technicians and machinists.
Professors Samuelson and Solow were reached for comment this month.
Samuelson recommended a monetary policy that would achieve a real growth rate
below that recorded in the third quarter but warned against aiming for a
negative growth rate. To induce a recession intentionally would be the
clearest possible example of the hubris of fine-tuning. The mild recession
in the standard forecast would lower the range of probable inflation rates
and reduce the chances of double-digit rates, but the magnitude of the reduction

would be very small in the short run. A slow growth path may, nevertheless, be
desirable to avoid a racheting up of inflation.
Professor Solow agreed that policy can't take the chance of an
overheated economy. Nevertheless, given the importance of momentum in the
economy, it is dangerous to try to engineer a "small" recession. A recession
policy risks unintentionally producing a major recession which, in turn, would
feed a future stop-go policy cycle. The steeper the downturn, the more
politically inevitable is a sharp policy reversal in which the transitory gains
are lost. Solow prefered selecting a target degree of slack or tightness
which can be maintained for a long period of time. He suggested the proper
degree of slack is not far from that presently experienced.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK
Economic activity in the Second District appears to have expanded at
a moderate pace in November and early December, according to the recent comments
of Directors and other business leaders. Retailers profess to be more or less
satisfied with the way their Christmas sales are shaping up, and they also report that their inventories are well in control. Elsewhere in the regional
economy, business activity appears to be moving along without any hitches. Most
businesmen continue to keep a very tight rein on their inventories in anticipation
of a slowing in the national rate of economic advance. Meanwhile, no one seems
very optimistic about the prospective success of the recent voluntary wage and
price guidelines.

Senior lending officers at the major New York City banks

generally expect stronger business loan demand in the near term.
After a weak showing in early November, retail sales in the Second
District apparently strengthened substantially in recent weeks. A spokesman
for a leading national chain of department stores noted that catalogue sales,
which are an early indication of the Christmas selling season, have been brisk.
Early in the holiday season, however, retail sales were sluggish.

In New York

City, retailers had hoped for a rebound in consumer spending with the end of
the newspaper strike in early November.

Initially, however, retailing activity

remained slow. One director attributed at least part of the sluggishness to
warmer weather which may have dampened consumer enthusiasm for holiday-season
shopping. After Thanksgiving, retail sales in the city have rebounded more than
seasonally. A similar revival occurred in the upstate region, according to the
Directors of the Buffalo Branch. Merchants are now looking forward to a pros<

perous Christmas selling season. Retailers are using heavy promotional

campaigns to bolster sales, but there is little evidence of unusual discounting. Evidently, since merchants have maintained tight controls on
their inventories, there are few excess stocks of merchandise to spark
sharp price reductions.
Business activity outside of retailing has lately been fairly
robust. Although some businessmen are concerned about the economic outlook
for next year, none of those contacted indicated they were dissatisfied
with their company's current volume of business.

Indeed, one large corporation

in the fabricated metals industry reports that it is operating at capacity.
The demand for petroleum products is also strong, and the oil industry is
currently operating close to capacity.

Sales have also teen strong for the

photographic equipment industry. Two construction firms which deal in
industrial and commercial building and renovation report increases in activity,
led by a revival in activity in Manhattan.

In contrast, residential home

building in Hew York State remains moribund. The upstate directors noted that
there was a heavy backlog of mortgage applications in the Buffalo and Rochester
areas, which weie awaiting the increase in the State's usury ceiling to 9 1/2
percent. At least one banking director, however, expressed some doubt as to
whether this higher mortgage rate would alter the current situation since it
was still below currenct market rates.
On the financial scene, senior lending officers at the major New York
City banks generally expect stronger business loan demand in the near term.
Although the prime rate has risen considerably in recent months, almost all of
the respondents report that they have not tightened either compensating balance
requirements or standards of credit worthiness. Moreover, there generally has

not been less willingness to accommodate either established or new business
customers.

However, most of the respondents are becoming increasingly-

hesitant to commit themselves to fixed-rate loans.

THIRD

DISTRICT-PHILADELPHIA

Indications from the Third District are that local economic activity is mixed
in December.

Manufacturers say business conditions have worsened since last month

and have consequently held the line on hiring.

Looking ahead to the first half of

1979, executives in the industrial sector see business slipping a little further.

In the

retail sector, merchants report sluggish sales currently and look for more of the same
over the next two quarters.

Unplanned inventory accumulation is being experienced

in some stores, mostly at the larger, national chains.

Area bankers report strong

loan demand so far in December, and look for continued growth next year.

Bankers

are in disagreement about the future course of interest rates.
Manufacturers responding to this month's Business Outlook Survey say business
conditions have deteriorated since November.

Only 10 percent of the respondents

note a pickup in activity at their firms over the last month, while 28 percent report
a decline.

This yields a "net change" of minus 18 percentage points—the first major

decline in business activity at firms in the Survey since March 1975.

Supporting the

claims of a drop-off in business, respondents report both new orders and shipments
to be down in December.

Inventories are stable after a dip last month.

O n the

employment front, the size of factory work forces has remained more or less unchanged,
while the workweek has been trimmed slightly.
For

the longer term,

economic conditions.

manufacturers

are generally

bearish

about

future

They look for a further slowing of business activity between

now and June, with no change in the level of new orders and only a fractional increase
in shipments.

Consistent with this outlook for production is the forecast of no growth

in the size of factory payrolls over the next two quarters along with further cuts in
the length of the workweek.

A

Director of this Bank, whose business is in the manufacturing

agrees that the outlook for 1979 is "shaky."
recession next year.

sector,

In fact, his company is budgeting for a

H e sees a downturn as a virtual certainty and says the only

questions are when it will come and how deep it will be.
Inflation in the industrial sector continues in December.

Over 60 percent

of the manufacturers polled this month report higher prices for inputs, while about
30 percent are charging more for their finished products.

A s for the future, the

executives surveyed look for price hikes to become more widespread over the next
six months.

Eighty-six percent of the respondents expect their costs to go up in the

first half of 1979, and about 65 percent plan to raise the prices of the goods they
sell in that period.
Sales at area department stores are extremely slow so far in December,
but retailers are looking for a big surge to come seven to ten days before Christmas.
Reports of current dollar sales range from only 3 percent above to 2 percent below
December '77 levels, which means that all merchants contacted have experienced a
drop in constant dollar sales.
figures for this period, even
Local

merchants

Current sales volume is generally below
though those projections

mention

several reasons

were "extremely

projected
modest."

for sluggish sales this

month,

including unseasonably warm weather which has not put shoppers in the "holiday buying
mood" and the possibility that general uncertainty about the course of the economy
over the next few
otherwise spend.

months is causing consumers to hold on to dollars they

might

Another reason for the poor sales performance might be that this

year's sales are being compared to record levels in December '77, making it difficult
to show much

improvement.

However, a Director of this Bank whose business is

retailing sees the current sales slowdown as part of a longer-term trend that started
in October.

H e expects consumers will continue to reduce spending and lead the

economy into recession next year.

Despite slower than expected sales, inventories at department stores based
in this area are reported to be in good shape.

Contacts in the retail sector indicate

that this is not the case in the national chains where stocks are beginning to accumulate
at an unplanned pace.

Merchants at the smaller, local chains say they have been

insulated from unplanned inventory accumulation because they have more flexibility
in buying their merchandise than do managers in the larger chains, who often make
inventory committments many months in advance.
Looking ahead

to the next six months, most retailers contacted

foresee

little improvement in business, with the exception of the period immediately prior to
Christmas.

Forecasts of sales between now and June range from "flat" to 4 percent

ahead of year-earlier levels.

Some plans to cut inventories early in 1979 are reported.

Area bankers say that the demand for both consumer and business loans is
generally

strong

this

month.

Reports

of

current

C&I

loan volume compared

December '77 levels range from "about even" to 8 1/2 percent ahead.
as expected or a little ahead of plan for this period.

to

This is generally

A s for the future, contacts in

the banking sector foresee moderate to strong growth in loan demand over the next
six months.
Future interest rates are a matter of some speculation and disagreement
among local bankers.

Expectations concerning the timing of a peak in rates, as well

as their actual levels, vary widely.

Six month projections of the prime rate, currently

11 1/2 percent at all of the banks contacted, range from a climb to 12 percent by
early 1979 and then a plateau through June, to a continued rise over the next two
quarters with a prime rate of 13 percent occurring in early summer.
High interest rates continue to cause some disintermediation at area banks,
but the problem

is apparently not serious.

A t least part of the outflow of funds

from consumer-type time and savings deposits is being offset by new purchases of

6-month money market certificates.
currently.

The certificates are being aggressively promoted

Moreover, a large portion of the certificates first issued in June and now

coming due are reportedly being rolled over, thereby supplying the banks with a
continuing source of funds.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND
Economic activity in the Fourth District continues to expand in
response to a high level of production of automobiles and steel and further
increases in capital goods. However, manufacturing activity is being
supported by some involuntary inventory buildup, especially of consumer
goods. While retailers and producers of consumer goods, excluding autos,
are not very optimistic over sales prospects, capital goods producers are
encouraged because of sizable backlogs and a generally favorable outlook
for new orders. Steel operations are expected to continue at 85 to 90
percent of capacity again next quarter. Mortgage loan demand has dropped
sharply in recent weeks.

Intense efforts are underway to prevent a default

by the city of Cleveland on December 15.
Several key industries in the District are manufacturing at rates
close to effective capacity, especially primary metals, machine tools, arid
industrial machinery. Although there are no widespread bottlenecks or
shortages such as in 1973 and 197^, shortages of skilled labor—and even
dependable labor—are constraining production, especially in machinery
industries.
Auto producers and suppliers are still relatively optimistic,
despite recent slippage in sales. Suppliers of steel, glass, tires, and
auto components report GMC orders coincide with their publicly announced
production schedules for the next few months. Also, a major appliance
producer is reasonably optimistic that consumers are unlikely to sharply
curtail spending for these goods because of continued gains in employment
and income and the strong replacement market for major appliances.

On the other hand, other producers and retailers of consumer goods
are less sanguine. A major producer of household soaps, detergents, and
paper products indicates that ye sir-over-year sales gains in recent months
have slowed and are below expectations.

In his judgment, high rates of

inflation have caused consumers to cut back consumption of personal care
products. Retailers of general merchandise also report reduced sales
gains in recent weeks. They expect, at best, that this month's year-overyear sales increase will be larger than last month's but well below the
increase recorded in December 1977Inventories of consumer goods have been built rapidly at both
the retail and manufacturing level. According to one report, retailers
have cut back reorders to keep stocks from building further, but manufacturers have continued to produce goods in expectation that sales would
continue at last spring's high rates. Therefore, some manufacturers have
involuntarily added to stocks in recent months.
A recent surge in new orders and backlogs adds support to expectations by some capital goods producers that gains in real spending next
year will be in the 5- to 6-percent range, instead of 2 percent or less
as indicated in latest surveys. According to some producers, the latest
surge in orders reflects a growing substitution of capital for labor
because of a shortage of qualified workers, favorable effects of dollar
depreciation, and perhaps some double ordering because of shortages.
Those firms that produce aircraft and aerospace components, freight cars
and railroad equipment, and computer equipment axe most optimistic. However, others have less favorable expectations because they have not
experienced recent acceleration in orders or because orders have been

relatively flat with little prospect for a pickup. Major machine tool
builders report strong but not accelerating order activity, and one builder
pushed back his expectation of a peak in new orders from third quarter 1978
to the spring of 1979-

A major producer of coal mining machinery believes

many of his product lines are at cyclical peaks in orders. Still others
see a relatively flat year ahead because of a lack of broadly based strength
in capital goods. A major builder of basic processing plants remarked that
his backlog is not large enough to sustain operations through a mild
recession as has typically been the case in the past.
Steel producers are operating close to 90 percent of capacity and
are growing more confident that this rate will carry at least through the
first quarter of 1979-

Orders have picked up strongly and those for Jan-

uary and February are considerably better than anticipated.

Strong demand

from the construction industry and capital goods produced the unexpected
strength in steel. Producers have not yet had setbacks from the auto
industry. Moreover, domestic steel users may be substituting some foreign
for domestic steel, as higher trigger prices either reduced the price
advantage of foreign steel or boost foreign above domestic prices. The
strike of independent steel haulers is disrupting as much as 5 percent of
total steel shipments this month, especially in the Pittsburgh producing
area, although neither steel production nor employment has been affected
by the strike.
Mortgage loan demand in recent weeks has weakened in response to
a usual seasonal drop and further tightening in lending terms by banks and
S&L's. Mortgage money generally is available, although borrowers are
discouraged by rates that are as high as 11.5 percent for a 95 percent loan.

Lenders are charging 9.75 percent to 10.75 percent for a 60 percent loan.
S&L's are having no difficulty in rolling over the certificates now maturing,
and some report that strong deposit flows are continuing into early December
because of the money market certificates. Those S&L's that acknowledge use
of funds obtained from certificates for short-term investments, especially
CD's, rationalize their actions on grounds they can more easily support
continued issuance of certificates, while at the same time making funds
available to prospective home borrowers.
In the city of Cleveland, serious proposals have emerged in a lastminute effort to avoid default on $15.5 million in bond anticipation notes
that mature December 15. A plan developed by an outside consultant calls
for resolution of the sale of the municipal light plant and the passage of
a state law establishing a fiscal control board with power to raise the
income tax rate by 0.5 percent to 1.5 percent. The rate increase would make
Cleveland's rate comparable to other Ohio cities and add about $30 million
in annual revenues.

The city administration plans a layoff of 600 fire,

police, and service workers starting next year which would save about
$6 million.

It also has scheduled bill payments for December 31 so that

checks will not clear the banks until 1979. Even with a rollover, the
city would still face the possibility of default when an additional $25
million in notes begins maturing next summer.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Business activity in the Fifth District in November seems to have
held on to most of the gains of recent months, but apparently made only
meager further advances. In the manufacturing sector new orders continued
to move ahead but gains were spotty. Backlogs of orders and inventories
were down slightly from a month ago. Retailers report little change in
total sales over the month, but suggest that relative sales of big ticket
items weakened. Price increases continue widespread in all sectors and the
business outlook remains largely negative. Year-end credit conditions in
the District appear to be moderately tight, with rates on loans rising and
nonprice lending terms tightening. Liquidity

is good at regional banks,

and thrift institutions continue to rely heavily on funds raised through
6-month money market certificates.

Loans at District banks are off season-

ally but bankers consider loan demand generally to be moderately strong.
Our latest survey of District manufacturers indicates continued
expansion of activity during November although this expansion narrowed markedly from recent months' experience. On balance, shipments and new orders
rose, but the incidence of declining activity at individual firms or establishments also increased. Backlogs of orders were unchanged to slightly
lower overall. Inventories, despite scattered reductions, apparently rose
relative to desired levels. Employment and weekly hours worked were basically unchanged at those manufacturers surveyed. Over 25 percent of our
respondents now view current inventory levels as excessive. Current plant
and equipment capacity is essentially in line with desired levels, and there
is almost no sentiment among respondents for altering current expansion plans.

Much the same picture emerges from the results of our survey of
retailers. District retailers surveyed report little or 110 change in total
sales during the month, but some noted a decline in relative sales of big
ticket items. Retail inventories rose somewhat from October, but remain
essentially in line with desired levels. Retail employment also rose in our
latest survey period.
Retailers and manufacturers continue to report widespread price increases. Respondents' expectations remain broadly pessimistic. A majority
of manufacturers surveyed expect the level of business activity nationally
and in their respective market areas to decline over the next six months.
In addition, 40 percent expect the level of production in their own firms
to worsen over that period. Retailers generally share these expectations,
but as a group are somewhat less negative about the outlook for their respective market areas and firms. A large majority of the Richmond Directors feels
that there is at least a 50-50 chance of a recession developing in 1979.
Business lending in the District is seasonally depressed with substantial rundowns in loans to commodity dealers and the wholesale trade sector.
Nonetheless, there is a general expectation that demand for commercial and
industrial loans over the next three months will equal or possibly exceed Its
recent cyclical strength. Nonprice terms on loans to businesses have tightened
of late, taking the form of firmer compensating balance requirements and
limits on approvals of lines of credit to new customers. Also, fixed rate
loans are harder to come by. Uncertainty about the real estate outlook has
made banks less willing to make construction loans to builders, especially for
multi-family projects.

Instalment lending to consumers is healthy, although

not as strong as in previous months.

Liquidity at most District banks seems ample. Regional banks are
experiencing strong trend growth in private demand deposits and growth in
small time deposits seems to be holding up fairly well. Deposit growth at
regional thrifts has virtually halted except for 6-month money market deposits.
It does not appear that ATS services offered by regional commercial banks are
drawing funds away from thrift institutions.
Bumper harvests are in prospect for most District field crops except
cotton and peanuts. Farmers' cash income from farm marketings continued to
improve through August, with some improvement over a year ago beginning to
show up in crop receipts as well as in receipts from livestock. Further gains
in cash receipts appear likely as the large crops are harvested and sold.
Farmers' gross returns from the 1978 flue-cured tobacco crop, most of which
was sold after the month of August, were at a record level some 26 percent
above a year ago.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Business activity has slowed in the Southeast, with hesitation generated by pessimistic attitudes and concern with high interest rates. Consumer
spending for apparel and new automobiles has been weak; retailers will depend
on heavy promotions and markdowns to help clear inventories in what they expect
to be an unspectacular holiday season. Producers, too, are aiming at tighter
control of stocks.

Commercial construction continues to advance, but home

building is waning. Many S&Ls have shown reluctance in mortgage lending.
Demand for all types of loans remains strong; money market certificates have
been an important source of funds at both banks and thrifts. Crop harvests
have been very good, but problems linger from the recently ended drought.
Branch directors and their business contacts almost unaminously foresee a slowdown or recession in 1979, a sharp contrast to the expectations prevailing two months ago. High interest rates are now the scapegoat for current
and prospective economic ills, replacing inflation as the most frequently
mentioned problem. Recession talk appears to have been a major influence on
attitudes; many fear that it will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Still,
most contacts anticipate only a mild downturn, if any, and expect their areas
to weather it well.
Contacts generally characterize November retail sales as good,
especially of luxury and "better" goods, but nearly all noted some weakness in
apparel sales due to unseasonably warm weather. Reports are mixed on Christmas
sales thus far; expectations are that holiday sales will be even to slightly
ahead of last year. Heavy promotions and discounts are expected to continue,
evidencing retailers' fears that stocks are on the high side and their pessimism for early 1979 prospects.

New car sales are reported to be down, sharply in some areas, or
even with last year at best.

Inventories appear to be adequate; dealers

blame the slowness on high prices, shrinking sizes, and consumers' uncertainty
about the economic outlook. Commercial sales of trucks and cars for rental,
however, have been strong, as are sales of late-model used cars.
Manufacturers, influenced by prospects of slower shipments and the
rising cost of inventory financing, seem to have tightened their rein on
stocks. Although plant utilization is generally high, materials shortages
are minor. Complaints of slow deliveries or tight supplies are less frequent
than they were two months ago.
Commercial and industrial construction generally remains strong,
with more on tap. In-migration of industry from outside the region continues
at a steady pace; Georgia-Pacific's relocation of headquarters to Atlanta was
noteworthy among last month's announcements.

Several areas, however, report

that rising costs, particularly of power and money, have resulted in some
slowdown.
While final demand for new homes continues fairly strong in all but
the highest price ranges, housing construction is suffering the impact of
high interest rates, tight money, and wariness of prospects.

Speculative

building has virtually ceased in all but the most active markets (south
Florida); S&Ls have moved to restrict construction loans; lot sales are
meeting resistance in some areas; and planned projects are being delayed.
Supplies of mortgage money appear somewhat strained.

S&Ls' sales of

money market certificates have been strong, but, overall, net inflows have
been weak to moderate.

From throughout the District, we hear reports of

S&Ls, both large and small, suspending or limiting commitments. However,

many of these are rebuilding liquidity by investing in banks' large CDs,
anticipating higher mortgage rates (especially in states where the legislature is expected to consider raising the usury ceiling next month).

Some are

requiring larger downpayments; others are pushing up interest rates and/or
points as usury ceilings permit. Conventional rates range from 9 5/8 to
10 3/4 percent, points from 2 to 4 1/2 percent.

In states where rates have

reached usury ceilings, there is some evidence that borrowers are switching
from conventional to government-insured loans. Still, several directors
report no problems with availability of mortgage funds in their areas; in
fact, many of the District's large associations have been aggressively seeking new commitments.
Bank lending has accelerated in recent weeks. Except in Tennessee,
where national and state banks' rates are limited to one point above the
discount rate, most of the District's larger banks are posting an 11 1/2percent prime rate. One director noted that banks in his area had become
more selective and had raised interest rates in their consumer instalment
lending. At banks as at S&Ls, sales of money market certificates have been
heavy despite their costs and there have been substantial outflows from
passbook savings. ATS has found few takers, and those are largely customers
who normally maintain high deposit balances.
Rains have improved pasture conditions somewhat, but pasture growth
is likely to be slow enough to delay feeding of stocker cattle to full weight;
one agricultural expert sees temperatures as the key to cattle prices in the
next few weeks. The recent downtrend in milk production should continue, as
hold-over effects of the summer weather depress output per cow and high
cattle prices promote extensive culling of dairy herds.

Florida's citrus

growers are disturbed by competition from Brazilian imports; year-end carryover is likely to be large enough to press prices down from recent nearrecord levels. However, the lengthy drought has made citrus crops more
susceptible to freeze damage.

SEVEHTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Despite fears of a recession next year the Seventh District appears
to he approaching 1979 with a good head of steaa. Order backlogs of capital
goods producers continue to rise.
not excessive.

Inventories remain generally adequate, but

Supplies of scae iteas are tight, finployaent is still rising.

Scattered reports Indicate a rigorous Christaas season. Residential construction is almost certain to decline next year, hut nonresidential building should
rise.

Price inflation has not moderated for goods and services, but prices of

existing hones are softening.

The f a n sector is m c h happier than last year

vith good crops and higher prices. Lenders say they are increasingly cautious
in granting new loans in all najor classes.
Business executives, especially in the business equijaent fields, seea
optiaistic about prospects for 1979*

There is sane concern that predictions of

a recession will help bring about such a development.

Professional forecasters

-vary vith scae predicting a aild recession starting about aid-1979*

The aere

ccaaon view is that growth will slow further in 1979* but that a two quarter
decline in real GUP can be avoided—at least that it is not inevitable. Chances
of slowing the rate of inflation are deeaed poor by virtually everyone.
Reports of purchasing aanagers in the Chicago and Milwaukee areas
showed farther strength in Hoveaber with new orders, backlogs, output, and
enploynent all rising. Order lead tiaes lengthened again. The Milwaukee report
was even stronger for Boveaber than October.

Milwaukee is heavily dependent on

capital goods production.
Auto sales were soaewhat above expectations in late Hoveaber. Truck
sales are generally Halted by supplies.

General Motors sticks to the prediction

that auto and true!* sales next year trill match 1978. Ford agrees on trucks but
thinks auto sales will be down by 300 to 500,000 units. Sane GM and Ford ears
are in short supply.

The other producers hare had to cut production schedules

in line with disappointing sales.
Ve are unable to find evidence of an excessive buildup of inventories,
except for some types of clothing • A large retailer whose sales have lagged
year ago Insists it has held orders to a level which has kept inventories in
good balance. Output has been adjusted promptly, for example in appliances)
when a buildup of inventories was threatened.

large companies are said to have

pushed their inventory problems back on suppliers to a greater extent than usual.
Short supplies of cement, castings, and some actors are limiting
activity.

Steel users say that the steel haulers' strike will hamper their

operations if it is not settled soon. Vest Coast paper strikes continue to
pinch supplies in this region.
Ho final reading on consumer buying during the Christmas season will
be possible until the second week of January.

Scattered reports indicate that

people are spending fSreely. Air traffic continues to show substantial gains.
Some bankers are screening consumer credit applicants more closely,
restricting loans to regular customers in seme cases. Despite vague reports of
increased delinquencies, a major auto company says delinquencies have been at
last year's moderate level. Half of these auto loans are for H8 months.
Michigan utilities say delinquencies are rising, but this is attributed to
regulations which drastically curb service cutoffs.
Consumers had been cleaning out dealer stocks of snow blowers, selling
in the $250 to $500 range, even before recent heavy snows.

District producers

of snow blowers and components who are operating all out for three shifts per

day cannot satisfy demand.

Shipments of over 800,000 units this year trill he

about double last year's total*
able only after a long wait.

Some types and sizes of snotr tires are avail-

Sales have exceeded manufacturers' expectations.

Evidence that labor markets remain tight is offered by reduced unemployment compensation claims* more applications on file at state agencies, a
heavy voItsm of help-wanted ads, and reports of shortages of skilled workers
both in industry and construction.

Shoppers have complained about inadequate

staffing of stores in suburban areas, especially where individual transportation
is required.

In the Chicago area

per hour to start for low skilled help is

not uncommon.
Hatural gas supplies were adequate in the district last year.

This

year district experts say the whole nation is in similar shape. One large gas
pipeline system has canceled a contract for deliveries from producers because
the market is soft. Hew commercial and industrial customers are being accepted
after a lapse of years.
Oil companies are somewhat edgy about supplies of heating oil and
gasoline, especially no-lead gasoline.

Beflneries are operating at capacity.

Big companies no longer are able to help out competitors with temporary production problems. A continued flow of oil from Iran, which supplies about 10 percent of 08 imports, is crucial*

It is not considered desirable to publicise

tight supply conditions for fear a large proportion of users will fill their
tanks and create temporary supply problems.

Supplies are deemed adequate, but

margins of safety are narrow.
Bealtors say that home sales have declined more than seasonally in the
last several weeks.

Only sales of condos are up because of conversions.

High

interest rates are expected to cut new residential developments next year.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Business expansion in the Eighth District continues, but at a more
moderate rate than in the first half of the year. According to reports from
retail representatives, consumer spending has slackened somewhat on the "big
ticket" items, while automobile and soft goods sales continue to register
moderate gains. Business inventories have begun to increase slightly in some
sectors, and business loan demand continues strong.

Farmers in the District

are enjoying a relatively profitable year, having produced large crops and
receiving higher average prices than a year ago for commodities sold.
While most retailers remain optimistic about pre-Christmas and early
1979 sales prospects, they report some slowing in sales of home appliances
and other major expenditure items. One major retailer reported that sales of
clothing and other soft goods are "coming along great", but sales of large
home furnishing items were softening. This trend was also noted at the
manufacturing level where a major manufacturer of small electric motors
reported that sales of such motors to appliance manufacturers had declined.
One major manufacturer of home appliances reported layoffs of some employees.
Nevertheless, sales of automobiles and other consumer items continue up. One
automobile dealer reported that overall sales in November were above the
year-ago level, but that buyers were more selective than last year as
indicated by a larger percent of customer orders rather than sales off the
lot.
Inventories at all levels have apparently increased somewhat. A
representative of a furniture manufacturing plant reported an eight percent
increase in inventories from a year ago; a shoe company reported some buildup

in Inventories; and an automobile dealer reported some excess In Inventories,
reflecting the larger than usual special orders from the factory by
customers.

Nevertheless, no one contacted expressed a great deal of concern

about excessive inventories.

On the other hand, one building contractor

reported some shortages of materials, tools, architects, subcontractors, and
other skilled workers.
Reflecting the continued upswing in business activity, loan demand
at District banks is increasing, furthering upward pressure on interest
rates. A major St. Louis banker reported a strong business loan demand and
rising interest rates; some Little Rock banks are selling loans to improve
liquidity; and some Louisville bankers have instituted stricter credit
standards.

A number of smaller banks in outlying sectors report that they

are loaned up.
Interest rates have continued up in the District where usury laws
permit them to rise.

Usury laws in Arkansas, Missouri, and Tennessee were

reported to be having adverse Impacts on lending activity in these states.
Some disintermedia tion has occurred in Tennessee savings and loan
associations and St* Louis associations report that virtually all the
increases in their deposits are from the new money market certificates.
Those S & Ls in St. Louis which are advertising extensively and offering
premiums to attract the new CDs report that they have gained sizable amounts
of these funds, whereas those choosing to limit promotional efforts are
experiencing some net withdrawals of savings capital.

Some savings and loan

institutions actively seeking more CD deposits, however, are purchasing
higher-yielding large CDs at commercial banks rather than making permanent
mortgage loans.

In Che agricultural sector conditions are generally good.

Farm

commodity prices are higher than expected, and relatively large crops were
harvested*

One representative in Kentucky reported the tobacco crop to be

the best in many years.

The soybean and corn crops were generally good

throughout most of the District, and the harvesting weather was favorable.
Prices received for both crops and livestock products are above those of a
year ago, and net incomes of most farmers are up.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Economic activity in the Ninth District remains strong as 1978 draws to
a close, but prospects for 1979 are uncertain.

Retail sales are up.

Inventories are about right. Industrial activity is hectic. Builders are busy.
Farm receipts are high.

And financial institutions still have lots of

customers. However, uncertainties regarding government policies loom large in
most scenarios of likely economic developments in 1979.
Retail sales have rebounded after a fairly slow start in holiday
spending. Retailers across the district were concerned about the low level of
sales activity over the Thanksgiving weekend.

But reports indicate a

substantial acceleration in consumer spending has been realized during the last
couple of weeks. Directors from every district state remarked that the recent
strength in buying should push this year's holiday sales well above last year's.
This sales increase is draining off some of the inventories that a few
district retailers, especially soft goods dealers, had seen building up in
November.

In fact, one Minnesota director expected fewer post-Christmas sales

than usual because of low inventory levels.
Manufacturers have kept inventories under control too.

Our Bank's

latest Quarterly Industrial Expectations Survey reveals that most manufacturers
consider their inventory levels "about right."
Brisk sales have held down those inventories. Based on our survey, we
estimate manufacturing sales are currently running about 13 percent above last
year's fourth quarter.

Since producers' prices have climbed only 8 percent

during the past year, these sales represent substantial real gains in
manufacturing activity.

The construction sector is substantially busier than last year, but
some slowing has been observed around the district. Construction employment is
way up, and the market for building trades people is very tight. Commercial and
industrial construction has shown almost no signs of slackening.
true of residential building though.

That isn't

While it is difficult to disentangle

seasonal elements, most directors detect signs of a slowdown in the homebuilding
sector.
Some things are moving slowly in the agricultural sector, but not cash
receipts. Railroad cars have been in short supply relative to demand, so that
many farmers have encountered difficulty in getting their grain off the farm. A
Montana director reported that about 10 percent of the grain produced in one
county was sold, but could not be transported.

A South Dakota director

attributed the severity of the transportation problems to the extremely good
harvests.

Because of those bumper harvests, grain farmers are in good shape

financially despite the slowdown. And cattle ranchers, poultry producers, and
dairy men are benefitting from abundant feed and relatively high output prices.
The price of credit is also high, but financial institutions continue
to have customers. There has been a shift in the type of customers, though, as
commercial borrowing has declined substantially, while installment borrowing i3
way up.

There were even several customers for the new automatic transfer

service in one of Minnesota's larger communities, but that was in contrast to a
lack of demand for ATS in most locations.
Future prospects for the economy are clouded by uncertainty over
government actions.

Two directors were concerned that price guidelines would

have the same stifling effect on the economy as price controls typically have.

A South Dakota director noted concern among cattle producers that the President
would allow expanded beef imports in response to continuing high beef prices.
And a couple of directors were apprehensive regarding the impact of the Imminent
boost in the minimum wage.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Tenth District economic activity continues strong, but with some
signs of less support from consumers and from nonfarm businesses. Manufacturers are finding supplies adequate to operate at near capacity levels in most
cases. Retailers detect some softening in sales, but see no cause for alarm.
Inventories at retail as well as at the producer level are considered to be in
good shape.

Farm real estate values are rising rapidly with the recovery of

farm income and the prospects for favorable farm product prices. Agricultural
loan demand is strong, but commercial loan demand is weakening. Bankers
expect prime rates to rise further.
Tenth District purchasing agents expect prices of most major inputs
to continue to rise, perhaps at an accelerated rate, in the year ahead. In
recent months, the prices of steel, wood materials, and jet fuel have increased
particularly rapidly. However, buyers in most industries are not having much
trouble obtaining materials.

Some problems with suppliers are being experienced

by the machinery and nonfarm transportation equipment industries. All industries
contacted, except the machinery industry, are operating at close to full capacity.
The furniture industry is having difficulty finding skilled labor.
Material inventories are at satisfactory levels, except in the
electrical goods industry where they are reported to be excessive. The
airline industry expects to be cutting fuel stocks because of cash-flow
problems arising from increasing fuel costs. Other industries plan to maintain current inventory levels through the first quarter of 1979.
Sales by District department stores are reported to be ahead of
last year at this time, but some respondents detect a softening in the last

three months.

Sales of fashions, fabrics, and other "wearables" have been

quite good recently while hardlines, appliances, and major ticket items have
slowed down. Good weather probably has delayed the usual winter buying of
some seasonal items, say store executives. While some retailers expect strong
sales in the first quarter, others are less optimistic.
Retailers say their inventory levels may be a shade high, and they
plan some cutbacks in purchases and some increase in promotions.

Still,

inventories are said to be in better shape than a year ago, and stocks are
expected to be back into balance by April 1.
Farm real estate values are continuing to rise at a brisk pace in
both the District and the nation as a whole. As of October 1, 1978, District
land values were—depending on the type of farmland in question—11 to 13 per
cent above year-earlier levels, with about half of this increase occurring
during the third quarter. These increases are very much in line with recent
USDA figures on farm real estate values which, for the year ending November 1,
1978, show an annual gain of 12 per cent for District states as well as for
all U.S. farmland.
Higher farm incomes, reflecting stronger commodity prices and
increased Government benefits, account for most of the strength in the farm
real estate market. For the nation, net farm income in 1978 is expected to
run about 30 per cent above the 1977 level, and it is clear that net income
within the Tenth District will also be up rather significantly this year.
Given the favorable price prospects for most farm commodities in 1979,
together with the outlook for net farm income, which promises to remain
fairly steady, further increases in land values are likely to occur in 1979.
If the land transfer rate holds up or increases in the period ahead, the

demand for farm real estate loans will remain strong, notwithstanding the
possibility of higher interest rates.
Most bankers in the Tenth District report that loan demand remains
strong. However, some bankers in metropolitan areas—Kansas City, Denver,
and Lincoln—report some softening. Agricultural loans are particularly
strong, according to those banks making them either directly or through
correspondents.

Construction loans are generally up, also. Commercial

loans at the larger banks show the most weakness. Nearly all bankers
contacted have prime rates of 11 1/2 per cent, following the lead of the
large money center banks. All expect further increases in the near future.
Most bankers do not expect to have problems meeting future loan demand.
However, some mentioned having higher-than-desired loan-asset ratios, cutting
back on real estate loans, and being more selective in general.
Deposit growth is moderate or down slightly at most banks contacted.
Demand deposits are flat or down slightly at all but a few country banks.
Savings deposits are generally down due to higher interest rates and shifts
into money market CD's. One banker notes, however, that his savings deposits
are up slightly due to automatic transfers. Time deposits are generally flat
or up slightly over a year ago.

Several bankers, who say that they have

recently become more aggressive, report increases in large CD's and money
market CD's. Most bankers believe their demand, time, and savings deposits
will grow no more than moderately in the near future due to rising interest
rates and stiff competition for funds. Bankers who are aggressively seeking
interest-sensitive funds expect continued inflows of these funds.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Although rapid inflation and high interest rates are worrying
many, retail sales, construction, and manufacturing activity are running at
brisk, rates in the Eleventh District, according to the Directors and businessmen surveyed this month. Department store executives predict moderate
sales gains over last Christmas' very successful season. The increase in
new car sales reflects mainly foreign cars. Although borrowing by consumers
is softening, deposit inflows and commercial lending activities remain
strong at banks. Mortgage demand is slowing under the weight of tighter
mortgage requirements, while savings and loan associations are increasing
their investments in commercial paper, bank CD's, and out-of-state mortgages.
Total construction activity remains strong, but residential construction is
slowing, especially nrultifamily housing starts. Shortages of building
materials have eased slightly.
Department store sales are stronger than forecast earlier and are
expected to top the record level of Christmas sales last year by a margin
comparable to the average rise in prices. Much of the current strength in
sales may be due to price markdowns and promotions to run off heavy inventory
levels at many stores. Department store executives warn that consumer
spending may weaken considerably with continued erosion in purchasing power
and mounting burden of consumer debt. Slower year-over-year sales gains
are expected in 1979Domestic auto sales are running at the same level as a year ago,
and inventories are tight. Sales of recreational vehicles are particularly
strong, and according to one AMC dealer, some dealers are haggling for the
available supply of Jeeps. Foreign car dealers report inventories have

expanded to desired levels, and sales are running well ahead of a year
earlier. Most auto dealers note price resistance from buyers, and sales of
used cars and parts have been growing since the new model year began.
A slowing of auto loans and other types of consumer credit is
reported by District bankers.

Commercial lending remains strong, however,

and apparently reflects a "better to expand now than wait" attitude among
businessmen. A major Dallas bank recently adopted a lower-than-prime rate
for small businesses. Deposits continue to rise with much of the strength
coming from money market certificates at small banks and large CD's at
larger banks. Liquidity generally remains adequate, but a few small banks
report shortages of loanable funds. Weather-induced delays in the harvesting of cotton have delayed payoffs at many country banks.
Terms on mortgage loans have been tightened recently by District
S&L's. Typically, 25-percent down payments and loan limits have been
imposed. Savings inflows have not slowed appreciably, but the cost of
fimds continues to rise relative to the prevailing 9 7/8-percent mortgage
rate, plus three to five points (one to the buyer and the remainder to the
seller). Mortgage demand is slowing under the current mortgage terms, and
additional funds are becoming available for alternative investments such as
commercial paper, bank CD's, and out-of-state mortgages, particularly
California. As long as alternative investments remain profitable, S&L's
are expected to continue issuing money market certificates. A few small
S&L's, however, are placing restrictions on their money market certificates,
such as eliminating the .25-percent premium over the six-month Treasury
bill rate. S&L's anticipate no problem in rolling over money market certificates as they mature and estimate 85 percent will be rolled over.

The tight mortgage market and expensive interim construction
financing are slowing housing starts. Weakness is already noted in the
higher-priced homes in Houston, and the multifamily housing market in that
city is said to be overbuilt as evidenced by a recent decline in starts.
Similar conditions exist throughout most of the District, with most industry
spokesmen predicting a continued decline in starts through mid-1979Because of the slowing in sales, inventories of new houses have risen but
remain at levels that builders consider manageable.
A major Southwest cement producer, while predicting a recession
for the national economy, sees his business next year little changed from
this year. What loss there may be from the residential sector is expected
to be made up by gains in nonresidential construction.

Cement, sheet rock,

and brick continue in short supply, although the slowdown in construction
activity is temporarily easing the shortages.
Most apparel firms report only moderate gains in new orders. One
area of significant strength is among uniform manufacturers.

The new

minimum wage is expected to add 6 to 8 percent to the cost of production
according to some estimates. Weak product demand, however, will keep the
manufacturers from passing on the full wage increase, and price increases
are expected to meet Carter's anti-inflation guidelines.
The current pinch in the supply of unleaded gasoline was caused
largely by higher than expected demand and refinery outages due to maintenance
and fire. Prices of all grades of gasoline, however, sire headed up.
Refiners are well along on their winter heating oil runs but will begin
shifting their product mix for next summer's gasoline demand next month.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO
The health of the western economy remains robust, though there
are a few signs of possible weakening. Retail sales continue strong
throughout the District, and the inventory-to-sales ratio continues
lean. While there are still shortages of some construction materials,
the situation has improved with weakening real estate demand. Declines
in orders for heavy equipment and men's clothing may foreshadow a
weakening in economic activity, though no actual weakening is yet
apparent, save in real estate. The money market certificates have
apparently prevented savings outflows, and early reports indicate a
substantial rolling over of these certificates.
Retail sales continue brisk throughout the District. Reports
from Los Angeles note that some department store chains are experiencing
sales close to 20 percent above last year's levels, with particular
strength being seen in soft goods. Some observers attribute this to
consumers spending the money they have saved through the property tax
cut associated with Proposition 13. Southern California is also experiencing
very strong demand for both cars and trucks.
The other side of the brisk sales coin is a continued lean inventoryto-sales ratio.

In California, reports generally suggest that sales have

been a bit more rapid than expected, leaving inventories a bit smaller
than planned.

In southern California, in particular, shortages of both

trucks and some imported cars have been reported.

In Washington, one

banker noted that "sales are so brisk, there has been little opportunity
for inventories to rise in relation to sales."

Indeed, some manufacturers have reported difficulty in keeping
production rates high enough to meet demand. A large electronics manufacturer in Oregon reported orders running 32 percent above a year ago
and noted that it was hard to keep up with this level of sales. One
independent oil producer noted that inventories in the oil industry are
considerably below a year ago.
The chief focus for actual shortages continues to be the
construction industry though the supply situation has improved somewhat
since last month.

Cement and dryvall materials were noted to be in

particularly short supply. However, as construction activity slows down,
demand for construction materials seems to be moving much more into
"balance with supply capacity. Thus, the previously reported shortages
in insulation appear no longer to be a problem. A food processor did
note that there were spot shortages of corrugated boxes, paper, aluminum
foil, and vanilla beans but attributed them to strikes, poor harvests,
and "the like which occur at intervals in the normal course of business."
Still he cited inflation in materials costs as "incredible and universal."
While the general pace of the western economy continues strong,
save real estate, there were two comments that were suggestive of a
slowdown. First, a distributor of heavy equipment reported an unexpected
slowdown in sales and an associated rise in inventories to a level 32
percent above a year ago. Action is being taken to reduce these
inventories.

Second, a large clothing manufacturer noted that orders

for men's clothing are down and that men's clothing is traditionally
the first to feel a slowdown.

There continues to be a slowing in real estate and construction
activity in the West. Only in one area of southern California are housing
sales and residential construction still reported very strong. One
source of continued sales in both San Francisco and Los Angeles is the
conversion of apartment complexes to condominiums.

In most areas, homes

are staying on the market much longer than earlier in the year with
particular buyer resistance to homes in the $100,000 plus range.
Almost all reports suggest a reduced supply of funds available
to the housing market.

Three of the largest S&L's in California have

stopped making new loans and have restricted themselves to refinancing
their own existing loans. A major California bank has not restricted
funds to either builders or home buyers but has increased rates and
tightened terms on mortgage and construction loans. Eleven percent is
now the going prime mortgage rate. Another large California bank has
increased rates to 11 l/U percent and reduced maturities from 25 to
15 years.

Several small builders in southern California are reported

to have gone out of business due to this tightening.

Construction

activity has fallen off considerably in Idaho, where a 10-percent usury
law restricts the flow of funds to housing.
There appears to be a general consensus in the District that
the money market certificates have helped to prevent savings outflows from
banks and S&L's. There was some concern expressed that when the first
generation of these certificates mature, savers may move their money
into longer-term Government securities. However, one large California
bank which is monitoring the situation closely, feels that reinvestment

in new certificates will be substantial. Also, several large S&L's in
California have ceased offering new certificates, though they are
rolling over existing certificates.

