CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

January 11, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

i

First District - Boston

1

Second District - New York .

4

Third District - Philadelphia

7

Fourth District - Cleveland

10

Fifth District - Richmond

14

Sixth District - Atlanta

17

Seventh District - Chicago

20

Eighth District - St. Louis

23

Ninth District - Minneapolis

26

Tenth District - Kansas City

29

Eleventh District - Dallas

32

Twelfth District - San Francisco

35

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]

The overall impression that emerges from this month's Current
Economic Comments is one of no significant change over the past month in
the business and financial situation. According to these reports, retailers
in most Districts enjoyed a good to excellent Christmas selling season,
although the sale of domestically produced autos continued weak. Retail
inventories are generally at or even below desired levels, and manufacturing
inventories are in line with sale expectations. Residential construction
remains strong. There were further, albeit limited, indications of a
strengthening of business plant and equipment expenditures. No significant
disintermediation has developed, although savings inflows apparently have
slowed down. Demand for bank credit, notably consumer loans, was strong.
Virtually all Districts report a good to excellent Christmas
selling season at non-auto retailers, with business generally exceeding
already high expectations.

Sales thus are characterized as "fantastic" by

some Boston respondents, and as breaking all records by Atlanta. A good to
excellent selling season is reported by Cleveland, Chicago, San Francisco,
New York, and Minneapolis and as substantially above expectations by Dallas.
A number of Districts report continued brisk sales since Christmas, including Chicago, Philadelphia, Atlanta, Boston and San Francisco. Sluggish
auto sales, however, are reported in about half of the reports. Among
others, Chicago reports December auto sales to have been a distinct disappointment, while St. Louis and New York also note that such sales have been

less than expected. Auto dealers in the Dallas District look for sales of
the 1978 models to exceed those of the 1977 models, but Cleveland characterizes prospects for new car sales and production as "highly uncertain".
Continued strong sales of imported cars, however, are noted in Atlanta,
Dallas and New York. Regarding consumer outlay on tourism, a good ski
season is reported by Boston and San Francisco.
The high level of non-auto retail sales has apparently reduced
retail inventories to desired levels, indeed in a number of cases to below
such levels. Boston thus reports that strong Christmas sales has enabled
retailers to work off any excess stocks that may have developed earlier,
while Dallas reports inventory levels to have been drawn down to low levels
at many stores.

Similar sentiments are expressed by respondents in the

Cleveland and San Francisco Districts. Chicago characterizes current retail
inventory positions as on the "slim side", St. Louis as "trim", Minneapolis
and New York as posing no problems, and Philadelphia and Richmond as consistent with sale expectations.

Similarly, according to several reports,

inventories at the manufacturing level are generally well balanced.
Manufacturing respondents in the Kansas District thus reported their inventories as neither excessive nor inadequate, while Boston respondents felt
inventories were unlikely to create problems. Philadelphia manufacturers
plan to maintain their inventories at current levels, while St. Louis reports
manufacturing inventories excluding autos to be generally in line with
expected sales. However, the view that inventories are too high is widely
held among manufacturers in the Richmond District.
Residential construction remains strong, according to those reports
that comment on this sector. Atlanta perceives an acceleration in the pace

of such construction, led by single-family units but with quickening of
the rate at which apartment projects are coming on stream as vacancies
dwindle and rents climb.

St. Louis reports home building to be strong,

with recent home sales in some areas of the District the largest in several
years for the winter season. Minneapolis notes that home building in its
District has remained well above the previous record pace of 1972, and is
expected to remain strong in the coming months, while housing experts in
the Chicago District also believe home building will be strong again in 1978.
Regarding business capital outlays, Chicago reports that the
demand for most types of capital goods has continued in a modest uptrend,
and that a majority of purchasing agents in areas heavily emphasizing capital goods production expect improved conditions this year.

Similarly,

capital goods producers in the Cleveland District expect business to be as
good or better this year than in 1977, with a sharp step-up in capital
spending in the aerospace and communication industries.

Respondents in New

York and Cleveland note that currently ample capacity obviates the need for
additional investment in the chemical industry, but Boston reports increased
capital goods orders by that industry.

Dallas reports that many oil field

machinery and equipment manufacturers are expanding production facilities.
No significant change on balance appears to have occurred in
manufacturing output and sales, which in general continued to advance. An
improvement in the steel industry is noted by several banks, including
Chicago, Cleveland and St. Louis.

Philadelphia reports that the strike in

the coal industry as yet has had little effect on the District's economy,
although Richmond reports the strike to be a major factor in the District's

economy.
On the banking scene, no indications of significant disintermediation have emerged, although a low or slower rate of growth in time
deposits and passbook saving accounts is noted by several Banks, including
Richmond, Cleveland, St. Louis and Dallas. Concern was expressed by some
respondents, however, that such disintermediation would occur should money rates
rise much further. The demand for credit continues strong, particularly for
consumer and real estate loans.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
First District respondents are generally pleased with the present
economic situation. Manufacturers are experiencing growth ranging from moderate
to very strong.

Christmas retail sales were very good. Inventories seem to

be under control and the inflation rate appears to be holding steady. The
only negative notes are concern about the continued weakness of foreign economies
and worry over the possibility of higher short-term interest rates.
Christmas retail sales in the First District were very good. Several
respondents described them as "fantastic." Moreover, indications of afterChristmas sales are also favorable. The head of a large department store chain
who was previously worried about a widespread inventory buildup now feels that
no substantial inventory correction will be necessary. The strong Christmas
sales enabled retailers to work off any excess. Consumers also appear to be
spending freely on tourism. The ski industry in northern New England is off
to a very good start. Volumes are well above last year, which was a record.
One banker did report that the demand for consumer retail loans is tapering
off. However, he felt that this was to be expected given

the unusually high

volumes of recent months. The demand for auto loans was flat.
Most manufacturers contacted are continuing to see an increase in
sales. Even in Connecticut where several firms with special problems had
extensive layoffs, manufacturing production was up and employment held steady.
Sales of household products, particularly small appliances, have been doing
well. Auto products have also been moving briskly and although growth in
1978 is not likely to be as strong as in 1977 some gains are still expected.

A supplier of capital goods to the chemical industry reported a sharp pick-up
in his order, rate. International prospects, however, are a source of uncertainty.
A chemicals producer expressed concern about the weakness of the overseas
market: recent sales in Europe were very disappointing.
None of the manufacturers contacted felt that inventories were likely
to be a problem for them. Price increases have been pretty much as expected
and no one foresees any difficulty obtaining materials or fuel. One manufacturer, however, was quite worried about short-term interest rates. This
firm is a frequent borrower of working capital, and while they are not
experiencing a problem now they are very concerned about the future.
Commercial banks in the First District report good deposit inflows
although one banker expressed concern about disintermediation should market
rates increase more than another 50 basis points. Consumer loan demand continues
to improve and is expected to be strong throughout 1978 with bank credit
supplying an increasing share of corporate borrowing.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, and Tobin were contacted
this month. All but Tobin expressed reservations about intervention on behalf
of the dollar. Eckstein feels avoiding getting locked into fixed exchange
rates is of singular importance. On the other hand, when our major creditor,
Saudi Arabia, insists that something be done, token intervention may be a
wise near-term political expediant. Houthakker believes intervention may
occasionally be necessary when market conditions become disorderly as may
have been the case in the early days of the new year. Further intervention,
however, is not necessary and not in the best interests of the United States.
Lower import prices would help meet Germany's and Japan's concern about
inflation and provide them with more elbow room to pursue expansionary policies.

Although declines in the dollar do contribute to our inflation, the magnitude
of the impact so far is one we can live with. Unlike 1972 and 1973, the rise
in the prices of our imports have not been accompanied by sharp increases in
the price of exported goods. Tobin does not object to short-run intervention
to stabilize irrational day-to-day speculation but does oppose trying to peg
the exchange rate. Tobin doubts that the dollar would be overvalued if
Germany and Japan were operating at reasonable levels of capacity, and
questions whether it is overvalued anyway. Recent declines reflect portfolio
shifts by OPEC investors that have little to do with the fundamental value of
the dollar. A policy which would enhance confidence in the economic recovery
and boost the stock market would help to restore the capital inflow.
Eckstein believes the long-run monetary growth targets should be
left unchanged. Houthakker urged the Fed to stick to its target range;
stabilizing Ml growth at the 7 percent rate recorded over the past year
would be a satisfactory policy. Tobin reiterated his view that quantitative
targets should be set for GNP, rather than monetary, growth. Monetary policy
should aim at a 10 to 13 percent growth in nominal GOT.
With the exception of auto sales, Samuelson feels economic data are
favorable. The tax cut proposal will act like a safety net—adjusted down if
the economy proves stronger than expected and augmented if the economy is
weaker. Samuelson is concerned that preoccupation with the stability of the
dollar be used as an excuse of deliberate acceptance of a growth recession.
A real growth target of at least 4 1/2 percent would not create demand pull
inflationary pressure.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Business activity remains mixed in the Second District, according
to directors and business leaders, but the outlook is viewed more favorably
than in recent months.

Retailers throughout the region apparently experienced

an excellent holiday season, and their inventories are now judged at satisfactory levels. Although some hesitation followed settlement of the twomonth selective dock strike, the outlook for shipping is now characterized
as strong.

There are also some scattered reports of increases in capital

spending in the district.

Domestic auto sales remain depressed, however,

although some dealers are optimistic that activity could strengthen considerably in the spring.
Virtually all major retailers contacted in the Second District
were elated over the strength of buying during the holiday season.

Sales

at the major department stores apparently at least matched or in some cases
far exceeded expectations, which had already been high.

New York City sales

were especially strong, with some outlets claiming their best holiday performance in at least several years.

While some retailers reported a large

amount of discounting and promotional activity, few indicated that this
was more than normal for the period.
Information on post-holiday sales is sketchy and conflicting.
Some respondents reported that sales were holding up very well in early
January, while others talked of a post-holiday slump.

In any case, all

retailers contacted indicated that inventories were now on target or only

slightly above target. None viewed their inventories as a problem given
the volume of business they experienced in December.
While department store sales have been strong in the district,
according to most respondents, sales of domestically produced autos continue to be depressed. Dealers report that inventories are not moving
because of price resistance and dissatisfaction with the new models.
However, there appears to be growing optimism among dealers that this is
simply a question of deferred buying, since a spring upturn is common
when there has been a slow winter.
By contrast, foreign auto sales have been very strong, substantially above last year's level and ahead of all projections. A
spokesman for dealers of a major foreign compact reported that, since the
introduction of the 1978 models, inventories have been insufficient to
meet demand, and there has been a backlog of orders. Although there has
been a sharp increase in price, largely as a result of the depreciation
of the dollar, there is no evidence of any price resistance as of yet.
Instead, customers apparently intend to hold their newly purchased autos
for a longer period of time, As they are buying more expensive options.
These dealers believe former large car owners are switching to smaller
cars but prefer the proven quality of the foreign models to the unknown
performance of the new domestic small models.
In other sectors of the district economy, respondents also
continue to paint a rather mixed picture. A Buffalo director indicated
that the outlook for the chemical equipment industry is not good. The
situation in the power equipment industry, however, appears brighter due

to the general need for more power plants, but the long time frame for such
construction makes specific predictions difficult.
A spokesman for a metals producer in the district reports that
their copper and brass business is still strong. This is expected to continue for the next two months and reflects, in part, strikes at competitors.
Although aluminum mill production has been good, demand for ingots is spotty.
Demand for consumer metal products, on the other hand, is expected to continue to be strong through spring.
A spokesman for an upstate forge reports a mild increase in orders.
He expects a steady level of orders through the first half of the year with
most as replacement orders rather than net investment. With no expectations
of bottlenecks in production capacity or shortages in labor or materials, he
believes 1978 will be a good year.
The New York telephone company is projecting an increase in volume
above last year's rise, according to one of the directors. He also indicated
that the telephone company is planning to increase expenditures on new construction by approximately 10 percent over the 1977 level. Another director
reported a substantial increase in capital spending plans by other companies
in the Second District for 1978.
Contrary to initial impressions, the shipping industry in the
Second District did not rebound immediately following settlement of the
selective dock strike at the beginning of December. However, an executive
with a leading steamship company reports that business now looks good and
that his outlook for 1978 is very optimistic.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District are that economic activity continues to expand unevenly. Respondents to the January Business Outlook Survey
say that manufacturing activity is essentially unchanged for the third
straight month, but retail sales are up for the fourth month in a row according
to executives in that sector. Looking to the future, both manufacturers and
retailers are anticipating expansion. Area bankers say that business borrowing
is up, but still generally sluggish. They too look for expansion over the
next six months. The nationwide coal strike is having little effect on the
District economy at this time, but shortages could develop if miners stay off
the job through February.
Manufacturers responding to this month's Business Outlook Survey
say that general business conditions are only marginally better than last
month, indicating that the slowdown that started in November is now in its
third month. In terms of specific indicators, employment and the average workweek are unchanged, continuing a three-month trend. New orders and shipments
are higher in January, but inventories are down for the first time since
early last year.
The continued sluggishness appears to be having an effect on manufacturers' expectations regarding the next six months. While producers are still
bullish overall, fewer are looking for improvement in the first half of 1978
than in previous months. New orders and shipments are expected to pick up,
but again by a smaller proportion of respondents than in the recent past.
At the same time, inventories are projected to remain at their current levels.
Despite this dampened optimism, however, manufacturers still anticipate some

gains in employment over the next six months. Thirty percent of the respondents say they plan to add to their payrolls by July, and 21 percent anticipate
a longer workweek by that time. Capital spending plans have not been
diminished either. Increases in expenditures on plant and equipment are planned
at slightly more than one-third of the sampled firms—about the same as last
month.
Comments by a director of this Bank are consistent with these reported
expectations. He sees the outlook for 1978 as only moderate, and claims that
capacity utilization in his particular industry won't approach the levels
necessary to induce investment.
Price increases in the industrial sector appear to be picking up
steam. Over half of the executives surveyed this month report higher prices
for inputs, and about one-fourth say they're getting more for the goods they
sell. As for the future, three-fourths of those polled anticipate paying
more for raw materials by July, while about half expect to hike the prices of
their finished products.
The nationwide coal strike is having little impact on the Third District economy. Although about 18 percent of all bituminous coal miners in
the U.S. are employed in Pennsylvania, only about 4 percent work in the
Third District. Moreover, utilities and steel producers, the major users of
coal, have stockpiled the fuel so that no shortages have as yet developed.
According to a director of this Bank representing the energy industry though,
with the strike now in its sixth week, about half of those inventories have
been depleted. Should the strike last longer than 45 more days, supply may
become a problem as holders of inventories try to spread a limited stock over
a longer time. Coal officials contacted had no opinion on the expected
duration of the work stoppage.

Sales at area department stores are higher again in January according
to retailing executives.

Current dollar sales, reported to be between 8 and

21 percent above January '77 levels, are outpacing expectations by about 5
percentage points in most cases.

Downtown Philadelphia and suburban stores

are doing equally well.
Merchants appear to be optimistic about economic conditions over
the next six months, and look for sales increases of 5 to 12 percent over
year-earlier levels.

Consequently, most retailers say that inventories are

up, but that these higher levels are consistent with the expected higher sales
volume.
Commercial bankers in the area say that business loan demand is
about 4 percent higher than it was at this time last year.
at or below planned levels.

This is generally

Bankers note that although borrowing by local

businesses is "as expected," the national market continues to be depressed.
They continue to cite alternative sources of funds and uncertainty about
future economic developments as the major causes of sluggish loan demand.
The demand for the consumer loans remains strong.
For the longer term, bankers foresee "moderate" growth in C&I loans.
They expect July loan volume to be 7 to 9 percent above the mid-1977 level.
The prime rate at every bank contacted is at 7 3/4 or 8
percent.

it is generally expected to increase to about 8 1/4 percent

by mid-year.

Contacts say they have noticed some disintermediation owing

to higher short-term rates, but that it is not now a problem.

One banker

noted that when interest rates started to rise, some depositors shifted to
higher-rate, longer-term certificates and are now locked into those deposits,
and claims that this is one factor that has helped to keep disintermediation to
to a minimum.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Nonautomotive retailers and steel producers in the Fourth
District are increasingly optimistic over sales prospects.

Auto suppliers

are skeptical that domestic new car sales will pick up much from recent
rates.

Steel production will be boosted this quarter partly because of

price hedge buying.
boom year.

Capital goods producers still expect a good but not

Continued slow growth in deposit flows is noted by banks and

thrift institutions.
Nonautomotive retailers describe sales during December as
excellent and generally above expectations.

Some department store officials

had expected year-over-year gains of 9 to 10 percent, but actually recorded
larger gains. An economist associated with a large department store chain
reported even larger gains for GAF merchandise.

These retailers are

increasingly optimistic in view of the sustained rise in sales since last
fall, but also point out that by spring consumer preferences can again shift
from general merchandise to automobiles.

Retailers are also pleased that

sizable increases in sales have pared inventories.
Prospects for new car sales and production are highly uncertain.
Two contrasting scenarios have surfaced: one views the reduced pace of
sales as temporary and associated with down-sizing of intermediate cars by
GMC; the other views the softening as a result of consumer substitution of
other goods for automobiles.

According to the former, as expressed by an

economist with a major auto producer, consumers are either buying smaller

GMC cars or are holding on to their cars a year longer.

If sales in

January do not pick up, auto producers will sharply cut back production
schedules for the balance of this quarter.

Some GMC auto dealers confirm

consumer disinterest for even the highly popular Oldsmobile Cutlass,
which one dealer described as smaller, lighter and 6 percent lower in
price than the 1977 models.
Auto suppliers, especially steel and tire producers, have not
experienced major setbacks in orders from auto producers, except from
Chrysler and AMC. A major tire producer reported, however, that GMC's
January projection of car production this quarter was shaved 100,000 units
to 2,485,000 cars.

This tire maker has been skeptical of sales and

production projections by auto producers and has pared the estimate to
2,250,000 million this quarter.

They expect total new car sales of

10.7 million this year and feel a comeback in auto sales is unlikely because
of the ample stock of new cars over the past few years and the rapid buildup of consumer debt.
The turnaround in steel operations that began last month has
accelerated under the impetus of price hedge buying.

The February 1

increase in steel prices caused the bulge in orders for January deliver.
According to one steel economist, orders for February and March shipments
have not fallen

as they usually have done after a price increase.

The

steel price increases scheduled for February and March have also had the
effect of ending the most recent phase of steel inventory liquidation.
First quarter steel shipments are expected to increase about 10 percent
from the fourth quarter 1977.

Even at this higher level of shipments and

production, however, industry profits will probably be neglible this quarter.

Generally, steel economists were noncommittal about reference pricing of
steel, pending additional information. One executive with a major steel
producer, however, views the announced trigger prices as low; and an
industry economist is skeptical that these prices will result in much of
a rollback in steel imports. Another source indicated that the talk about
reference pricing may have deterred some users from placing foreign orders
beyond the first quarter of 1978. If anything, reference prices are more
likely to have an adverse effect on European steel producers than on the
Japanese, who still have a quality and price advantage over most steel
producers.
Capital goods producers expect business this year to be as good
or better than 1977, although there is still little sign that spending for
new plant capacity is accelerating. Exceptions are in technically oriented
industries, such as aerospace and communications, where producers indicate
a sharp stepup in spending for new capacity. A communications and printing
press producer has been experiencing an order rate of about $1 billion
compared with sales of around $900 million and will boost capital expansion
this year. An aerospace and electronics producer expects to boost capital
spending by 40 percent from last year. On the other hand, a medium-sized
chemical producer reported that they had no additional need for capacity
over the next few years in view of softness in prices, ample capacity, and
completion of expansion programs that were begun a few years ago. Rubber
producers will accelerate capital spending this year because of need for
additional radial tire capacity to replace obsolete facilities and to improve
productivity. A large machinery producer reported the excavator machinery

business is still slow to recover and.that increased orders for machine
tools are replacements for existing inefficient equipment with computercontrolled machinery.
There is no sign of early settlement of the coal strike. More
than a third of the industry in Eastern Kentucky, one of the largest coal
mining centers in the country, is shut down, and about 90 percent of the
mines in Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania are down. A director, who
describes the strike as bitter, does not expect a settlement before midFebruary, although there will be growing pressure to end the strike because
pensions funds will be depleted. Another source associated with a major
coal producer expects the union may drop the right-to-strike issue in return
for increased contributions by mine operators to the health and welfare fund.
Banks and thrift institutions report no signs of disintermediation,
although growth in time deposits and passboook savings accounts has slowed.
A large S&L is concerned that outflows from passbook savings accounts could
occur if yields on 3-month Treasury bills exceed 7 percent.

S&L's have

been increasingly active in the secondary mortgage market to support the
high volume of mortgage loans. One association reported that it sold over
$50 million of mortgages in 1977, or 10 percent of its portfolio, in the
secondary market. Lenders, builders, and producers of home maintenance and
building materials continued to be cautiously optimistic over prospects for
new housing starts in 1978. One director expects new starts at 1.8 million
units this year.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
The pace of Fifth District manufacturing activity apparently showed
little change in December, judging from responses to our latest survey. The
volume of new orders and backlogs were down somewhat while shipments were
essentially unchanged. Inventories also showed little change, a minor expansion
of stocks of materials being offset by a comparable decline in finished goods.
There remains, however, a widespread view among manufacturers that current
inventories are above desired levels. Retailers' expectations of a strong
Christmas selling season have apparently been fulfilled. Total sales as well
as relative sales of big ticket items increased in December. Concerning
longer term expectations, manufacturers' outlooks have improved over the past
month, but a majority of the respondents still foresee little change in the
level of business activity over the next six months. The apparent lack of
progress in the coal industry negotiations suggests continued sluggishness in
the overall level of Fifth District activity in the near term future as
supporting industries continue to cut back operations and personnel.
As in December, our January survey of manufacturers showed considerable
variation in the performance of individual respondents. There is little
indication from the survey of the present direction, if any, of the District
economy. One change since last month is that the weaker responses are now more
heavily concentrated in the textile industry and the fibers component of the
chemicals group. Otherwise there is no discernible pattern in this month's
responses. Inventories held by District manufacturers were virtually unchanged,
but the view that current levels are excessive remains common. Employment and
weekly hours worked both declined in December according to survey respondents.

Prices, particularly prices paid, continued to rise across a broad front.
In the retail sector activity was broadly higher in December than
a month earlier. Respondents to our survey were unanimous in reporting
increased sales and a majority also reported increases in the relative sales
of big ticket items. Inventories at retail showed little change and are
generally in line with desired levels. Employee compensation, in terms of
average hourly earnings, rose over the month, but responses suggest no change
in other prices paid or received bv retailers.
District manufacturers express somewhat greater optimism than in
recent surveys and expectations in general now seem more positive than at
any time since mid-summer. Approximately one-third of the manufacturers
surveyed now expect the level of business activity nationally, locally, and
in their respective firms to improve over the next six months. Retailers,
on the other hand, apparently expect little or no change in the level of
activity over that period.
The UMW strike remains a major factor in the Fifth District economic
picture. Indications are that somewhat in excess of 80,000 Fifth District
employees are out of work as a result of the strike, although this number has
not increased since the early days of the work stoppage. Significant additions
to this figure are unlikely over the next month. Should the strike extend
beyond that point, however, a second round of layoffs, primarily of coal users,
is likely unless other sources of coal are found.
Credit at large Fifth District banks has expanded moderately during
the past several weeks, with loans to consumers and business leading the
expansion. At the same time inflows of time and savings deposits net of
negotiable CD's have been small. Holdings of large negotiable CD's, however,

have risen substantially. These funds have increased every week for the past
several months. Consumer credit extended by banks has risen steadily since
November, reversing its October lull. Real estate loans, on the other hand,
continue seasonally weak. Half of the banks reporting on the Fifth District
survey of changes in lending practices confirm that demand for commercial
and industrial loans has increased moderately over the past six months. Only
two of the twelve reporters, however, expect such demand to continue to expand
over the next three months. Both the price and non-price terms on business
loans have firmed recently, as District banks exhibit a reduced willingness
to enter into term loan arrangements.
The District's cash farm income during January-October 1977 was down
4 percent from a year ago, reflecting the drought-reduced crop output and
sagging grain, soybean, and cotton prices. Crop receipts were 10 percent
under the year-earlier period, while livestock receipts were up 2 percent.
Nationally, total cash farm receipts were about 1 percent under the yearago level.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
December was a banner month for consumer spending; auto purchases
held up better in the Southeast than in the nation. Banks have realized
strong gains on both sides of the balance sheet, but at S&Ls, the gap
between loans and deposits has widened. Housing demand continues to
climb. Rising agricultural prices have brought some relief for the farmers'
plight, and the strike has had little impact. Job gains continue despite
strikes and layoffs. Businessmen are relatively optimistic about economic
conditions in 1978.
By almost all accounts, December retail sales broke all records
and a brisk buying pace carried through the week after Christmas. Retailers commonly estimate year-to-year sales gains at 15-20 percent. Two
directors commented that luxury items had been moving particularly well
in their areas. One retailer who had been concerned about his large inventory now complains that inadequate stocks restrained his sales. Only
in the coal-mining areas of northeast Tennessee did sales fail to show
a year-to-year advance.
Sales of new domestic-made cars seem to have held about even with
last year in the last few weeks of 1977. Dealer inventories have reached
"ample" (but below national) levels. Designations of the best-selling models
vary too widely for a neat characterization.

In Jacksonville, a record

number of imports were unloaded last month. Truck sales continue to surge;
both Chrysler and Ford recorded all-time peak truck sales in their southeastern zones last month.

Bank deposit inflows have strengthened after a brief slowing;
large-denomination CDs have accounted for much of time deposit growth.
Exceptionally strong gains in bank lending have been broad-based, inducing some banks to reduce their securities holdings.

Stricter adherence

to usury laws has reduced bank earnings in Tennessee. Mortgage rates at
S&Ls have held a pretty even keel, though lending activity remains heavy.
There are indications that sources of funds are tightening in places:
Central Florida S&Ls are advertising certificates at maximum rates (atypical
in that state), and Atlanta associations are both advertising and offering
premiums again.
The pace of residential construction has continued to accelerate
through the off-season, still led by single-family homes. Demand for
existing homes has mounted. Apartment projects are coming on stream at a
quicker but moderate rate as vacancies dwindle and rents climb.
The first round of annual tallies of nonresidential construction
outlays shows surprisingly strong (30-75 percent) gains in some of the
smaller cities. Planning has progressed to the initial stages of construction on several major industrial projects (representing several
hundred million dollars) announced earlier. On the negative side, Offshore
Power Systems of Jacksonville ordered a 30-day halt (with possible termination) on $75 million of construction when the State of New Jersey, its only
customer, extended the delivery date on its order by three years.
Stronger export demand has lifted prices of farm products,
especially grains, improving farm incomes somewhat from badly depressed
levels. Recent loan applications suggest that Mississippi farmers have
maintained their living standards through a disastrous year, piling up

substantial unpaid debts.

The effects of the much-publicized farmers'

strike have been limited to sporadic interruptions of marketings.
auctions in Georgia and Alabama closed briefly.

Livestock

Picketers at meat-packing

plants convinced few truckers to hold their cargoes, but slaughter volume
was reduced temporarily. Late December explosions at several grain storage
facilities are thought to have been caused by unusual atmospheric conditions,
combined with high concentrations of dust, rather than sabotage.
District employment has risen steadily despite the interruptions
of strikes. Most of the disputes which have troubled the labor scene for
the past few months (including the massive Lockheed strike) have now been
resolved.

The coal strike, however, has begun to afflict retailers, banks,

and small coal producers"in northeast Tennessee.

The impact of a recent

large layoff in central Florida will be more than offset by new jobs provided by industrial expansion; a new CETA grant to Mississippi will
furnish almost as many new jobs as will be lost to extensive layoffs by
Ingalls Shipyards.
There is no uniform consensus among businessmen or area economists
about the prospects for 1978.

Few are totally pessimistic, but most express

some apprehension about inflation, government regulatory policies, energy
developments, and the minimum wage.

Tennessee bankers are particularly

concerned with the outcome of a March constitutional referendum on the
usury ceiling. The majority of business leaders expect the economy to
improve at least as rapidly in 1978 as it did in 1977.

They generally

anticipate better-than-national growth in their own industries or locations,
citing such potential stimulants as reviving population growth, continuing
housing expansion, rebounding nonresidential investment, and/or increasing
tourist inflows.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
Most economic sectors in the Seventh District still appear to be
expanding, and sentiment is generally favorable that growth will continue
into the second half of 1973.

Production schedules for autos and farm equip-

ment have been reduced, however.
been very strong.

Retail sales of general merchandise have

Inventories are generally on the slim side. The slow but

steady uptrend in total capital outlays is continuing.

Favorable weather,

until this week, has permitted outdoor construction activity to continue
later this winter than last. Mortgage credit terms are tightening moderately.
Virtually all general merchandise retailers report that sales exceeded optimistic budgets, not only in the Christmas season, but since Christmas as well.

Inventories are "on the slim side." January "clearance" sales

have emphasized special purchases rather than markdowns of regular stock.
Sales of most lines have been at high levels, with home furnishings, including
appliances and furniture, especially good. Consumers have used credit freely
but "with prudence." A University of Michigan survey showing consumer confidence "at a two-year low" in December baffles local retail analysts.
Large retailers expect their selling prices to average somewhat more
than 4 percent higher in 1978, about the same as the rise in 1977, with soft
goods up more than hard goods.

Purchasing managers for industrial and commer-

cial companies expect the prices they pay to rise 6 to 7 percent on average in
1978, also about the same as in 1977.
held down by stiff competition.

Prices of some commodities have been

But utility rates are 10 percent or more

above year ago levels, while costs of insurance, transportation, and professional services probably have increased even more.

Auto companies have been cutting production schedules for the first
quarter. Sales in December were a distinct disappointment, particularly for
the new down-sized intermediates. Sales of heavy trucks also have slowed.
A number of layoffs have been announced in the district's important
farm equipment industry, with at least one tractor plant closed for the whole
month of January. Sales of farm equipment had been sharply below year ago
levels long before the widely publicized "farmers' strike."
The December survey of the Milwaukee purchasing managers shows that
h6 percent expect their business to be better in the first quarter than in the
fourth quarter, as opposed to only 10 percent who expect it to be worse. For
the second half of 1978, 58 percent see business better than in the first half,
and only 5 percent expect it to be worse. This is significant because of the
heavy emphasis on capital goods production in the Milwaukee area. Also, a
high proportion report that their companies' capital expenditures will be
higher in 1978. Finally, the proportion reporting higher output and orders
was larger in December than in November. Inventories were reduced on average
in both months.
Demand for most types of capital goods has continued in a modest uptrend. Foreign demand for US equipment has remained sluggish, however. Among
the most confident firms are producers of sophisticated machine tools, often
used in mass production processes. The auto industry continues to dominate
these orders, but demand from other industries also has improved.
Steel companies expect an improvement in their shipments in the first
quarter because of restrictions on imports, low user inventories, and further
gains in total usage. However, auto producers probably will reduce their
orders for steel. While total steel imports into the US were up about one-

third last year, imports into the Great Lakes area rose "by over three-fourths.
Many of the vessels waiting to exit the Seaway after the scheduled closing
date of December 15 had. brought in European steel and had delayed their sailings as they sought cargos for the return voyage.
Relatively favorable weather in December and early January permitted
private and public construction projects to continue in a period when outside
work had virtually ceased last winter because of severe cold and strong winds.
Four new office buildings totaling 3.8 million square feet are underway (or
soon will "be) in Chicago's Loop, scheduled for completion in 1979• Over 5
million square feet of office space is said to be vacant in the Loop, but
large blocks of top notch space are not available.
Most housing experts believe that homebuilding will be strong again
this year. Prices are still rising at a 9 to 10 percent pace. Shortages of
materials, particularly insulation and sheetrock, are not likely to be resolved in 1978. Limited availability of developed lots, with sewer restrictions a large factor, has held back plans of some builders. Some of the
largest Chicago area S&Ls recently raised their basic rates on 80 percent
home mortgages from 8.75 to 9 percent. Moderate further tightening of rates
is expected. Opinions vary as to whether availability of mortgage funds will
limit construction this year. The main question mark is the extent of disintermediation, already noted by some lenders.
Permits for apartment units in the Chicago area in 1977 were about
double the level of 1975. Nevertheless, apartments comprised only 3*+ percent
of all units, compared to 58 percent in 1971 and 1972. Suburbs reporting the
largest increases in permits in 1977 are generally 30 miles or more from the
Loop, and often 6 to 7 miles from public transportation.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Business activity in the Eighth District continued to rise in late
1977, and businessmen generally expect further gains in 1978.

Retail sales

have registered moderate gains in recent weeks, although automobile sales by
some dealers have been less than expected.

Retail inventories are generally

at a "satisfactory" level, but stocks of some types of cars were reported to
be greater than desired. Home construction and sales continue strong for
this time of year, and overall manufacturing activity is advancing.
financial sector loan demand is generally strong.

In the

Savings and loan

institutions report inflows of savings are smaller than a year ago, and with
strong demand for home mortgages, mortgage interest rates are beginning to
inch upward.
Consumer spending has continued to advance from year ago levels,
and retailers are generally optimistic about sales prospects for 1978. On
the basis of limited information, St. Louis department stores made only modest
sales gains during the recent Christmas season, but reports from other areas
of the District indicate larger gains than in the St. Louis area.
goods sales are mixed.

Durable

Home appliance sales continue up, while automobile

sales have leveled off. Automobile sales have declined in the Memphis area,
probably reflecting a ruling by the Tennessee Supreme Court which limited
interest rates under the state usury law to a 10 percent maximum.
Inventories at the retail level are reported to be "trim." Even at
department stores, where sales gains in the Christmas season were only
modest, inventories are not considered to be a problem.

Inventories of some

automobile makes, however, are considered to be above desired levels. Other

manufacturing inventories are generally in line with expected sales.
Demand is strong for most types of loans, including real estate,
consumer, and agricultural loans. Overall, business loan demand at
commercial banks, however, has not increased much in recent weeks. In
December net inflows of consumer-type savings deposits at banks and savings
and loan associations were well below year ago levels. However, sizable
increases have occurred in large negotiable certificates of deposit. Upward
pressure on home mortgage interest rates is apparently developing. One large
savings and loan association in the St. Louis area recently increased its
lending rate on an 80 percent loan to 9 percent from the 3-3/4 percent rate
which had prevailed for several months.
Manufacturing activity generally continues to advance.
Manufacturing of building materials, appliances, heating equipment,
recreational equipment, paints and coatings, paper and boxboard, and hospital
supplies are among industries reporting sales gains. A steel industry
representative noted that steel orders have unexpectedly accelerated in
recent weeks, reflecting prospective anti-dumping measures, and continued
overall improvement in steel demand. A major chemical firm, however, notes
mixed sales among its product lines, and farm equipment sales are reported to
be sluggish, reflecting the relatively low farm incomes of last year.
Home building remains at a high level. Recent home sales in the St.
Louis and Memphis areas were reported to be the largest in several years for
the winter season. Reports from Memphis also indicate a recovery from the
overbuilding which occurred in 1973-74. Due to strong home sales and sizable
backlogs of orders, most builders are not laying off workers as normally
occurs at this time of year.

Fall wheat plantings are estimated to be down substantially in the
District. Wet weather in Missouri last fall hampered planting operations and
wheat acreage was estimated to be off 45 percent from last year. Wheat
acreage is also reported to be down substantially in Tennessee.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
As we enter the new year, most indicators of economic activity
in the Ninth District remain strong, and the near-term outlook is
generally favorable.

Declines in unemployment, strong retail sales, and

booming residential construction were reported in 1977 and are expected
to continue, perhaps at moderated paces, in early 1978. Large crop
carryovers are expected to continue downward pressure on commodity
prices.

Despite historically high loan-to-deposit ratios, Reserve Bank

directors are not aware of serious liquidity problems at district
agricultural banks.

Employment
The district's employment picture is considerably improved from
a year ago.

The fourth-quarter unemployment rate of 5.2 percent (based

on October-November data) is more than a full percentage point below
last year's 6.3 percent.

Improvement is reported throughout the district,

including the chronically high unemployment area of Michigan's Upper
Peninsula.

Even in that region, unemployment in a few counties is less

than 5 percent.
Reserve Bank directors generally see a favorable employment
outlook for the first half of 1978, ranging from "very strong" to "very
stable." Areas expecting continued strength include western Wisconsin,
South Dakota (except for some weakness in ag-related industries), portions
of the Upper Peninsula, and central Minnesota.

"Stable" areas include

metropolitan Minnesota, North Dakota, and eastern Montana. A banker sums
up the outlook for the large industrial areas by suggesting that unemployment
will continue to decline but at a somewhat slower pace as the economic

recovery progresses- Only two areas in the district may have employment
problems: western Montana, where public employment is being reduced and
the wood product industries are softening, and Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan,
where the closing of an air base is having a severe impact on the local economy.
Retail Sales
Retail sales were strong throughout the district in the last
quarter of 1977, according to our directors.

All directors report that

Christmas sales met or exceeded retailers' high expectations.

A few

directors describe seasonal sales as "strong," "pretty good," and
"remarkably good."

Severe weather in North Dakota reduced sales from

what they otherwise would have been, but even there, retailers are
described as "happy."
Our surveys are consistent with these observations.

Some

retailers are reporting sales for December as 10 to 30 percent over a
year ago. Retailers with outlets in rural areas found sales gains there
about the same as in the metropolitan area.
Neither our directors nor our surveys uncovered any significant
retail inventory problems.
Residential Construction
Homebuilding has remained well above the record annual pace set
in 1972. For the first ten months of 1977 cumulative housing permits
were 31 percent higher than the year-earlier level, which was 34 percent
higher than in 1975. Data through October do not yet indicate a slowdown,
although some directors have previously suggested this might happen.
any event, loan commitments outstanding at district S&Ls rose steadily

In

throughout 1977 and in November were 25 percent above the year-ago
level.

Consequently, we expect homebuilding to remain strong in the

district, at least during the first quarter of 1978.
Agriculture
According to Reserve Bank directors, there is little evidence
to suggest that the farm strike has done anything more than generate
some publicity.

In Montana, some small marginal crop farmers apparently

are participating, but ranchers are not. A director representing the
food industry notes that his firm has been buying corn from farmers
throughout December, which does not represent a withholding action. One
director described the farm strike as a "nonevent."
With the dramatic turnaround in weather conditions, total crop
production in 1977 easily exceeded that of 1976.

Soybeans were up 80

percent and corn 75 percent. Wheat production declined about 10 percent
but only because of a 13 percent reduction in plantings.

The resulting

low commodity prices not only have depressed current farm receipts but
also have built up a large carryover of grain which will continue to
exert downward pressure on market prices.
In general, our directors have observed that government crop
deficiency payments are improving liquidity situations at rural banks,
but how much is still hard to say. Apparently, some of the payments are
lower than anticipated and are coming in a little slower than expected,
so directors have yet to form any judgments.

Several directors note

that there might be some complaints about ag bank liquidity or that
loan-to-deposit ratios might be high in historical terms, but they are
not aware of any serious liquidity problems.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Reports of business and financial conditions in the Tenth District
point to continued economic expansion.

Although prospects for improve-

ment in farm income are not that bright, the winter wheat crop looks good
and prices of agricultural products have regained some strength.

Purchas-

ing agents for major manufacturers in the District expect the year to be
good for business.

These buyers are comfortable with their current inven-

tories of materials, and they are neither experiencing nor anticipating
a general acceleration in the prices of materials nor significant problems
in maintaining stocks at desired levels.

District bankers report a sharp

increase in loan demand and a good increase in total deposits.

These

bankers do not expect deposit growth to keep up with loan demand, and they
forecast sharp disintermediation if short-term interest rates rise to
7 per cent.
Purchasing agents in various types of businesses throughout the
District report little change in the lead times for the items they buy, with
a few exceptions.

The exceptions are primarily in steel, especially sheet

and plate, where some stretching out of lead times is being experienced,
but not by all buyers.

The purchasing agents who are finding steel harder

to obtain attribute the change to layoffs in the domestic steel industry,
and to less "dumping" by the Japanese.

Some aluminum materials also are

becoming somewhat less readily available, according to a purchasing manager
for a manufacturer of small airplanes.

A competitor, however, says he

is having no problems getting aluminum.
The purchasing agents are generally optimistic about prospects

for sales by their firms this year.

Their levels of inventories of raw

materials are neither excessive nor inadequate, say most buyers, who
describe their stocks with phrases such as "ideal," "just right," "where
we want them," and "according to plan." Most buyers expect the prices
of materials to rise at about the rate of inflation.

Certain petroleum-

based chemicals and related products are expected to go up somewhat faster
in price.

Polyester fibers, used by two major rubber manufacturers, and a

solvent, used by a paint manufacturer are two of the items expected to
show sizeable price increases soon. A manufacturer of furniture hopes to
see an end to the frequent price increases, totaling 30 per cent in 1977,
on plywood and particle board.
Following a 3-month rebound, farm prices have once again reached
the levels of last July due largely to stronger markets for hogs, cattle,
and corn.

In December, farm prices were only

per cent above year-ago

levels, which explains why retail food prices were not a particularly
troublesome issue in 1977.

Of course, it should be recognized that the

stability in food prices has come at the expense of the farmer who has
been confronted with serious cash flow problems and depressed incomes for
most of the last 2 years as commodity prices have generally fallen.
Moreover, although adjustments are occurring, most of the evidence suggests
that income levels are not likely to show much improvement in the year ahead.
A recent report on the seeding of the new winter wheat crop shows
that acreage nationwide will be down about 14 per cent from 1977 levels.
If the 1.3 billion bushel projection is realized, 1978 production will be
off 13 per cent from last year's figure. However, a larger carryover
will help keep total supplies for the 1978-79 marketing year at a high level.

Within the Tenth District, 1978 winter wheat acreage will be about 13 per
cent smaller than in 1977.

But the prospects for higher yields in 1978 are

excellent since most of the wheat is in better condition now than it was
last winter when severe cold and drought were affecting the District's
agriculture.
Most Tenth District bankers contacted report loan demand is up
sharply.

Loans for natural resource development and energy-related

businesses continue to be a source of strong demand, and credit needs
for retail inventory financing have increased.

Many bankers report heavy

credit demand from agribusiness and from country banks to finance farm
needs.

In Lincoln, however, there has been a significant paydown in

correspondent bank loans related to agriculture, as farmers have reduced
their debts to banks by borrowing from the Federal Government.

Consumer

credit card loans have increased sharply at many of the banks surveyed,
but auto loans are weak in most areas of the District.
Deposit growth has been good at District banks.

Demand deposits

have increased at several banks due to large public deposits.

Passbook

savings deposits continue to decline although outflows are reported to have
moderated from the second and third quarter declines.
and large negotiable CD's have increased.

Other time deposits

Bankers anticipate sharp dis-

intermediation if short-term interest rates rise to 7 per cent.

Several

bankers feel that deposit growth will not keep pace with loan demand and
that they will have to purchase funds in the near term.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Business activity in the Eleventh District enters the new year on a
note of strong economic expansion.

The businessmen and Directors surveyed

this month are optimistic about future business prospects.

Christmas sales

exceeded the expectations of many department store executives, and the outlook for future sales is bright. Auto dealers expect sales of 1978 models to
be greater than 1977 models. Bankers report deposit inflows have slowed but
do not see disintermediation becoming a serious problem.

The booms in drilling

and construction continue, with heavy demand for inputs to the two activities.
The financial position of the agricultural sector is being squeezed by low
crop prices.
The Directors surveyed this month generally agree that the pace of
economic activity for the Southwest and nation will quicken in 1978. However,
they all express concern that many of the economic and political uncertainties
that discouraged capital investment in 1977 are still present.

Only one

Director expects that many of these -uncertainties will be resolved and that
business spending will move from the "maintenance" expenditures that characterized capital investment in 1977 to a greater emphasis on expanding productive
capacity this year. Most respondents see little improvement in the national
rate of unemployment and are forecasting a jobless rate of 6.5 percent by yearend 1978.

Interest rates are expected to show only moderate changes in 1978—

rising in the near term and falling by year-end. A small majority of the respondents thought that the rate of inflation would increase moderately rather
than abate.
Department store sales in the Eleventh District ended 1977 on an upbeat with Christmas sales substantially above the expectations of most merchants.

Inventory levels were drawn down to low levels at many stores, and the clearance
sales now underway are relatively small in volume.
executives forecast increased sales for 1978.

Most department store

Some respondents feel, however,

that part of the exceptionally high level of Christmas sales reflected advanced
buying by customers and are predicting that sales this quarter may be weaker
than they otherwise would be.
Although new car sales have slowed somewhat, auto dealers continue
to express confidence that sales in this model year will exceed last year's
level. Sales of intermediate-sized cars are especially slow.
of domestic cars are above desired levels for most dealers.

Inventories

Foreign car

dealers seem to be doing slightly better than domestic dealers in spite of
recent price increases on foreign cars, and some Volkswagen dealers report
that inventories are below desired levels.
At current interest rate levels, bankers report funds are being transferred out of demand and savings deposits and into certificates of deposit.
Most do not expect disintermediation to become a serious problem. However,
banks are having difficulty attracting new deposits, with consumer saving
deposits especially weak. Demand for construction, real estate, and consumer
loans continues to increase in the District, and demand for those types of
loans is expected to remain strong throughout 1978.
Drilling activity is at an 18-year high, and drilling contractors
anticipate continued expansion in 1978.

Because of the high level of activity

in the industry, the supply of oil field equipment is tight.

The lead time

required to deliver most equipment has doubled since last spring. A short
supply of drill pipe is hampering some activity, but the problem is not acute.
To meet demand, many oil field machinery and equipment manufacturers are

currently expanding or plan expansions of their production facilities in 1978.
One respondent plans a $6 million expansion that will add 600 new jobs.
The increase in construction activity in the District is also leading
to greater output in several durable goods industries. Cement producers are
expanding their operations to meet the increased demand for their products.
Demand by construction contractors for metal buildings to store equipment and
materials is increasing output in the fabricated metals industry. In addition,
fabricated metal manufacturers report strong demand for solar panels and
aluminum doors and window frames.
According to our latest quarterly survey of agribankers, reduced cash
flows from low grain and cotton prices continue to squeeze the financial conditions of farmers. As a result, repayments of loans remain slow at rural
banks, and the Availability of loanable funds has decreased since October.
Participations with nonbank credit agencies continue to rise. One "banker noted
that "many farmers will have to refinance long-term debt to meet operating and
machinery loan obligations." With commodity prices at low levels, a large
portion of the 1977 crops will be placed under the Commodity Credit Corporation
loan program. Higher cattle prices and more profitable feeding margins account
for much of the increase in feedlot placements. But dry weather and poor
winter grazing conditions continue to force many cow-calf operators to cull
herds. The farm "strike" movement appears to be gaining support, with the
strongest backing in the grain-producing areas in West Texas.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
Retail Christmas sales were up by double digits over last year for
many Western firms.

Since these sales were typically larger than expected,

inventories were typically leaner than planned by year end. An apparent end
to the drought is filling both agricultural reservoirs and mountain ski lifts,
both of which were nearly empty for most of last year. Western firms are
still highly liquid and western banks are comfortably liquid, though there
were two reports of mild disintermediation. Related to the U.S. trade deficit,
concern was expressed over the lack of competitiveness of U.S. goods.
Christmas sales were higher than expected and end-of-the-year inventories lower than expected in almost all areas of the district. Most areas
experienced double digit increases in their Christinas sales over year-ago
levels. In the Los Angeles area, sales of practically all items, except
autos, were up 10 to 15 percent over last year, and this strength has abated
only slightly in the post-Christmas period. A Chamber of Commerce survey of
another Southern California city found this year's Christmas to be selling
17 percent better than last year's.

In Portland, the largest department

store reported a 12 percent increase and a large local chain a 21 percent
increase in Christmas sales. Particular strength was seen in electronic
games, food processors and TV/stereo items, and even foreign autos were selling nicely in Portland.

In Seattle, even Christmas-week food sales topped

last year's level by 20 percent, according to one large chain. Christmas
sales were reported to be unusually heavy among both large and small retailers
in various parts of Idaho, and Salt Lake City's major retail outlets were
ringing up 12 to 15 percent more sales than a year ago. The only declines

in retail sales were reported on an Oregon Indian Reservation and in a
drought-damaged agricultural part of Idaho.
The unexpectedly high level of sales left unexpectedly lean inventories. One Southern California city reported shortages in certain lines of
toys, women's clothing and small appliances. One large Portland store
reported that inventories were depleted a full week to ten days before
expected. Lower than planned inventories were reported in virtually
every part of the district. One note of concern came from a large California banker who characterized the season as a "credit card Christmas" and
feared that optimistic retailers may restock inventories as if such sales
would continue, while consumers will begin to feel overextended in their
debt load and cut back their spending.
There are reports from the forest products industry that the supply
of raw timber is down because environmental groups have blocked timber sales
from government lands. The end of the drought has put the Western ski industry back on the road to financial health since extremely good snows are
bringing droves of people to the mountains. The weather has imparted mixed
blessings on California agriculture. While deepening snowpacks and rising
reservoir levels mean more water for farming in 1978, the hurricane-force
winds which ripped through California's Central Valley on December 20 have
reduced farmers' net income by an estimated 20 million dollars. Up to half
of the damage was confined to avocado losses, but damage was also reported
in vineyards, citrus and almond groves, some field crops, green houses
and irrigation systems.
When asked to comment on press reports of liquidity problems among
banks and non-financial corporations, Twelfth District directors responded

that such reports appeared exaggerated and alarmist. Two years of strong
profit growth combined with modest plant and equipment expenditures was said
to have left corporations in strong cash positions. Most major forest products firms are able to fund their planned investments largely through
internally generated cash. There was one report of a firm repurchasing its
own stock. Overall, there was not a single report of a liquidity problem
among Twelfth District firms, and many firms were reported to be in highly
liquid positions. The only liquidity problems appear to be among farmers
who are squeezed between low prices and high costs.
Most banks also report no liquidity problems, though one Salt Lake
City bank hints that strong loan demand may soon spark a rise in interest
rates and two Southern California banks have observed some disintermediation.
In particular, one of these latter banks reported a 20 percent decline in
savings certificate balances between August 1 and mid-December.
Several of our directors commented on the persistent U.S. trade
deficit.

Some echoed the prevelant explanation that the lagging economies

of our trading partners were responsible for weak foreign demand and that
our rapid import growth was due to purchases of foreign oil. A natural
gas producer recently turned to Japan for "malleable pipe fittings" because
U.S. fittings were of such poor quality, and for small trucks because the
U.S. did not produce an equivalent product. One banker noted that foreign
autos now capture 41 percent of. Oregon's new car sales due to their high
quality. He also noted that Oregon capital goods producers are losing their
competitive edge due to government restrictions concerning ecology, human
rights, boycotts and due to relatively non-aggressive action by U.S. export
financing agencies (such as the Export-Import Bank).

