CONFIDENTIAL (PR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open. Market Committee
by the Staff

July 12, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 30
Eleventh District-Dallas page 33
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.]

District reports continue to point to a slowdown in economic
activity in the second half of the year. However, current retail sales
and manufacturing activity continue to advance at a rapid pace, although
some industries have entered their normal midsummer doldrums. Businessmen continue to manage inventories closely, and growing uncertainty is
deterring some capital spending. Higher prime rates are expected as loan
demands strengthen and bank deposit inflows slow further. Although higher
interest rates are not expected to impact significantly on business borrowing,
they have led to fewer mortgage commitments. The prospects for farm income
are improved, and the demand for new equipment in some areas is rising.
Modest to brisk gains in retail sales are being reported across
the country, although the expected strength of sales at year-end remains
uncertain. New cars continue to sell well, but sales of other durable goods
are mixed. Minneapolis and Dallas suggest that retail sales are increasing
at unsustainable rates, while Atlanta indicates a similar situation for
new car sales.

Chicago reports that consumers continue to use instalment

credit freely, and there is concern in the New York district that mounting
consumer debt will soon slow sales.

Inventory levels remain within manageable

limits, although Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, and Kansas City indicate stocks
are on the high side. Atlanta is the only district where retailers plan
to build inventories through the summer.

Industrial production continues to grow at a brisk pace in most
districts, as evidenced by expanded employment, increased shipments, and
rising prices. Although some industries, such as autos and coal, have
geared down to slower rates of summer output, production in such durable
goods industries as fabricated metals, transportation, equipment, construction
materials, and defense goods are on the rise. Nonetheless, many manufacturers are pessimistic about business conditions at year-end and are
keeping a tight rein on factory inventories.
Despite the recent runup in imports, steel companies in the Cleveland
and Chicago districts remain heavily booked, and production is expected to
remain strong. But inventory levels, especially in the distribution channels,
are building and may hamper further price increases.
Capital spending plans vary widely. Low rates of return and uncertainties over inflation, government regulations, and economic policies
are listed as obstacles to increasing capital outlays.

San Francisco notes

investment plans by several industries are short of that needed to meet
future product demand. While no significant changes in capital spending
are anticipated by Philadelphia, large expenditures are in the offing for
commercial aircraft, rail cars, and heavy trucks and trailers, according to
New York and Chicago.
Credit demands at commercial banks are expected to strengthen for
the remainder of the year.

Continued slowing in deposit growth is holding

down the liquidity positions of most banks, and bankers are becoming more
selective in processing loan applications. While business loans, consumer instalment credit, and agricultural lending account for much of the
growth in bank loans in many districts, New York points to the financing of

mergers and acquisitions and inventories as sources of loan demand in that
district.

Interest rates are expected to continue to rise with the prime

rate climbing 25 to 100 "basis pointsfayyear-end, according to Philadelphia
and Kansas City. Although the new six-month money market CD's appear to
be adding little to overall deposit growth, they are helping many banks,
and especially S&L's, to hold on to some savings deposits.
Residential construction in many areas is being pinched as tight
mortgage markets are leading to sharp reductions in new commitments.
Chicago indicates that residential permits and sales of existing homes
are down 30 to U0 percent in some areas from a year ago. The uncertainty
of property tax cuts promised by Proposition 13 is an additional factor
that is holding back home sales, according to San Francisco. Slowdowns
in residential construction are anticipated by St. Louis and Minneapolis,
while Cleveland reports housing starts will remain strong for the remainder
of the year, regardless of sales. Demand for mortgages also remains
vigorous in the Atlanta and Dallas districts.
Financial conditions in the agricultural sector show some
improvement with higher livestock prices. But Atlanta reports some
weakening of farm prices in recent weeks, and Kansas City indicates that
the abundant wheat harvest should preclude a runup in wheat prices. Prospects
of improved farm incomes are adding to demands for farm equipment, according
to Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas. Soil moisture conditions are generally
adequate, but shortages are reported in the Southeast and portions of the
plains.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
First District respondents report that business is brisk and that, as
yet, there are few signs of an economic slowdown. Manufacturing production
and new orders continue to rise and retail sales remain strong. There are
scattered reports of labor shortages.

There is, however, some concern that

inventories may be too high in view of the growing number of forecasts of an
economic slowdown.
Among participants in a survey of manufacturers there was an increase
in the number reporting higher shipments. New orders are also on the rise.
The fabricated metal industry is doing particularly well.

In southern New

England, several large firms have backlogs of defense orders which are just
now reaching the production stage and promise employment increases even if
the economy sags. On the other hand, one manufacturer of consumer durables
reports that his products have begun to move more slowly.

Inventories have

increased for most manufacturers; but, although sales are strong, uncertainty
about future economic conditions has made many very cautious about further
increases. Among those who do wish to add to inventories there are a few reports
of increasing delivery lead times. A shortage of skilled workers, particularly
machinists, has been observed by firms in the transportation equipment and
machine tool industries.
Consumer spending in the First District continues to be strong. Retail
sales throughout the region were good in May and June and through the first week
of July.

The tourist industry in northern New England is faring very well

Retailers are somewhat apprehensive about the future course of the economy and
some feel that inventories may be a bit high; but this concern is not based on

actual experience.

Both a major department store chain and a large utility

report that uncollectible bills and bad debts, which increase as the economy
weakens, are low and falling.
The region's economists are, for the most part, considerably more
pessimistic about the economic outlook than are most businessmen. At a recent
gathering of business economists nine out of twelve assigned a probability in
excess of 50 percent to the prospect of a recession in late 1978 or early 1979.
Consumer debt, the rate of inflation and the Federal Reserve's response were
the basis for their gloomy forecasts.
Professors Eckstein and Samuelson were available for comment this
month.

Both respondents agree that there is a very real possibility of a

"credit crunch" developing in the second half of this year, although neither
believes that the present level of interest rates will necessarily lead to this
outcome.

They also agreed that while an overly ambitious attempt to slow the

rate of money growth could easily produce a recession, the economy's prospects
in the absence of this policy are for slower but still acceptable real growth
in the months immediately ahead.
According to Eckstein, some signs of a credit crunch have already
emerged.

Specifically, the extent of the disintermediation that is currently

being experienced by the Nation's commercial and savings banks is similar to
that which developed in previous crunch episodes. On the other hand, the
sudden shift in sales expectations characteristic of such periods has yet to
occur, nor is there evidence of impending collapse in any segment of the
financial markets. Eckstein is concerned, however, that an increase in the
Federal funds rate to the 8-9 percent range may be sufficient to induce the
massive deterioration in expectations that will result in a crunch and a

recession.

He believes that "the Fed would then once again be disappointed

by a recession-triggered policy of fiscal stimulus despite only a brief respite
from inflation."
Samuelson likens the current period to the "slower motion" period
preceding the sharp downturn late in 1974. Although he cannot predict a
crunch on the basis of existing data, Samuelson fears that current high
interest rates are increasing the chances of a growth recession.

It is his

view that the Fed may be overly restrictive in trying to maintain money growth
within the existing ranges. Describing the present targets as "niggardly,"
Samuelson feels that since they have already been breached, and since inflation
will not be cured by a "preventive" growth recession, there is no compelling
reason to attempt to hold money growth to them.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK
Comments of directors and other business leaders indicate that economic activity" in the Second District continues to expand moderately. At the
same time, an increasing number of respondents voiced concern about prospects
of a national slowdown or even a recession. Any downturn was expected to he
relatively mild, in large measure because of the absence of imbalances such
as excessive inventories, overbuilding, or serious shortages of labor or
supplies.

Indeed, although business conditions appear less buoyant recently

than in the spring, many of those canvassed gave upbeat reports for their
own firms, with a few noting a step-up in capital spending. Respondents
unanimously viewed the recent increase in inventory investment as related to
economic growth rather than hedge buying in anticipation of price rises.
Leading New York City bankers expect some acceleration in loan demand over the
remainder of the year.
District retail sales appear, on balance, to have posted a moderate
advance in June and early July. Leading merchants in New York City characterized sales as "not had," "reasonably good," or "on target." Reports from
upstate respondents indicated that sales were reasonably good. Merchants
differed in assessing the outlook for consumer spending. Some viewed consumer
sentiment as uncertain while others expected retail sales to exhibit continued strength. At the same time, several business economists expressed concern that mounting debt burdens would slow consumer spending. The president
of one of the District's leading retail firms discounted this view, however,
noting that the amount of credit outstanding on a per account basis at his
firm had risen only six percent over the past two years.

The capital spending outlook appears mixed. On the one hand, several
industries—most notably the automotive and railroad sectors—were reported to
be spending record amounts on capital investment. Producers of railroad cars
are booked so solid that some firms are reportedly seeking foreign suppliers.
One director noted that one of the region's major airlines is operating close
to capacity and is planning substantial capital commitments.

Further evidence

that capital spending has finned was offered by a major producer of machine
tools who reported continued strong orders and high backlogs. On the less
optimistic side, a number of respondents reported no plans for stepping up
capital spending. Several executives felt that government policies played a
crucial role in inhibiting investment. Among the chief influences cited were
the costs of pollution control programs, whimsical changes in federal regulations,
uncertainty over the administration's economic policy, and government's inability
to control inflation.
The level of inventories appears to be in relatively good balance
with sales. At the retail level, most respondents seemed pleased with current
inventory levels, although a few viewed their stocks as slightly high. Recent
inventory expansion was generally related to the strong economic growth posted
in the second quarter. Uniformly, no respondents reported hedge buying in
anticipation of heightened inflation.

Nevertheless, inflation remains a

primary concern of business executives. Most of the respondents felt that
inflation was worsening and that rising prices would be a principal factor
behind any economic slowdown. At the same time, many felt that the monetary
authorities had done enough to fight inflation and that it was up to the
government to curb prices by reducing fiscal stimulus.

For the most part,

respondents were skeptical as to the effectiveness of voluntary restraints.

Business loans at the large banks in New York City were essentially
flat during June following a strong performance in May.

Looking to the future,

officers at four of five banks that were contacted foresaw some acceleration
in loan demand in the second half of 1978 compared to the past six months.
However, no one expected credit demands at anywhere near the rapid rates of
expansion witnessed in the 1973-7^ period. In explaining the pick-up in loan
demand this year, the most frequently mentioned causes were financing of
mergers and acquisitions and inventories. Most respondents said that it was
too soon to tell whether capital spending would provide much impetus to loan
demand.

Two respondents said Hew York City banks were finally picking up

loans partly because of the growing inability of regional banks to further
supply customer loan needs.

One respondent cited the rise in bond rates

as at least temporarily stimulating demand for bank loans. Although the prime
rate has risen 1 l/U percentage points since the end of 1977, only one of the
five respondents felt that it was having any deterrent effect on potential
borrowers.

In fact, one respondent cited fewer loans at below prime rates as

evidence of a firming in loan demand, although another respondent indicated
that below-prime lending was still common.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District indicate that regional economic
activity is mixed.

Business loan demand is strong at commercial banks and

expected to improve further in the latter half of the year. Retail sales
posted gains again in July, and although merchants have reservations about
business conditions in the fourth quarter, they look for a strong fall
season.

Inventories are in "good shape" now according to contacts, and barring

seasonal variation, no change in stock levels is planned over the next six
months. District manufacturing growth has been stifled in July, but the
slowdown appears to be a typical midsummer lull.
hold, we can look for a pickup in August.

If past seasonal patterns

For the longer term, however,

manufacturers are less optimistic than they've been in three-and-a-half years.
Business at Third District vacation spots has been sluggish so far for the most
part.
The recent expansion in manufacturing activity in the Third District
has virtually died in July according to this month's Business Outlook Survey.
Although work forces are larger at one-fourth of the firms sampled, general
business activity, new orders, and shipments are all unchanged from their
June levels.

Inventories are slightly lower than they were a month ago. This

midsummer slowdown may be seasonal though, and not a cause for concern. Such
a drop-off in activity has been observed each July for the last eight years,
and has typically been followed by an August rebound.
Looking ahead to January, Survey respondents foresee bleak prospects
for the manufacturing sector. Less than one-third of those polled expect
business conditions six months down the road to be any better than they are

now—the lowest this proportion has been since November 1974. New orders,
shipments, and inventories are expected to remain essentially unchanged over
the next two quarters.

Consequently, Survey participants expect no increase

in the size of factory payrolls over the period, and even a slight trimming
of the average workweek. Moreover, the level of capital expenditures is
projected to remain unchanged for the remainder of the year.
A Director of this Bank, whose business is in manufacturing, agrees
that the picture is less than rosy. He foresees a lack of real strength
in the retail sector and projects a slowdown in new car sales next year,
both of which could have trickle-down effects on the industrial sector.
On the price front, inflation appears to have picked up steam again
in the manufacturing sector after abating somewhat last month. Half of
those responding to the Survey this month report higher prices for inputs,
while about one-third say they are charging more for their finished products.
For the longer term, about 85 percent of those surveyed expect to pay higher
prices for raw materials by January, and almost 70 percent project price
hikes on the goods they sell.
Area merchants say business is strong this month, with reports of
current dollar sales ranging from 8 to 15 percent over July f77 levels and
either "on target" or ahead of planned volume. Downtown stores and their
surburban branches are doing equally well. Retailers say their inventories
are at approximately the desired levels at this time.
For the longer term, merchants are becoming more uncertain about
the remainder of 1978 than they have been recently. While they look for a
strong fall buying season, some weakening is expected later in the year,
leaving projected January sales volume only about 4 to 8 percent ahead of

year-earlier levels. Retailers may run into inventory accumulation problems
in the next six months if the administration's proposed $15 billion tax cut
is not realized. As one contact points out, some merchants assumed a tax
cut was in the offing when they made fall and winter buying commitments a
few months ago.

If no cut materializes, retailers may be caught with larger

inventories than planned.
Contacts at the Pocono Mountain and South Jersey shore resorts say
that tourist and vacation business has been generally less than anticipated
so far this season, and, in some cases, is running behind 1977 levels. They
attribute the sluggishness to several factors including unfavorable weather
through much of the spring and early summer, and an extended school year as a
result of last winter's snows. As for the balance of the season, resort
entrepreneurs look for a pickup and expect total trade this year to be 6 to
12 percent ahead of last summer. One area that warrants comment is Atlantic
City. Officials in that town say that as a result of the onset of casino
gambling this year, hotel/motel reservations are running 10 percent ahead
of 1977 levels with further gains projected for the rest of the season.
Commercial bankers in the region say demand for both consumer and
business loans is strong in July. Commercial loan volume is up 8 to 10 percent from year-ago levels and either as planned or ahead of projections for
this period.

The growth in local demand growth is outstripping demand growth

from elsewhere in the nation by a considerable margin. As for the future,
bankers foresee further increases in loan volume over the next two quarters,
with January levels 10 to 15 percent above year-earlier figures.
The prime rate at all of the banks contacted is currently 9 percent,
and is projected to rise another 50 basis points by year-end. Bankers

foresee no significant disintermediation as a result of rising short-term
rates. Deposit growth will slow, they say, but they do not expect a credit
crunch.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND
Summer vacations and the model changeover in the automotive industry
are hampering this quarter's production of autos, steel, and coal in the
Fourth District. Retailers are facing a larger than usual liquidation of
stocks of new cars and of general merchandise.

Capital spending still

lacks a broad-based expansion, and demand for mortgage credit continues
strong despite higher interest rates.
Retailers in the District are still cautious in their appraisals
of consumer behavior.

Car sales have been sustained at near-record rates

since spring. Still, some auto producers expect annual rates of sales
this half to fall about 6 percent from the 10 million annual rate of
domestic sales last quarter.

Inventories are large and still imbalanced,

but a larger than usual summer runoff of stocks is expected (especially
with a longer Ford shutdown for model changeovers because of downsizing of
Ford and Mercury cars). Uncertain over sales prospects, officials with
department stores expect smaller gains in real sales for the second half
of this year as compared to the first half. Strength in sales has not
been broadly based, and inventories of summer goods are heavy. Thus,
retailers of general merchandise will be forced to vigorously promote
goods throughout the summer with the result that some department and
variety stores will likely experience either no improvement or another
decline in profits this quarter. Also, some retailers apparently will
be cautious in ordering fall and winter merchandise. An official with
a major appliance producer reports a strong increase in unit sales of
appliances, especially freezers. He reports some excess stocks of ranges

and laundry equipment at the distributor level and believes stocks of
appliances, except freezers, are large, although masked by a high volume
of sales.
Steel production this quarter is not expected to fall as much as
usual during the summer months, and industry economists expect the operating
rate for the industry to hold close to 90 percent of effective capacity.
Order books for July sire full, in part because of another steel price
hike at the end of this month, and order volume for August and September
is better than expected in view of uncertainties over auto production and
ample availability of world steel supplies.

Steel economists are somewhat

concerned over an unexpectedly large buildup of inventories held by distributors. While this buildup has not hampered orders, inventories may
be more than ample later this year. Also, a common complaint is that
the trigger price system does not seem to be working as evidenced by the
much stronger than expected volume of steel imports in May. Steel price
differentials have narrowed in favor of U.S. producers and have contributed
to a sharply reduced volume of imports from Japan and Western European
producers.

But imports this year from Third World nations, including

Korea, South Africa, and Spain, have risen sharply from a year earlier.
Unless imports in June and succeeding months abate from the l8 million
ton annual rate in May, some domestic producers may consider filing
dumping charges.
The rebound in coal production following the long strike is being
temporarily hampered by usual summer vacation shutdowns of mines. Production has failed to reach peak levels of late last year, which according
to an industry economist, reflects weaker than expected demand for coal.

Coal stocks apparently were not run down as badly as reported during the
strike, and utilities are not rebuilding stocks as much as expected.
According to some utilities, electric power consumption since the coal
settlements has not risen in line with industrial activity because of
conservation programs.
The continued lack of broad-based strength in capital goods
industries is hampering a robust expansion in spending. For example,
capital goods producers of rolling mills and steelmaking facilities still
see no meaningful strengthening in sales this year. They report that
their order backlogs so far this year have trended downward. A producer
of turbines, generators, and nuclear systems reports sales to utilities
are still soft, although industrial equipment business continues to be
strong. On the other hand, a producer of computers, point-of-sale
terminals, and electronics business machines reports sales and backlogs
continue to rise, although not at an accelerating rate. A producer of
printing and communication equipment reports a spurt in orders in June
following a May drop and that backlogs are still growing but less rapidly
than last winter.
Builders and mortgage lenders concur that demand for housing
and mortgage credit remains strong, although there are some scattered signs
of buyer resistance to high prices and tightened mortgage terms. Consumer
resistance to higher mortgage rates is not as strong as during the tightness
in mortgage markets in 197^, according to a financial officer with a major
national builder of new houses. He expects housing starts to remain strong
at least through the fourth quarter of 1978 regardless of sales. His
firm's backlog has been stretched out because of bottlenecks in skilled

labor and materials. Mortgage lenders, particularly S&L's, report little
sign of easing in demand despite rising mortgage rates.

In Cleveland,

for example, the rate of 80-percent loans is generally 9 3 A percent, but
a few S&L's are charging 10 percent. Some are no longer making 95-percent
loans or investment loans on land, apartments, and multifamily units.
S&L's are quite pleased with response to the six-month savings
certificate and indicate no waning in consumer interest since the initial
offering in early June. These S&L's, however, have been aggressively
promoting certificates.

Their view is that these certificates helped

boost deposits in June to the best volume so far this year and have enabled
these associations to meet strong loan demand. Some report that at least
60 percent of the certificates represent new money.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Responses Co our latest survey of District manufacturers suggest some
slowing in the rate of expansion over the past month.

Shipments continued to

grow but new orders were essentially flat and backlogs of orders declined somewhat.

Inventories were unchanged, remaining moderately above desired levels,

and inventory policies continue on the cautious side.

Retailers, on the other

hand, report improvement in sales and relative sales of big ticket items over
the past month.

Expectations have become mixed.

Manufacturers surveyed have

turned decidedly pessimistic about the national outlook while retailers and
Richmond Directors retain basically positive expectations for the second half
of the year.

Credit market activity in the District is brisk, with some insti-

tutions reporting record consumer and commercial lending in June.

Real estate

lending, while showing some signs of tapering, is still vigorous.
District manufacturers continued to expand employment and weekly hours
over the past month as their shipments continued to increase.

But in the face

of stable new orders some reduction in backlogs resulted and further improvements
in employment are doubtful.

Inventories of both materials and finished goods

were virtually unchanged and inventory positions relative to desired levels
improved slightly.

Although one-third of the manufacturers surveyed view current

stocks as excessive, a small number consider them inadequate.

Most respondents

view current plant and equipment capacity as about right and there is little
sentiment for altering current expansion plans.

Manufacturers also continue to

report widespread price increases, but such reports were slightly less common
this month than last.

Retailers' responses were somewhat more positive.
in June as were relative sales of big ticket items.

Total sales were up

There is some question,

however, as to whether these increases involve more than just price changes*
Nonetheless, retailers are encouraged by recent performance and look for continued improvement.

Inventories at retail were larger than a month ago, but

remain in line with desired levels.

One of our Directors attributes current

satisfaction with inventories to the relatively strong sales activity of recent
weeks.

He feels that even a minor reversal in sales would lead to a rapid

turnaround in retailers' views of current inventory levels.
Current expectations vary widely from sector to sector.

Manufacturing

respondents have become pessimistic over the past several months; half now
expect the general level of business activity nationally to worsen over the
next six months.

Their expectations for their respective firms and market

areas are not quite that weak, but are essentially negative.

Retailers, on

the other hand, are basically optimistic, with most expecting further improvement nationally, locally, and in their respective firms over the remainder of
the year.

Most of our Directors who commented on this topic expect second-

half growth, nationally, to be somewhat below that for the first half of the
year.

Specifically, they expect real GNP growth in the 3-4 percent range.

Current perceptions of local labor market conditions are likewise varied.
Comments by Directors suggest some tightness in markets for specific types of
employees and in areas which have recently experienced rapid growth or development.

Otherwise there is no indication of impending constraints arising from

labor market conditions.
Bank business lending seems to be generally stronger than expected.
Recent increases in commercial and industrial loans have been concentrated in

the durable goods, recall trade, and transportation sectors.

The coal industry

has also been a big borrower of late, leading West Virginia banks to increase
their requests for loan participations with correspondent banks.

A clear cut

pattern has emerged in business use of loan proceeds, with capital expenditure
financing explaining the largest part of commercial and industrial loan demand.
Consumer installment loans of commercial banks have increased rapidly in recent
weeks, largely as a result of healthy automobile sales.

Bankers seem to expect

continued strong demand for installment loans over the near-term, although some
note that consumers' interest in big ticket items may be cooling off.

Demand

for residential mortgages continues strong, and is responding only moderately
to- increases in interest rates.
single-family area.

Real estate loan demand is not limited to the

There is still interest in borrowing to finance construction

of apartments and condominiums, although the latter are intended as primary
residences, not second homes.

Area banks seem generally comfortable with their

liquidity positions, but thrift institutions are concerned about low rates of
deposit growth.
The District's total cash farm income, led by significantly higher
livestock receipts, continues to show a slight improvement over a year ago.
Soil moisture conditions throughout the District were marked by considerable
diversity as of July 1.

Moisture levels ranged from short to very short in

South Carolina, with drought conditions broadening and cutting yield prospects,
to mostly adequate to surplus in West Virginia.

Elsewhere, soil moisture was

also short in slightly more than half of North Carolina but generally adequate
in Maryland and Virginia.

While conditions of most field crops and pastures

were generally rated as fair to good, apple and peach prospects were reported
as good to excellent.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Although businessmen increasingly regard prospects for late 1978
and 1979 as questionable, recent business reports have been largely good.
Consumer spending, still heavy, may have weakened a bit in late June. Inventory trends are not clear, but we may be in for some additional accumulations at the producer or wholesale levels.

Construction activity and

prospects remain strong. Credit demands are hefty, with sources of loanable
funds generally adequate. Farm product prices have softened; dry weather
and labor shortages have made trouble for crop producers.
Retail sales remain generally strong, but directors in several
areas reported a moderation in late June, particularly in sales of bigticket items. Elsewhere, durables still appear to be dominating the sales
gains. More than one retailer has complained of sluggish repayments.
Passenger cars have been moving at a rapid clip, with no one type
clearly a favorite.

Some dealers are disappointed with the short margins

and slim profits they've pulled on their heavy volumes. Many are dubious
that such high sales levels can be maintained through the fall. One director has already noticed a "drastic slowdown" in his area.
Because of good sales prospects, businessmen plan to accelerate
their stock building through the summer, according to one director. Retailers seem more cautious in their buying for fall and spring 1979, says
another.
Judging from the recent volume of announcements of new plants,
capital expansions, and relocations, nonresidential construction activity
and building materials production should be quite strong for several months.

In Florida, a number of huge, long-term residential developments, many
backed by Canadian, Latin American, or European money, have emerged from
the planning stages.

Forecasts of a condominium shortage on the Gold Coast

by year-end have become common.
Demand for consumer, mortgage, and business loans continues vigorous and has contributed to a rapid run-up of interest rates, particularly
local prime rates. An economist for a large Florida holding company commented on the number of "marginal" business borrowers who have "come out
of the woodwork."

His organization feels it can be rather selective and

still make all the loans it wants (it1s also planning for a "rather severe"
recession within the next few months).
Deposit inflows can still be characterized as moderate at most
banks and savings and loan associations.

Updates on the six-month CDs

suggest that they are indeed drawing funds largely from passbook savings,
bringing in roughly one-third new money.

There have been a few more

reports of S&Ls having trouble meeting loan demands—they've either quit
accepting new applications or pushed back commitments to the fourth quarter,
when they expect funds to be more adequate.
Prices of cattle and calves have been steady to slightly lower
since late May. The near-term outlook is for continued leveling, but live
prices may yet fall to forestall further increases in retail beef prices,
which have already met resistance from consumers.
tinue to delay the rebuilding of cattle herds.

Heavy marketings con-

Broiler placements are

expanding rapidly in response to increasing prices. Most crop prices have
weakened in recent weeks. A dry spell in the eastern part of the District
has been threatening growing crops; in the western area, weather conditions

have improved. The shift to soybeans has continued, with producers in some
areas bidding up rents and drawing land out of pasture to expand acreage.
A labor shortage in central Florida has left nearly 10 percent of the orange
crop still on the trees and forced early closings of several concentrate
plants. Unmanageable harvest costs, strong competition from Mexican produce,
and mediocre crop quality have prompted some south Florida vegetable growers
to open their fields to public harvest.
Businessmen continue to be most deeply troubled by inflation and
what they perceive to be a lack of effective government measures to restrain
it. In August, 11,000 Southern Bell employees will receive a 7-percent
"cost-of-living" pay raise.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Except for housing, virtually all sectors of the Seventh District
economy- are vigorous and there is no evidence that momentum is fading.

Farm

equipment sales picked up briskly in the second quarter.

Employment continues

to rise, and unemployment to fall, throughout the region.

Consumer spending

on goods and services has remained at high levels.
at a faster pace.

Prices appear to be rising

Capital goods overall are treading upward.

Rising non-

residential construction will provide an offset to the growing slowdown in
residential construction.
Prices of goods and services are rising at a faster pace under the
impetus of strong demand and rising costs of labor, transportation, utilities,
insurance, and purchased materials.

There has been no sudden surge in infla-

tion, but rather a gradual acceleration with price increases posted more
frequently than in the past.
Except for various building materials and certain special items,
components and finished goods are available on normal terms.
ules have stretched out, but not to an alarming degree.

Delivery sched-

Equipment producers,

however, complain of long waits for large and special castings, as opposed to
standard castings produced in quantity.

Many smaller foundries have been

closed in recent years, because owners were unable or unwilling to invest
the funds needed to meet state or national EPA standards.
Retailers were pleasantly surprised by a surge in sales in the second
half of June.

Virtually all lines sold well for the month as a whole, includ-

ing motor vehicles, appliances, home improvement items, and apparel.
continue to use instalment credit freely.

Consumers

One large retailer reports a

moderate, but not serious, rise in delinquencies in recent months.

Airline

passenger traffic has been running about 15 percent above year ago with
capacity loads on many flights.

Cut rate fares have helped.

A major telephone

company reports net new installations of phones 50 percent above year ago, and
message volume tip 13 percent.
Employment in both the goods producing and service sectors has continued to rise at a surprising pace.
growth in hirings in the months ahead.

Surveys of employers indicate further
Help-wanted ads in Chicago papers have

been running about one-third above the year earlier level in recent weeks.
Demand for executives is at the highest rate in a decade, according to a large
recruiting firm.

Many of these job openings are for engineers, accountants,

tax lawyers, and others with highly specialized skills.
Recent contract settlements with construction trades unions in Chicago
and Milwaukee have brought "moderate" first year increases in wages of 7 to 8
percent.

Total compensation of electricians, iron workers, pipefitters, and

operating engineers is now in the $15 per hour range.
While most firms are hiring new workers, some major companies are currently pressing programs to reduce white collar staffs to raise average productivity and improve narrow profit margins.

Such cost-cutting programs have

been instituted despite good gains in shipments and orders.

Examples include

producers of paperboard, capital equipment, chemicals, and furniture.
Backlogs of steel orders indicate a high level of shipments through
the third quarter at least for most plants in the region.

A growing share of

shipments consists of plates and structurals used in capital goods.

Steel

companies were "shocked" at the continuing high level of steel imports in
April and May.

The effect of trigger prices is still uncertain.

An overhang

of inventories of imported steel in the distribution channels may prevent
further price boosts, and. possibly dampen domestic steel shipments in the
fourth quarter.

Chicago area plants are said to be the best situated in the

nation to meet foreign competition.
Improving farm income prospects have encouraged farmers to spend more
freely on equipment.

Farm equipment sales had been very weak in the first quar-

ter, but picked tip in April, May, and June.
Demand for producer equipment, overall, has risen at a steady if
unspectacular pace.

Earth-moving equipment has been strong all year.

for commercial airliners, locomotives
trailers is booming.

Demand

and freight cars, and heavy trucks and

The European "airbus," using many domestic components,

appears increasingly attractive to US airlines because of its low operating
cost.

Delivery schedules for freight cars have stretched out to mid-1979•

Shortages of freight cars are the worst in a decade, with priority given to
grain movements.
by Conrail.

In part, the rail car. shortage is blamed on bad management

Very strong sales of heavy trucks currently may reflect, in part,

diversion of traffic from rail to truck, and there are fears that a reaction
may occur in 1979.
Residential building permits and sales of existing homes have been running 30 to 40 percent below year ago in major centers in recent months.
gage lenders have reduced new commitments sharply.

Mort-

Preliminary samplings

indicate that S&Ls have gained a sizable net inflow of funds through sales of
T-CDs, and this may improve the supply of mortgage funds.
been shown in the new 8-year notes.

Little interest has

Nonresidential construction, especially

commercial and industrial projects, is rising and the trend probably will
continue into 1979.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

The Eighth District economy continues to advance, but at a more
moderate rate than in April and May, according to a number of businessmen
reporting on conditions in the area.
slightly.

Department store sales continue up

Manufacturing activity showed strength in recent weeks in a number

of important industries, but representatives of several firms expect some
slowing in the second half of the year.
levels.

Inventories remain at moderate

Credit demand has been strong in recent weeks and interest rates

have continued to advance.

Savings flows have remained at the slower pace of

recent months; however, some S and L officials expressed the view that the
new higher-yielding CDs will help them retain funds which otherwise would
move to higher-yielding investment alternatives.
Retail spending at department stores made only modest gains in June.
One retailer noted that sales were about as planned in recent weeks, but that
targets have been lowered from those of a few months ago.

Wearing apparel

items were reported to be selling better than earlier in the year.

Sales of

some big-ticket items, such as freezers, ranges, and tires, were reported to
be sluggish, whereas air conditioners and consumer power tools were
registering gains.

Automobile sales have remained strong and dealers are now

clearing inventories for the new models.

Dealers are generally optimistic

about sales prospects for the new model year.
Manufacturing activity in major industries, such as transportation
equipment, appliances, and chemicals, remains strong in the District.
Appliance manufacturers noted that orders have continued up in recent months,
rising to 10 percent above a year ago.

However, representatives of appliance

manufacturing firms are quite cautious about sales prospects for later this
year.

Chemical industry representatives noted continued overall gains in

June, although rubber sales have slowed.

Some deceleration in the growth of

chemical sales is expected in the summer months.

A paint and coating firm

has experienced strong sales gains since May, after sluggish sales during the
early spring.
Homebuilding remains at a high level, and housing permits are at
about the same level as last year.

Yet, builders indicate some slowdown in

new home sales which is attributed to the higher interest rates and more
restrictive lending policies of the mortgage lenders.

Realtors report that

the demand for older homes continues strong, citing lack of listings as their
main problem.
Credit demand continues to expand as indicated by sharply increasing
loan volumes and higher interest rates.

Banks and S and Ls report continued

rapid increases in business loans, consumer installment loans, and real
estate loans.

Interest rates have continued to advance, with the prime bank

lending rate moving to 9 percent and the most common home mortgage rate (80
percent loan) rising to 9-3/4 percent.

With the higher rates, state usury

laws are becoming an important factor in the credit markets in Missouri and
Arkansas.

A 10 percent usury law has caused lenders in these states to

restrict lending to the less risky customers.

Arkansas bankers report more

restrictive lending policies on loans to small businessmen and real estate
developers.
Inflows of funds into financial intermediaries continue at the
slower pace of recent months.

Large commercial banks have experienced losses

in small passbook deposits, but increases in other time deposits have been

fairly rapid.

The new six-month certificates have been gaining acceptance by

consumers and some savings and loan officials expressed optimism that this
source of funds will help avoid serious disintermediation.

Currently more

than 50 percent of the net? CD purchases are made by withdrawals from existing
accounts.
Crop plantings, while somewhat later than usual, are nearly complete
in the District except for a portion of the soybean acreage which will be
planted after the wheat harvest.
reported to be adequate.

Soil moisture conditions are generally

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Business remains brisk in the Ninth District. Manufacturing,
building, farming, and retailing sectors have maintained their heady
pace of the past few months. And according to our Bank's directors the
near-term outlook is marred only by a likely homebuilding slowdown
brought on by sharply rising homeownership costs. The severity of that
slowdown should be tempered by growing sales, of the money market CD
introduced in June.
In last month's Redbook summary we reported good news for just
about every sector of our district's economy.

Since that time little

has changed. Our Bank's directors tell us that manufacturers, builders,
farmers, and retailers across the Ninth District are doing well.
Manufacturing employment is up a healthy 5 percent from last
year. And directors characterize industrial activity as being either
"good" or "strong" in every district state.
Among the busiest manufacturers are those producing building
supplies. They have been straining to keep up with the demands of the
district's construction sector. Both residential and nonresidential
builders have shared in that sector's hectic pace.
Farm businesses have also had their share of good tidings.
Livestock prices remain quite high. And with the exception of some
rain-damaged corn fields in southern Minnesota, crops are growing well
throughout the district.
Directors from Montana and North Dakota report that the improved
farm situation has spurred sales of high-priced farm implements. And

"big ticket" items are selling well off the farm too as low real rates
of interest make consumer durables among the best investments available
to most households.
Retailers have pursued cautious inventory policies in the face
of this strong demand. They apparently have been concerned about the
sustainability of the current brisk sales pace.
But currently available data does not lend support to the view
that a slowdown is imminent. Econometric analysis of the region's
economy carried out at this Bank indicates that retail sales will maintain steady growth through the remainder of the year. Manufacturers
surveyed by our Bank expect year-over-year sales growth of around 15
percent in the third and fourth quarters. Crop farmers look for bumper
harvests and price supports to boost this year's income well above last
year's. And livestock prices are expected to remain relatively high
through the remainder of the year so ranchers are in pretty good shape
despite the recent relaxation of beef import quotas.
But observers aren't optimistic about every sector.

It is

feared that high building costs and rising interest rates will choke off
the currently high rate of construction activity. Directors have mixed
opinions regarding the near-term outlook for commercial building. Most
say it is picking up but one Wisconsin director sees signs of a slowdown.
They are unanimous in predicting a slowing of residential construction
activity though.
This vulnerability of homebuilding is at least partly due to
government-imposed market imperfections.

For example, South Dakota has

a 10 percent usury ceiling which is starting to interfere with the

operation of mortgage markets there. And the lure of high nominal rates
of return on non-Regulation Q limited investments has slowed the flow of
funds into banks and thrifts.
The T-bill rate six-month CD introduced in June has helped
staunch a funds outflow though. Bankers in the region report that sales
of these certificates have picked up substantially during June and early
July.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Continued growth without severe imbalances characterizes Tenth District economic activity.

Inventories of manufacturers' inputs and of goods

in retail stores are considered to be close to desired levels. Lead times
on some materials and producer goods have stretched out, but a slower rate
of economic expansion is expected to hold production under capacity, thereby
keeping supplies adequate.

The wheat harvest is now slightly less than half-

completed. Reports on yield vary, but total production will be down from
last year in any case because of reduced acreage. The combination of large
carryover stocks and government support programs should keep wheat prices
fairly stable over the 1978-79 marketing year. Loan demand is strong and
deposit growth is moderate at Tenth District banks. The demand for money
market CD's is weak, and consists mostly of transfers from other time accounts.
Consumer spending continues strong, judging from reporting retail
department stores.

Softline items are selling especially well. Prices are

up about 2 per cent, on average, from 3 months ago.

Store executives complain

about the exorbitant price increases being demanded by some manufacturers,
and attribute this pricing behavior to expectations of price controls. Inventories at retail are felt to be a little high, but stocks are expected to
be back to desired levels soon. Retailers forecast a slowing economy and
stiffening competition for consumer dollars as the Christmas season approaches.
Purchasing agents say that input prices continue to rise and that
lead times for some items are lengthening. However, inventories of materials
remain satisfactory and no acute shortages of supplies are expected to
develop in the months ahead. Host buyers note that business is good now,

but some think it might sour soon.

In most of the firms represented by

those purchasing agents contacted, there is still excess capacity. The
aircraft industry in Wichita, however, is having trouble hiring and retaining skilled labor and management personnel.
Hot, dry weather has permitted wheat farmers to harvest their
crop at a rapid clip, although total progress is somewhat behind schedule.
The harvest is finished in Oklahoma and is progressing well in Kansas, but
the 40 per cent that has been harvested compares with a long-term average
of 55 per cent for this point in time. Reports on yields are mixed. With
the reduction in acreage, production will obviously be smaller than last
year. Moreover, most of the information in the press indicates that yields
may fall below levels projected by the USDA. However, two directors report
that yields in their immediate areas are excellent. No matter what the
final production figure is, carryover stocks are sufficiently large to
assure an abundant total supply of wheat for the 1978-79 marketing year,
which will likely preclude a sharp runup in wheat prices over this period.
The two directors commenting on the wheat harvest agree that most
of the harvested grain is finding shelter, despite well-publicized concern
about a boxcar shortage 1 to 2 months ago. As always, some grain is being
temporarily stored on the ground or in the streets of rural communities.
Within a short time, virtually all of this wheat will find shelter as local
elevators begin shipping to terminal markets. Although a seasonal decline
normally occurs during the harvest period, wheat prices have held up very
well so far this year.

Given the quantity of grain that is under Government

loan, together with other features of the farm program, it is unlikely that
wheat prices will experience the same precipitous drop as occurred last year.

Thus, 1978 should be a better year for the District's wheat producers.
Tenth District bankers report that loan demand remains strong.
A number of bankers single out loans for energy and natural resources
development as one of the strongest loan demand categories. Agricultural
loan demand, particularly by cattle farmers, is heavy. Construction loan
demand for single-family housing also remains vigorous.

Some banks report

that they are becoming somewhat more selective in making loans due to the
continued strong demand and a slight tightening of available funds. Most
bankers expect their lending rates to peak within 6 months, with a prime
rate reaching between 9 1/4 and 10 per cent.
Deposit growth is moderate at most banks contacted. Demand and
time deposits are increasing, but passbook savings deposits are leveling
off or declining due to withdrawals by corporate customers. Money market
CD's are being offered by all banks contacted, but the demand for them at
most banks has been weak. Almost all of the money market CD's consist of
transfers from other time accounts.

Some bankers feel that the money

market CD's may help to divert a slowdown of deposit growth.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
The fast pace of economic growth that began in early spring continues,
but a slowdown in business activity is forecast by fall, according to the
Directors and businessmen surveyed this month. Department store and new
car sales are well above year-earlier levels, and manufacturing output—
led by durable goods production—continues to grow steadily. Business
inventories are being closely managed, and there is little evidence of
inflation hedging.

Savings inflows to S&L's are slightly improved, but

the strong demand for mortgages is keeping that market tight. Bankers
indicate they can meet projected loan demand even though deposit growth
continues to slow. Agribankers report farm loans remain strong, but repayments are slow and loan renewals and extensions are frequent.
Retail sales are growing at an unsustainable rate, according to
survey respondents, and a slowdown from the current strong pace is expected
in coming months. Department store sales are running 15 percent ahead of
year-earlier levels, and much of the strength is attributed to advanced
buying in anticipation of higher inflation.

Several auto dealers report

record sales levels for new cars, while the market for used cars has
softened. Foreign car dealers continue to report their sales are being
held down because they are unable to get a sufficient number of new cars.
Many sales are being made because buyers realize prices for current models
are likely to be much less than for the 1979 models. Therefore, dealers
expect new car sales to slow when this model year comes to an end.
There has been little change in the steady rate of growth in
manufacturing output this summer. Most of the strength continues to be

centered in the durable goods industries.

Producers of cement, aluminum,

and fabricated metal products are operating at full capacity. Business
for aircraft manufacturers is also on the rise.

General Dynamics has

begun full-scale production of the F-l6 fighter plane, which will raise
employment at the Fort Worth plant through 1980, and Bell Helicopter
reports growing sales for its civilian aircraft. Although the firms
indicate that there are tight supplies of aluminum, titanium, and avionic
components, the effects of the shortages have been dampened by careful
planning and early ordering.

In nondurable goods manufacturing, apparel

firms are operating at 80 percent of capacity.

Summer sales are up, but

a decline is anticipated by fall. Apparel manufacturers are having
difficulty passing on price increases, and profit margins are squeezed.
Businesses are maintaining close control over inventory levels,
and stocks at most trade and manufacturing establishments are reported
near desired levels. Expectations of higher prices are tempting some
businesses to hedge their inventory positions by making advanced purchases,
but the higher costs of financing inventories and the increasing concern of
a recession are prompting many firms to hold- down inventory levels and not
to hedge against inflation.
Savings inflows are slightly improved since May at District S&L's,
even though the rates of .inflow are down as much as 50 percent below year
ago levels. Deposit gains are particularly strong in the Dallas-Fort Worth
area.

Some of the improvement is due to the marketing of the new six-month

money market CD's. S&L's report that ho to 60 percent of the new issues
represent new deposits. Despite the small improvement in deposit flows,
there appears to be no letup in the demand for mortgages.

The size of

mortgage loans continues to be increasingly restricted to 80- and 90-percent
loans with the mortgage rates bumping up against the 10-percent usury ceiling.
Lending activity at commercial banks continues to climb with demand
expected to remain strong for the rest of the year. All categories of loans
are contributing to the growth with petroleum and real estate loans leading
the advance. Although deposit growth continues to slow, most banks report
their liquidity positions are adequate to meet projected loan demands.
There is, however, a growing number of banks reporting tight liquidity
positions.

Large denominated CD's remain the primary source of deposit

growth at large reporting banks, while six-month money market CD's are
contributing little to overall growth.
Demand for agricultural loans remains strong, but repayments are
slow, and loan renewals and extensions are frequent, according to our latest
survey of agribankers.

In addition, the number of referrals to nonbank

credit agencies continues to rise. Demand for feeder cattle, crop storage,
and farm operations is expanding, and the demand for farm machinery is
improved. A third of the respondents consider their loan-to-deposit
ratios are too high, compared to less than a fourth of the bankers three
months ago. Most farmers continue to be in worse financial, condition than
a year ago. Some improvement, however, is noted in Oklahoma and East Texas,
while dry weather continues to hamper farmers elsewhere in the District.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
Consumer spending remains strong in the West, with autos displaying
considerable briskness.

For various reasons, several western industries

anticipate capital spending to be less than that needed to meet future
demand for their output. Housing demand appears to have been dampened somewhat by high interest rates, though a number of savings institutions do not
have the funds to meet even this weaker mortgage demand.
Retail sales continue strong in the West.

The consumer is still

the strong factor in the California economy, according to one director.
Comments from Washington, Oregon and Utah echoed this sentiment. Auto sales
have been particularly brisk — enough to offset softness in the sales of
other consumer goods in some areas.

Sales of household durables, in parti-

cular, are said to be growing less rapidly than last year in southern California. There seems to be a growing feeling that retail sales will not continue their current strength for very much longer. One banker-director noted
that consumer debt burdens are already too high to permit a continued expansion of debt-financed retail sales.
One large clothing manufacturer plans to cut back inventories in
anticipation of slower retail sales in early 1979. A large distributor of
domestic and foreign cars reports low inventories right now because they are
selling more cars than they can get their hands on.
The economic recovery continues, according to Seattle University
which is finding more demand for its graduates this year than last. Demand
is particularly strong for bachelor's degrees in engineering and business and
for MBA's. Demand is weak for graduates in liberal arts and education.

In the industrial sector of the West, a number of businesses note
that their planned level of investment is insufficient to meet the expected
demand for their industry's product. The president of Kaiser Aluminum noted
that "investments have lagged in the industry due to inadequate returns in
prior years and due to uncertainties caused by inflation". A large clothing
manufacturer stated "the clothing industry is a low-wage business and the
increase in the minimum wage is forcing us to look at outside sources
(imports), rather than local investment and expansion". An oil producer
pointed out that oil companies are concentrating their capital investments
offshore and that no new-technology refineries had been built in the U.S. for
many years. A gas producer supported this by noting that gas supply projects
are difficult to finance because of the low return on investment capital.
He felt that the rate of return was held artificially low by the regulatory
lag and the lack of a well-defined energy policy.
The exception to this trend appears to be the banking industry.
Several banker-directors noted that investment in new capacity has been
sufficient to support continued expansion of that industry. However, one
director did say "it is likely that investment in new facilities will moderate
during the next eighteen months in line with our forecast of reduced growth
in major loan and deposit categories".
There seems to be a general consensus that construction activity
peaked in the fourth quarter of last year and that the demand for home ownership has been dampened by both high mortgage interest rates and uncertainty
over whether the California property tax cuts promised by Proposition 13 will
really be forthcoming. Building permits have declined since the first of the

year in several counties of southern California and quite substantially in at
least one case (47 percent in Orange County). However, there are still
several areas (such as Oregon) where construction activity is quite strong.
Concern was expressed by a number of directors over high interest
rates and a lack of funds for mortgage lending.

Several S&L's have stopped

making loans and at least one other has reduced the maximum amount of a loan.
A Utah banker saw a lack of mortgage funds in both primary and secondary
markets.

One small bank noted that the new T-bill Certificates had stimu-

lated very little activity.

Consumer lending remains brisk, but the feeling

seems to be that consumer debt burden may have reached its limit.

