CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 15, 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 30
Eleventh District-Dallas page 33
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.]

Generally good economic conditions prevail across most of the nation,
although there is notable uncertainty over economic prospects. Retail sales have
been fairly steady overall—consumer durables have been selling somewhat better
than nondurables.

Agricultural and industrial production has been strong.

Construction activity is mixed, with some increases in commercial construction
and some decreases in homebuilding.

Inventories are lean almost everywhere.

Financial markets continue to be tight. But despite fairly positive assessments
of current economic conditions, reports from most districts reveal substantial
uncertainty regarding future economic developments due in part to the evolving
anti-inflation program.
Retail sales have held up in recent weeks throughout most of the
nation.

Strong consumer demand was reported in Boston, Chicago, St. Louis,

Dallas, Minneapolis, and San Francisco. The weakest demand was observed in New
York, Philadelphia, and Atlanta.

In between, retail sales ranged from slightly

above last year to 10 percent above last year in Kansas City.
Chicago was the only district reporting relatively better soft goods
sales than hard goods sales.

In Richmond, Atlanta, and Minneapolis the reverse

was noted. Several districts indicated that auto and light truck sales did not
adequately reflect demand, as slow deliveries held actual sales below potential
levels.
Auto dealers aren't the only business people with low inventories.
Nearly every district notes the lean inventory positions of most retailers. Some
soft goods dealers in Boston, Atlanta, and Minneapolis are concerned about
inventory creep, but this concern is much less prevalent than satisfaction with

inventory levels. Reports from manufacturers throughout the U.S. reveal that the
overwhelming majority are maintaining very tight inventory positions.
Since inventories are low, strong demand for manufactured goods has
been reflected in healthy industrial activity.

For instance, Chicago reports

that most producers of capital goods continue to report rising shipments, new
orders, and backlogs.

Only New York characterizes manufacturing activity as

flat, while all other districts cite improvements.
Improvements

in

agricultural

production

are

also

widespread.

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis all note good agricultural production.
impressive.

And prices are holding up so that crop values are quite

Livestock producers throughout the nation are also reaping the

benefits of high prices.
Recent trends in the construction sector are not so clear-cut as they
are in agriculture—commercial construction remains strong but homebuilding has
weakened.

Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis each report active commercial

building.

Meanwhile, most districts state that a homebuilding slowdown is

imminent or had already begun.
High interest rates are cited most frequently as the reason for the
housing slowdown.

St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco remark that usury

laws are making mortgage funds particularly scarce in parts of their districts.
Regulation Q is also mentioned as having a detrimental impact on the ability of
banks and thrifts to attract funds.

The newly legalized automatic transfer

service at commercial banks was supposed to have relieved some of the negative
aspects of Regulation Q, but at least according to Atlanta, Minneapolis, and
Dallas consumer interest in the ATS is currently quite limited.
This lack of interest contrasts with the public response to other
recent Administration and Federal Reserve policy actions.

New York, Atlanta,

and

Chicago

report

skepticism

guidelines would work.

concerning

the

likelihood

that wage-price

Furthermore, each of these banks notes public concern

that the guidelines will turn into mandatory controls with the attendant
inefficiencies.
are mixed.

Reactions to discount rate and reserve requirement increases

For example, Atlanta finds that some observers are "reassured that

something concrete has been done toward alleviating the inflation and exchange
rate situations," while a few others feel the actions were "excessive or
dangerous."
Uncertainty

associated

with

the evolving

anti-inflation

program

complicates economic forecasting. Districts report widely divergent opinions on
the probability of a recession and on the chances that inflation and interest
rates will moderate during the coming year. Boston's panel of experts reflects
this diversity of opinion; Professor Eckstein argues that the odds now favor a
recession in 1979, Professor Houthakker feels the odds are against recession in
1979, and Professor Samuelson suggests that government policy will have a
substantial influence on what transpires and that recession is not inevitable.
Similarly, opinions on inflation prospects range from less than the guidelines,
according to some Philadelphia respondents, to substantially higher, according
to some observers in Atlanta and Cleveland.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
First District respondents report that economic activity continues to
be vigorous.
increasing.

Retail sales are healthy.

Manufacturers shipments are still

Inventories in manufacturing appear to be under control, although

there is some concern about retail inventories.

In the financial sector, the

effects of higher interest rates are beginning to appear but this does not
seem to have discouraged real growth.
Retail sales are fairly strong.
doing particularly well.

Luxury and collectors items are

Retailers report that consumer debt is unusually

high for this time of year.

There appears to have been a lengthening in the

time consumers are taking to pay their bills.

The head of a large department

store chain notes that, because of exchange rate changes, his stores are no
longer buying Japanese goods and have greatly cut back purchases in Europe.
There is some concern that retail inventories may be too high. One
respondent reports that, although there has been a general improvement in the
retail sector's inventory position since earlier this year, the industry would
still be vulnerable if there were a significant weakening in the economy. One
reason for this concern about retail inventories is that manufacturers and
wholesalers are offering retailers very attractive deals, thereby discouraging
further reductions, in order to keep their own inventories down. Respondents
generally feel that manufacturing inventories are lean. One director contends
that manufacturers have already anticipated an economic slowdown so that if one
were to develop no inventory correction would be needed.

Supporting this, a

large tire manufacturer claims to have made very substantial inventory cuts
since spring.

A chemical producer who had been increasing inventories to support

rising sales is now reassessing his position in view of the frequency with which
forecasters are calling for a recession. A note of caution was sounded by a
director who expressed concern that further shifts to LIFO accounting may be
distorting published inventory data.

However, although First District business-

men are concerned about the possibility of a slowdown, there are no concrete
signs of any weakening in demand.

Business remains exuberant.

Loan demand continues to increase.

In northern New England both

consumer and industrial demand is strong: one banker says that he will be
forced to allocate credit before the year is out.

In southern New England,

the head of one large bank reports that the trend for industrial loans is up
but less so than in other parts of the country. Higher rates do not appear to
be choking off demand, and there has been a substantial increase in requests
for credit commitments as potential borrowers seek to avoid being squeezed out
in a credit crunch.

Several firms report a slowdown in the rate at which

accounts receivable are being paid off; it is thought that delaying payment of
bills is being used as an alternative to borrowing from the banks.

A number

of thrift institutions are considering ceasing to offer the six-month certificates
because they have become such a high cost source of funds.
Professors Houthakker, Eckstein, and Samuelson were available for
comment this month.

Although intervention 14 months ago, when urged by our

allies, would have been a mistake, the respondents generally agreed that the
slide in the dollar had now reached the point that it "could not be allowed
to continue" and that "tactically this was a good time for counter-speculation"
to "impress on holders of private capital that the Swiss franc and German
mark are not a one-way bet." Houthakker, who had been urging greater gold
sales, was generally pleased with the package but does not like the idea of

foreign borrowing. Eckstein argued that the jump in interest rates and the
strengthened currency arrangements do nothing to solve the basic problem of
the dollar, which can only be corrected by a turnaround in our trade position.
Samuelson disputes the view that a recession is inevitable and the
earlier it comes the milder it will be. To contrive a recession is "playing
with brinkmanship" and is not justified by either demand-pull inflation or
the level of the dollar.

To honor the President's commitment to support the

dollar, it is now appropriate to aim for a somewhat lower real growth target
(such as 2 percent).
Houthakker has been impressed by the recent strength of the economy
and feels the odds are still against a recession in 1979, although they have
increased slightly. Noting the sharp rise in the weekly wholesale price
index, he fears inflation next year in the 9 to 10 percent range.
Eckstein feels the odds are now in favor of a recession next year.
He is convinced that monetary policy has now tightened to the point where
lending for commercial and residential construction has dried up. He urges
the System to conduct a survey to verify the anecdotal evidence that the
process is now underway.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
The expansion in business activity in the Second District apparently
slowed in October, judging from recent comments of directors and business
leaders. On the national outlook, there is growing concern and anxiety about the
stubbornly high rate of inflation and the recent sharp run-up in interest rates.
Respondents were uncertain as to how successful the new wage and price guidelines
would be in stemming inflation, with a few even reporting some companies raising
prices apparently in anticipation of an eventual return to mandatory price
controls. At the same time, many view the program designed to shore up the value
of the U.S. dollar in the foreign exchange markets as appreciably increasing the
chances of a recession next year.

Against this national economic outlook,

apprehensions have been voiced about the business prospects for the regional
economy.

On the financial scene, NOW accounts have been introduced in New York

so that it is unlikely that many automatic transfer accounts will be offered.
Retail sales turned in a mixed performance in the district.

While

retail sales were fairly strong in western New York, the autumn buying season in
upstate New York fell below the expectations of directors of the Buffalo branch.
As evidence of the mixed signals being emitted by consumers, some major
department

stores in New York City reported healthy gains, while others

registered disappointment at the low level of October sales.

The prolonged

newspaper strike was blamed by several New York City merchants as contributing to
the sluggishness in retail sales, but a few observers interpreted the slowing as
evidence of an incipient weakness that may presage a retrenchment by consumers.
Nonetheless, merchants are looking forward to the Christmas season, although the
traditional seasonal optimism appears to have been dampened by this undercurrent

of trepidation. Auto dealers in the Second District also reported a softening in
consumer spending.
Outside of the consumer sector, the mood of business appears to be sober
and cautious.

A spokesman for an upstate manufacterer, whose comments were

echoed by many manufacturers, reported that business was flat and was probably
going to stay that way for a while.

Another telling indicator is that the

capital spending plans of companies in such diverse industries as chemicals,
steel, paper, and prefabricated metals show no evidence of strengthening or have
been even pared.

An increasing number of businesses now seem to regard the

prospect of a recession next year as a foregone conclusion. In this connection,
the sharp rise in interest rates and the other moves taken to defend the U.S.
dollar were judged to have appreciably increased the chances that there will be a
recession.
Respondents were generally unenthusiastic about the probable success of
the wage and price guidelines in slowing the rate of inflation. It was generally
felt that while business management would do its part in holding price increases
to the level sought by the president, unions were unlikely to cooperate. Indeed,
the Buffalo directors thought that the anti-inflation program was misguided. It
was their feeling that the government itself was contributing importantly to the
current inflationary environment through a host of ways—e.g., the minimum wage,
Social Security taxes, continued high deficit spending, onerous regulatory
burdens, etc. At the same time, a number of businessmen indicated that they knew
of instances where prices appeared to have been increased in anticipation of
mandatory price controls. Still, the overall impression is that there is little,
if any, real evidence of such increases, and the practice appears to be far from
widespread.

The offering of automatic transfer service is not likely to become very
widespread in New York state, according to a recent survey of Second District
banks.
instead.

Most New York banks contacted said they plan to offer NOW accounts
The recently enacted banking act authorized

federally chartered

financial institutions in New York state to offer NOW accounts, and this
privilege was recently extended to state chartered institutions by the state
banking authorities.

Of the 30 New York banks surveyed, only four (two of which

were New York City wholesale banks) said they did not plan to offer either ATS or
NOW accounts.

In contrast, all the New Jersey banks surveyed said they were

already offering ATS. Banks with automatic transfer service estimated that about
60 percent of the balances came from demand deposits at the same bank with most
of the remaining funds coming from savings deposits, also at the same bank.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District indicate that the local economy continues to grow but at a slower pace than in the past few months.
are not generally optimistic about future prospects.

Businessmen

In the manufacturing

sector, gains are less widespread than they have been recently, and the effects of
the growth slowdown have stopped the expansion of industrial employment.

For

the longer term, manufacturers see little improvement in business conditions.
Retail sales are -sluggish this month. Merchants' forecasts of Christmas sales
this year are mixed, but a slowdown in 1979 is generally expected. Local
bankers say business loan demand is soft and foresee no real pickup within
the next six months. Further interest rate hikes are forecast.
Manufacturers responding to the November Business Outlook Survey say
economic conditions in the industrial sector have improved somewhat since
last month.

However, gains do not appear to be as widespread as they have

been through most of the spring and summer.

In terms of specific indicators,

survey respondents report little change in the level of new orders in
November, while shipments are up significantly.

Consequently, inventories

have declined in the past several weeks, and no improvement is noted on the
employment front.
For the longer term, manufacturers foresee little improvement in
business over the next six months. While no pickup in overall business
activity is projected between now and May, new orders and shipments are expected
to rise. At the same time, however, survey respondents plan to maintain
inventories at their current levels.

No change in either employment or the

length of the average workweek is forecast. Manufacturers report plans to
increase capital spending fractionally over the next two quarters.

Price hikes are again reported in the industrial sector in November.
Almost 60 percent of the respondents this month report paying higher prices
for raw materials while 25 percent say they have raised the prices of the goods
they sell. Looking ahead six months, 90 percent of those surveyed expect to
be paying more for inputs by May, and nearly 70 percent plan to charge more
for their finished products.
Department store sales are sluggish in November, according to local
merchants.

Retailers report current dollar sales to be only 3 to 4 percent

over year-ago levels. Nevertheless, this is slightly better than had been
expected for this period. Retail executives had forecast a sharp dropoff in
consumer spending by this time, but such a downturn has not materialized.
As for the future, merchants expectations about the Christmas buying
season are a mixed bag. While some look for a good season, others point to
the strong sales of last year and believe they will be difficult to match.
Looking past Christmas to the first half of 1979, retailers generally expect slow
sales to be the rule, with the distinct possibility of a "mini-recession."
Concerning the Administration's anti-inflation program, most merchants
contacted feel the program will be largely ineffectual, particularly with
regard to wage guidelines, but plan to try to cooperate with the program. They
feel that price inflation will be somewhat slower next year so that the price
guidelines will not be binding.
A Director of this Bank generally agrees with this view.

He too feels

that prices will not rise by more than the guidelines. His manufacturing firm will
try to follow the wage guidelines, but he is not sure that this will be possible.
Local bankers say consumer loan volume remains strong, but that
business loan demand is soft.

C&I loan volume is reported to be between 3

and 6 percent over November 1977 levels and either "on target" or slightly
ahead of plan. A possible cause of the softness could be high interest
rates, according to one banker contacted.

He claims business borrowers are

turning to other sources of funds to avoid double-digit interest rates.
Little improvement in loan demand is anticipated over the next six months.
The prime rate at all of the banks contacted is currently 10 3/4
percent and projected to go higher in the near future. Rising interest
rates are forecast through the first quarter of 1979.

Bankers believe that

a peak in the first quarter could mean a prime rate as high as 12 to 12 1/2
percent.
High interest rates appear to continue to have a slight but definite
effect on deposit flows at area banks. Net inflows are slow and time and
savings deposits are well below anticipated levels at this time.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Economists from Fourth District firms who convened at the Bank last
week have scaled down their expectations for output and raised their estimates of
inflation for this quarter and 1979.

Half of the thirty economists expect at

least one quarterly decline in real GNP next year.

Retailers and producers of

consumer goods are cautious over short-term sales prospects. Manufacturing and
mining activity is supported by a high level of auto production, better-thanexpected steel and coal production, and additional but small real gains in
capital spending.

Financial officers prefer tax relief as a remedy for the

steady erosion in capital stock. The city of Cleveland appears to be approaching
default.
Economists at the regularly scheduled meeting on the economic outlook
held November 10 have considerably altered their expectations for output and
prices from those given at a similar meeting last June. At that time, the group
expected real GNP would increase at about a 3.0 percent annual rate this quarter
and 2.5 percent in the first half of 1979.

The latest set of forecasts,

submitted before the November 1 actions to defend the dollar, indicates real GNP
would increase at a 2.5 percent annual rate this quarter, followed by a 1.6
percent annual rate of increase in the first half of 1979 and a 2.0 percent
annual rate of increase in the second half.

The participants expect the

inflation rate to increase at about a 7.3 percent rate in the first half of 1979
and 7.0 percent in the second half. Although in the aggregate the group expects
the expansion to continue through 1979, seven economists expect a recession, and
an additional eight a one quarter drop in real GNP in 1979.

Moreover, policy

actions taken on November 1 further altered expectations; at least a third of the
group now anticipates a recession in 1979.

Retailers and producers of consumer goods remain cautious over nearterm sales prospects. Some look for a relatively good Christmas season followed
by sluggish sales through the winter months.

Retailers, especially major

chains, are reported to have large stocks of goods and are holding down placement
of orders from producers.

Department store officials are said to be buying

cautiously, partly because of uncertain prospects and also because of more than
ample stocks of goods. An official with a large food chain noted that consumers
are paying more attention to specials and private brand merchandise in an effort
to maintain a fixed food budget.

He noted his chain is selectively expanding

inventories as an inflation hedge.
Prospects for the auto industry in 1979 suggest a reduced level of
sales and production, according to a group of auto producers and suppliers.
Compared with an estimated domestic sales volume of 9.3 million units and 2
million imports this year, they expect domestic sales of about 8.7 million units
and 1.8 million imports in 1979.

An economist with an auto producer recently

trimmed his 1979 forecast of domestic sales to 9.1 million and imports to 1.7
million units. He noted that imports will fall more than domestic sales because
import price increases of the past year have not yet been reflected in prices
paid by the consumers. He expects that part of that sales loss will result in an
overall market loss of 100,000 cars in 1979. Auto suppliers, especially rubber
and steel producers, report a continued strong level of orders from the two major
auto producers.
Steel economists have become more optimistic over prospects for that
industry. Several weeks ago, they anticipated a continued high volume of imports
and inventory liquidation that would weaken production this quarter.

More

recently, price hedging coupled with an expected drop in the volume of imports

this quarter will likely hold production at about the 87 percent capacity rate of
the third quarter. However, a strike by steel haulers could curtail shipments.
Coal production has rebounded to the high levels of earlier this year,
following a summer slump. A rail strike contributed to a runoff in coal stocks.
Inventories of domestic coking coal, at a record low, induced a surge in imports
from West Germany which brought charges of dumping.

A freight car shortage is

encouraging some coal producers to buy their own cars.

The industry expects

record production in 1979, but the operating rate would still not exceed 90
percent of capacty.
Mixed expectations mark prospects for fixed investment in 1979. Some
economists expect real gains to exceed the 2 percent increase suggested in the
latest McGraw-Hill survey.

One producer pointed out that much of the recent

increase in spending has been concentrated in trucks, autos, and communications.
Moreover, some industries are expected to show either little gain or some decline
in 1979. Heavy-duty truck production and off-highway tractors are estimated to
be at or somewhat below 1978 levels, and machine tool orders will likely drop 2025 percent in 1979, although a large backlog should sustain production. Others
anticipate real gains of as much as 5 to 6 percent over 1978. They cite further
strength in freight car production, industrial equipment—including gears and
conveyor equipment for mining—and in industrial commercial construction.
At a recent financial seminar at this Bank, chief financial officers of
Cleveland-area firms acknowledged that capital stock is being depleted because
of inadequate provision for replacement cost of assets.

Some asserted that

competitive market pressures would not permit increases in prices to reflect
replacement costs.

Some also felt that financial markets would not accept

changes in accounting procedures that would attempt to cope with the problem of

inflation accounting.

Others remarked that switching to LIFO penalizes income

statements and may hinder a continuous upward trend in earnings, an objective of
many firms.

Several preferred tax relief rather than changes in accounting

procedures as a solution.
A growing feeling of a number of observers is that the city of
Cleveland can hardly avoid a default in 1978.

A top administration official

feels that Cleveland needs MAC-type assistance.

Since the mayoral recall

election last August, Cleveland's political leadership has remained divided on
issues that affect the city's solvency.

The administration's effort to raise

revenues has been hampered by several factors: the city council's refusal to
approve a $50 million bond issue until a detailed financial plan is submitted,
the loss of the profitable water division to regional authority, and the
reluctance of banks to refinance $15.5 million in below-investment grade city
notes that are due December 15. Some analysts believe that even an eleventh hour
rescue would only postpone an inevitable default until the spring of 1979.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Fifth District manufacturing activity remains firm at this point as new
orders and shipments continue to gain over the past month.
survey

also

indicate

some

drawing

down

of

particularly of finished goods, during October.

Responses to our

manufacturers'

inventories,

Manufacturing employment and

weekly hours worked continued to rise among our respondent firms. Nonetheless,
manufacturers' expectations for the next six months weakened markedly during the
latest survey period. Reports on the retail sector are a mixed bag; automobile
sales appear to be slowing, if only slightly, while other retail activity remains
firm. Credit demand in the district has been strong in recent weeks, with both
businesses and consumers borrowing significant amounts. To date there has been
no sign of any substantial moderation in credit demand, even though interest
rates have increased sharply.

Strong demand for farm loans, rising interest

rates, and continued liquidity pressures at some banks were reflected in our
latest survey of farm credit conditions.
In the manufacturing sector, activity in the Fifth District continued
to expand during October. Shipments and new orders both gained over the month,
although the gain in new orders was somewhat less widespread than in September.
Backlogs of orders and materials inventories were essentially unchanged, while
stocks of finished goods continued

to run off.

Overall, manufacturers'

inventories have been brought very nearly into line with desired levels. Current
plant and equipment capacity is also at or near desired levels at most respondent
firms.

Manufacturing employment also made some month-to-month gains, although

these gains were not particularly widespread, and weekly hours worked were up
slightly.

Prices continued to rise broadly as 65 percent of our respondents

reported paying higher prices over the past month.

Manufacturers' expectations deteriorated badly during our latest survey
period.

Half of the manufacturers surveyed now expect the level of business

activity nationally to worsen over the next six months, while over one-third
expect a decline in activity in their respective market areas.

Over half of

these respondents expect to maintain current levels of production in their own
firms, but even here expectations have weakened over the past month.
No clear picture of current conditions in the retail sector emerges from
our various sources of information. Our survey of retailers suggests some minor
gains in total sales and in relative sales of big ticket items over the month.
Other sources indicate that sales of department stores have turned spotty around
the district with weakness in apparel and other textile products and some
scattered strength in home furnishings. Automobile sales, although strong, seem
to have tapered off in recent weeks, at least in some areas. A survey of district
bankers shows October as a strong month for consumer instalment lending, due
largely to automobile sales.
strong but not booming.

Instalment lending is described by bankers as

Use of credit cards by consumers continues to be

moderately strong.
Most Fifth District directors have detected no significant impact of
the recent run-up in interest rates on consumer demand for homes or the rate of
homebuilding in their respective areas.
funds, if anything, rather

than

the

More often it is nonavailability of
interest

rates, which

is dampening

residential construction and/or sales activity in real estate markets. There is
some concern, however, that more serious effects on housing will be felt in the
near future.

This situation may be compounded by what appears to be a growing

reluctance on the part of financial institutions to pay market rates on money
market certificates.

Business loans have surged ahead over the past several weeks, although a
substantial part of this lending appears to be in response to seasonal credit
demands.

Commodity dealers and retail stores account for a large share of

borrowing at large area banks, but public utilities have also been active. While
the major source of recent loan demand appears to be middle market firms that are
expanding plant facilities, there has also been some pickup in usage of lines of
credit by larger companies. Demand for new credit lines may also be increasing
somewhat.

Agricultural loan repayment rates and the number of renewals and

extensions of existing loans continued to be roughly the same as the improved
levels of the second quarter.

Banks actively seeking new farm loan accounts

showed a modest rise in the third quarter, while the fraction of bankers forced
to refuse or reduce a farm loan because of a shortage of funds continued at the
reduced level of the second quarter.
Estimates through July reveal continued improvement in district cash
farm income, with all of the increase coming from livestock marketings. Drought
conditions have reduced corn and soybean yields in some areas, but bumper
harvests of these crops and other feed grains are still anticipated.

The season

average price for flue-cured tobacco continues at a record level, some 13 percent
above a year earlier, as the end of the 1978 marketing season approaches.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Events of the past month have created a sharp contrast between
expectations and the current business picture.

Growth continues strong in

nonresidential investment, heavy industry, and agriculture.

There's been

some weakening of consumer spending and housing markets, but the near-term
outlook remains good. At financial institutions, the rapid run-up of borrowing costs was accompanied by a sharp slowdown in deposit inflows, but no
significant liquidity problems have surfaced as yet. A lack of confidence
in price-restraint measures and the likelihood of further increases in interest rates has convinced many of the region's businessmen that a recession is
in store for 1979.
Retail sales were spotty in October and early November.

Retailers

in many areas reported sales gains that would not cover price increases,
with a further softening of nominal sales in the latest two weeks. Unseasonably warm weather has apparently dampened demand for soft goods, particularly apparel.

Strong sales of housewares, furniture, and appliances

have kept spending growing steadily in other locations.

Generally, retail

inventories are heavier than desired; retailers have become more apprehensive about post-holiday prospects.
Auto sales reports are mixed as well.

There has been considerable

grumbling from dealers that low inventories or slow deliveries of popular
models have held sales below potential.

Buyers continue to favor the

larger, higher-priced models, although a few dealers noted resistance to
"loaded" cars.

Small trucks are in heavy demand and short supply.

The used

car market is strong; supplies of late models have become inadequate as

higher-mileage, older-model cars account for a growing share of dealers'
stocks. Import sales are still lagging.
Housing markets have continued their gradual slowdown.

In southern

and central Florida, residential construction activity remains near record
levels, but mortgage closings and permits are waning.

Directors report that

lenders have raised mortgage rates and have tightened credit standards in
most areas. Sales and construction of commercial properties, particularly
office buildings and shopping malls, appear to have accelerated in the past
few weeks; contractors are carrying a sizable backlog of industrial projects.
Central Florida is experiencing a boom in all types of nonresidential
construction, including several huge tourist attractions.
Heavy industries are enjoying very good business. A regional
industrial supplier reports sales up 20 percent over the year-earlier level.
A railcar manufacturer describes demand as "unbelievable" and claims his
current bookings could keep him operating at full capacity for 13 months.
Manufacturers of metal products find their sales steady and have been shipping from inventories.

U. S. Steel plans to add steel finishing facilities

in Birmingham to complement its new blast furnace and coke oven battery.
In contrast, the southeastern textile industry, ailing from import competition, sluggish apparel sales, and the demise of denim, continues to pare
operations and lay off workers.
Crop harvests, speeded by dry weather and now virtually complete,
have been good. Yields are slightly better than average for cotton and
soybeans, with total output somewhat below last year's for cotton and
sharply higher for soybeans; prices and demand are good.

Citrus production

has fallen short of expectations, pushing up prices. Drought-damaged winter

grazing pastures have forced many cattlemen to dip into feed supplies and
could precipitate additional herd liquidations.

Pork production has failed

to expand significantly.
Deposit inflows to both banks and thrifts slowed sharply in October.
Interest rates climbed, with the prime rate reaching 10-3/4 percent at many
large banks. Directors have pointed out that most banks are fairly liquid
and in good shape to weather further increases in interest rates.

S&Ls have

become noticeably less aggressive in raising funds via the costly six-month
certificates.
According to branch directors, most major banks began offering some
form of ATS on November 1.

Set-ups run the gamut from simple overdraft

protection to zero-balance demand accounts, with wide variety in pricing
structures.

Promotions have varied greatly, even within cities; some banks

have embarked on a virtual blitz of television, newspaper, billboard, and
radio advertising and give-aways, while others have been completely silent.
Consumer response has been limited so far.
Southeastern businessmen have become markedly more pessimistic
since last report. Although the great majority are pleased with current
business conditions, only a handful of contacts consider the probability of
recession within the next year remote. The uneasiness has been reflected in
increased caution in planning and management of inventories, cash flow, and
personnel and closer watchfulness of business indicators.

By and large, the

business community feels that recent and prospective government actions (or
inaction) will be largely responsible for any slowdown.
President Carter's anti-inflation program has not lowered expectations of inflation.

Generally, respondents have little confidence that

voluntary controls will work, describing them as a "stop-gap measure" or
"the first step toward mandatory controls."

Some suspected that either the

Government or the unions would not hold up their end of the bargain.
Several were troubled that the guidelines permitted larger increases than
they were accustomed to in their areas and noted that 7 percent could become
a floor, rather than a ceiling, for wage hikes.

That possibility and the

emphasis that the problem has received of late may have even raised inflationary expectations.
The discount rate and reserve requirement increase and dollarsupport announcement seem to have reassured many that something concrete has
been done toward alleviating the inflation and exchange rate situations,
although few are convinced that it will be enough to solve the basic problems. Only a couple of respondents felt that the interest rate increase was
excessive or dangerous, but all expected further rises to take a toll in the
year ahead.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Economic intelligence available in the Seventh District suggests that
the general business expansion will not be halted in the near future either byhigher interest rates or accelerating inflation.

The President's inflation

program outlined October 2k is viewed by most observers as being of minor significance.

Some analysts are predicting a recession to start about mid-1979-

Demand for capital goods remains strong.
shape.

Job markets remain vigorous.

Inventories are generally in good

Retail sales seem to be holding at a high

level overall, but results vary by establishment and product.
has tightened further.
centers.

Mortgage credit

Housing permits and transactions have declined in major

Farmers are prosperous and farmland values have increased further.
Economic forecasts for 1979 vary substantially.

Some predict a con-

tinuing rise through the year, while others insist that a recession is
"inevitable," probably starting around midyear.

Some seek refuge in seeing

a "50-50 chance" of a recession.

Comment on the President's inflation program has been surprisingly
sparse. Executives willing to express themselves in public are laudatory for
the most part. They promise "full cooperation," and say "Our company will follow the guidelines to the letter." These views probably reflect the belief
that the rules are flexible and will not weigh heavily in decision making.
Comments by economists and financial analysts are often more critical with some
suggesting that the program, to the extent it is effective, will do more harm
than good. Many observers fear that the rules are really mandatory, and will
be followed by stricter formulations.
Executives in business and finance complain with some heat of the

rapid growth of controls, despite assurances to the contrary, and the manner
of their administration.

The anti-inflation program is expected to result in

added paperwork and loss of time spent in "educating" federal monitors. The
energy bill is judged to he difficult to administer without significantly
affecting the supply and demand for energy either for better or worse.
Most producers of capital goods continue to report rising shipments,
new orders, and backlogs. Various diversified producers report orders up 20 to
50 percent in September and October, greater gains than were achieved earlier
in the year. Demand for farm and construction equipment has continued very
strong and above expectations.

Orders for castings, forgings, and types of

steel used by equipment producers indicate further increases in output of
producer goods.
Output of heavy trucks is at record levels, and the largest producer
is "supplier limited." Demand for freight cars far exceeds capacity, and some
believe no letup will occur in 1979-

U. S. plants could produce 95,000 freight

cars per year a decade ago, but only 65,000 now. Castings of various types are
in great demand, and constitute a major bottleneck.

Some producers of castings

have activated expansion plans, a step that would not have been seriously
considered until recently.
Some analysts believe that orders for both heavy trucks and freight
cars are artificially high and that a reckoning lies ahead.

Some believe this

is true of capital goods generally. Nevertheless, various companies assert
that they are controlling their backlogs carefully to keep out "water." Some
do not include orders with cancellation clauses; some require stiff penalties
in case of cancellations.
Inventories are not excessive and probably will not become so unless

sales drop sharply.

Companies insist they are watching the situation carefully.

Inventories of farm and construction equipment are judged to be low.
products inventories are somewhat low, especially gasoline.

Petroleum

Leaders of a strike

of steel haulers that began last weekend (apparently to sever connections with
the Teamsters) believe they will win

because user inventories are tight.

Even a large retailer whose sales have been running slightly below year ago, in
contrast to the industry, says inventories are in line because orders to suppliers had been reduced promptly.

Also supporting the view that inventories

are lean is the recent stretchout of delivery times.

The October report of

Milwaukee purchasing managers (a preeminent capital goods town) shows U9 percent
with longer lead times, compared with 18 percent a year ago.

There has also

been a significant rise in the proportion of these managers reporting poorer
dependability on deliveries and lower quality.

Despite reduced sales reported by a large chain, total sales of general
merchandise have been running 12-13 percent above year ago. Appliance sales
have leveled off at about the year-ago level. TV sales have slowed recently.
Consumers are spending more on nondurables, gasoline, and air travel. Credit
use has remained strong with no rise in delinquencies.

Sales of light trucks

to consumers have been limited by capacity, especially four-wheel drive models.
At least one major auto producer has shifted its production of cars away from
larger models with larger engines to help meet mileage standards, regardless
of consumer desires.
Home mortgage rates moved up to 10 percent and more in various areas
in the past month. The impact of tighter credit is increasingly evident. Permits were down 21 percent in the Chicago area in September and 8 percent for 9
months.

In the Milwaukee area permits were off k2 percent in September and 23

percent for 9 months.

Transactions are also down.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District has continued up in recent
weeks, although the rate of gain appears to be moderating in most sectors of
the economy.

A number of positive features were reported including gains in

consumer spending, Industrial sales, and production in a number of important
industries including agriculture.

No excessive inventories were reported;

however, some moderation in gains was reported in the housing and housingrelated industries.

Home sales reportedly dropped off somewhat more than

seasonally this fall, and appliance sales have also flattened out.

In

addition, credit for homes may become scarcer as usury laws limit the
interest rates that may be charged in some states.
Retailers report that consumers are still in a "buying mood" and
that the overall sales trend continues up.

Department store representatives

are optimistic about Christmas sales and express satisfaction with current
inventory levels.

Automobile sales are also reported to be at a high level,

and further gains are expected for the remainder of this year.
Overall, industrial activity continues to register gains, but
slowing was reported In some industries.

A slowing in sales was most notable

among firms related to the homebuilding industry.

Two major appliance

manufacturers reported that sales so far this quarter were not as strong as
earlier in the year, and one reported production plans for a downturn in
sales in the near future.

Reasons given were a slowdown in the housing

industry and changing consumer attitudes toward credit purchases.

A

representative of a major chemical firm noted that sales gains have
continued, but the rate of increase has slowed somewhat from the rapid

advances of the past few months.

A paper industry representative described

business as being at a "frantic" pace, but some slowing is expected early
next year.

A representative of a car assembly plant in the area reported

operations are at a very high level, although part of this production is to
fill inventory demand created by the new models.

An automobile replacement

parts manufacturer has experienced excellent sales this year and expects 1979
to be a very good year.

Representatives of the steel industry are also

optimistic about sales for 1979.
Construction activity, on the whole, remains strong in the District.
A representative from Arkansas noted that construction in that state was
booming and some material and skilled labor shortages have developed.

While

current home construction activity is still fairly strong, based on past
backlogs, recent home sales are reported to have dropped off somewhat more
than is normal for this time of year.

Current home mortgage rates in the St.

Louis area are in the 9-3/4 to 9-7/8 percent range on 80 percent loans, and
at the 10 percent Missouri usury ceiling on 90 percent loans.

Loans with

small equities have in general become unavailable in states where rates are
bumping up against the state usury ceilings.
Loan demand continues to advance at a very rapid rate in recent
weeks.

Large commercial banks report sizable increases in industrial,

consumer, and real estate loans and have raised their prime lending rate in
step with the trend in the national loan market.

Deposits at commercial

banks have also increased rapidly in recent weeks as bidding has been
aggressive for both large and small CDs.

Inflows at savings and loan

associations continue to advance at a moderate pace.

The new six-month

certificates are reported to be drawing considerable customer interest as

rates paid have risen.

Savings and loan officials, however, are concerned

over the rising cost of these funds, particularly in areas where usury laws
restrict the rate that can be charged on mortgage loans.
Unusually good weather conditions have accelerated this year's
harvesting of crops in the District.

Production of corn, soybeans, and

tobacco exceeds last year's level, but cotton production is down
substantially, reflecting decreased plantings and lower yields.

Greater

production and higher average prices than last year are expected to result in
substantially higher farm incomes than a year ago.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Business is generally good in the Ninth District, but the outlook is
clouded by uncertainty regarding the likely impact of government moves to combat
inflation.

Overall retail sales have been brisk, even though some recent

slackening in soft good demand has been reported in a few communities.
industrial, construction, and agricultural enterprises have been busy.

Area
Except

for grain farmers, most businesspeople have been keeping a tight rein on inventories. And demand for credit remains strong even as interest rates soar. But
despite the general vigor of the district economy few observers are sanguine
about the future as the economic ramifications of recently announced wage-price
guidelines and financial market actions are difficult to predict.
Retail sales activity is holding up fairly well throughout most of our
district.

Retailers located in agricultural communities have enjoyed parti-

cularly strong sales according to our Bank's quarterly survey of agricultural
lenders.

Consumer durables have been selling better than nondurables in these

areas as well as in the rest of the district. In fact, two Bank directors report
that nondurables sales have slackened noticeably in some parts of Minnesota and
Michigan's Upper Peninsula.
There has been no slackening in the district's manufacturing sectors.
One of our district's

largest manufacturers

in the nonelectric machinery

industry reports production rates are up almost twenty percent from a year ago.
While this increase in production is unusually large, other manufacturers are
busy too—the most recent figures on total manufacturing employment for our
district are up almost five percent over last year.
Construction employment gains have been even more impressive—a nine
percent increase during the past year.

Our Bank's directors report very tight

construction labor markets throughout most of the district.

In a few areas

residential construction activity has weakened, but so far vigorous commercial
building has made up for that weakness.
Farmers are enjoying good times as well. Eighty percent of the Montana
bankers responding to our most recent Ag Credit Survey report their farmer
customers are making more money this year than last. Higher livestock prices are
cited as the primary reason. Furthermore, grain harvests throughout most of the
district have been abundant.

And grain prices have held up well, making for

record crop values in many parts of the Upper Midwest. Farmers have been storing
much of the harvest and reports from around the district indicate grain
inventories have nearly exhausted existing storage capacity.
Large inventories are unusual in other sectors of the economy.

A

survey conducted by a large manufacturing concern headquartered in our region,
revealed that eighty-five percent of its business customers placed their current
inventory levels in the low to normal range. There was some undesired inventory
buildup by the Minnesota retailers faced with slackening soft good demand, but
these businesses were the exception to the districtwide rule of low to moderate
inventory positions.
With the exception of cement and credit markets, low inventories are
not viewed with concern either. Cement shortages have continued to inconvenience
some builders.

But, as winter moves in, short supplies of cement are becoming

less and less of a problem.
In contrast to the cement market, demand has remained strong in the
credit market.

Bankers throughout the district report that they are having to

strain to keep up with loan demand.

As elsewhere, nonregulated interest rates

are climbing rapidly and the nonprice terms on loans subject to usury limits are
becoming more and more restrictive. Furthermore, several of our Bank's directors

voiced concern over the detrimental effects of Regulation Q limits and other
regulation on the ability of banks and thrifts to compete with credit unions for
funds.
Directors noted that while many banks had begun offering automatic
transfer plans, low customer interest suggested the new service would do little
to attract funds from other intermediaries. The main plus seen for the automatic
transfer plans was that they might usher in pricing for checking services.
Other recent Federal Reserve and Administration policy actions got
much more attention than the legalization of automatic transfers. Some observers
welcomed the jump in the discount rate and increase in reserve requirements on
large CDs as a signal of new resolve in the fight against inflation.

Others

feared these moves together with the President's wage-price guidelines would
harm the real economy.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Business activity in the Kansas City District is characterized by
rapidly rising prices, satisfactory materials availability, and little
improvement in real sales volume. Purchasing agents in the Tenth District
report substantial input price increases so far this year and anticipate
further increases in the final quarter. With a few exceptions, however,
input availability and inventory levels remain satisfactory.

District

retailers note a recent strengthening of sales, but, in real terms, sales
have not improved over last year.

Bankers contacted report that loan

demand remains strong for most loan categories, especially construction and
agriculture.

In agriculture, the financial situation is somewhat better than

a year ago, due to higher farm prices and improved cash flows.
According to Tenth District purchasing agents, prices for most major
inputs are up approximately 8 to 10 per cent over this time last year. For
the remainder of the year, input prices are anticipated to increase for metal,
clothing, and building materials.
additional 5 to 10 per cent.

Cardboard is expected to increase an

Input material availability does not appear

to present a serious problem for most industries contacted.

The transpor-

tation industry, however, reported an increase in lead times as well as
some difficulties in obtaining an adequate number of rail cars and trucks.
Also, the container industry reported that lead times for steel-based input
products have been increasing and are expected to continue to increase for
the remainder of the year.

In the building materials industry, insulation

and concrete are very difficult to obtain.

Currently, material inventory

levels are at satisfactory levels for all industries, with the exception

of the metals industry where inventories are too high due to a slack demand
from the agricultural sector. As a result, the metals industry will continue
trimming its inventories. Most industries contacted expressed no real
problem regarding labor shortages.

Only firms in the transportation industry

and some in the metals industry appear to be near full capacity.
Retailers report that while dollar sales have been improving in the
past three months, they are up only about 10 per cent over last year. Mild
weather throughout the District was cited as having the effect of delaying
sales of winter goods.

Other goods that have been weak are home improvement

items and major appliances.

Clothing, housewares, and domestic goods have

been selling well. Retail prices have recently been fairly stable. Most
retailers felt that prices may rise about 1 to 2 per cent in the fourth
quarter.

Inventories have been characterized as "in line with sales" by

most stores.

Those experiencing somewhat heavy inventories expect them to

be corrected by strong Christmas sales. Most retailers, in fact, were optimistic about the Christmas season, though they felt it might be a little
slower than last year.
Bankers contacted in the Tenth District report that loan demand
remains strong, particularly for agricultural and construction loans. Demands
for consumer, real estate, and energy-related loans are also reported as
moderate to strong. All bankers contacted raised their prime lending rates
recently and expect further increases before the end of the year. As of
November 3, most had prime rates of 10 1/2 per cent.

Some of the bankers

contacted mentioned tightening other lending terms recently or possibly in
the near future.

Despite these comments, most bankers do not expect to

have problems meeting future loan demand. However, some mentioned cutting

back on consumer, real estate, and new loans.
Deposit growth is moderate or down slightly at most banks contacted.
Demand deposits are up moderately, but savings deposits are generally flat or
down slightly from a year ago due to higher interest rates and shifts to
money market CD's.
year ago.

Time deposits are generally flat or up slightly over a

Deposits are expected to grow moderately in the near future due

to seasonal factors and a strengthening agricultural sector.
Farm loan demand in the Tenth District has strengthened recently,
causing some renewed pressures on bank liquidity. However, due to higher
farm prices and significantly improved cash flows, the overall financial
picture for the District's agriculture is somewhat brighter than it was a
year ago. The upturn in loan demand pushed average loan-deposit ratios at
rural banks during the third quarter to levels near the high ratios of a year
ago. As of October 1, the average ratio for the District was 63.4 per cent,
and ranged from 58 per cent in Oklahoma to 73.8 per cent in Wyoming.
Apparently, farmers are now borrowing to take advantage of profit
opportunities.

While this development has placed new pressure on bank

liquidity, the prospects are good that the farmers will be able to repay
their loans as they mature.

In the past year, farmers have significantly

improved their loan repayment performance.

But because of the strains on

liquidity, bankers are maintaining collateral requirements, and many continue
to refer loans to other credit agencies.

Though referral activity does not

appear to be increasing very significantly, interest rates on farm loans are
rising and now stand about 40 to 45 basis points above year-earlier levels.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Business activity continues to advance at a moderate pace in the
Eleventh District, according to the Directors and businessmen surveyed this
month.

Savings and loan association officers are responding to higher

short-term interest rates by raising mortgage rates and tightening other
mortgage loan requirements.

Bankers report a weakening in real estate and

consumer loans, but total loan demand continues strong.

It appears that the

strength of consumer spending is waning slightly, but sales are expected to
remain strong through the Christmas season. Manufacturing output has slowed
in some industries but overall continues to make moderate gains.

Shortages

of both skilled and unskilled labor persist.
Pinched by the rising cost of funds, District S&L's require a 20percent down payment and have raised the mortgage rate to 9 7/8 percent.
Money market certificates of deposit account for about Uo percent of new
savings.

So far, S&L's have not diverted significant amounts of funds from

mortgages to alternative investments, which are becoming more attractive.
Rising interest rates are changing the composition of loan portfolios at District banks, but the higher rates have not curtailed total loan
demand. Real estate and consumer lending are expected to slow further with
continued rises in interest rates, but large banks expect commercial lending
to national firms will pick up as those firms shift from the commercial
paper market to banks. Liquidity remains adequate, although the growth in
deposits is slow. Because of its high costs and narrow appeal, automatic
transfer of savings is meeting a sluggish response from customers.
general are making minimal efforts to promote ATS.

Banks in

Many farmers in the District are holding corn and other feedgrains
in anticipation of higher prices. Demands for crop storage and farm operating
loans, combined with the rising cost of funds, are causing problems for some
rural banks in Texas and New Mexico where interest rates on loans to individuals have reached usury ceilings.

Several banks are making loans only to

their best customers and are referring marginal borrowers to nonbank sources
of funds.
Department store sales remain well above a year earlier, but some
of the underlying buying strength of earlier months appears to be absent
from recent sales figures.

Current sales are being aided by sales pro-

motions designed to reduce inventory levels at some stores. The management
of one chain store expects a mild recession to occur next spring.
Retail buyers attending a recent market of women's apparel at the
Dallas Apparel Mart were cautiously optimistic about sales prospects next
year.

Because wholesale prices are up sharply from a year ago, buyers were

acutely price conscious. Higher quality garments in the middle price ranges
sold particularly well. Most retailers indicate inventories remain at
manageable levels, although late fall deliveries of woolens pushed stock
levels up suddenly at some outlets.

Silk and leather are reported to be in

short supply.
Auto sales are on par with a year earlier at most dealers. Plymouth
and Dodge dealers, however, are reporting 10- to 15-percent declines in
sales from a year ago.

Some price resistance is noted, but big, fully

equipped cars are selling especially well.

Inventories of the most popular

models are below desired levels at both domestic and foreign car dealers.

Manufacturing activity continues to make moderate gains. Production in the computer and electronics industries continues very strong as
these firms report heavy inflows of new orders and rising backlogs. Orders
for electric motors are up slightly.

Output in the paper and allied products

and furniture industries has flagged slightly.

Sales of pulp and corrugated

boxes have weakened while sales of other paper products remain strong.
Furniture dealers appear to have reduced their orders, which is contrary to
the increases normally posted this time of year.
Shortages of both skilled and unskilled labor continue to plague
many businesses in the Eleventh District.

New plants are able to attract

needed workers, but existing firms complain of shortages and high labor
turnover.

One Dallas manufacturer even complains of a shortage of illegal

aliens. Because of labor shortages wage rates appear to be rising frequently, especially at the lowest pay scales.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
The western economy continues generally strong, though feelings
are mixed as to how long this strength will continue
rates.

given rising interest

Retail sales are brisk and retailers are generally optimistic about

holiday sales. Despite this optimism, inventories are still under tight
control in most areas. While there has not yet been any decline in commercial credit demand due to the rising interest rates, construction activity has begun to weaken in some areas.

Basic industrial activity appears

still strong, though there does seem to be an unusually large number of
strikes in some areas.
In general, retail sales in the West continue strong and most
observers expect continued strong sales into the holiday season.

Several

of our directors argued that the strength in retail sales represented consumers buying now in anticipation of more rapid inflation later. A bankerdirector felt that currently strong sales in California are being assisted
by both rapid employment growth as well as the property tax savings resulting
from Proposition 13.

Contrary to the consensus, two directors involved in

the food industry did not expect especially strong holiday sales.
The general feeling is that despite these optimistic sales expectations,
inventories are being kept under tight control, even if this strategy entails
some loss of sales.

High financing costs are said to be enforcing this ten-

dency to keep a tight rein on inventories.
pattern.

There is one exception to this

The largest department store chain in Oregon, which expects excellent

holiday sales, is currently holding inventories equal to sales.

It claims that

this is an agressive inventory posture since its normal procedure is to keep
inventories below sales.

There are not yet any indications that industrial and commercial
demand for credit has weakened due to rising short-term interest rates.
The outlook for the near future is extremely mixed with some of our directors certain that the higher rates will not cause a slowdown and others
just as certain that the demand for business loans, and thus economic activity, will weaken within the next few months. Most, however, seem to feel
that credit demand will weaken somewhat before the second quarter of next
year.
There appears to be almost unanimous agreement that housing will
suffer from the higher rates.

Indeed, weakness in the construction sector

has already begun to appear in some areas.
with usury ceilings.

The extreme cases are in states

Idaho, with a 10 percent ceiling, had September housing

starts 50.7 percent under a year ago. However, even Utah, which has no interest rate ceiling and has an otherwise booming economy, is starting to
see some weakening in construction.

In central California, it is reported

that building contractors are reluctant to carry any significant inventory
of finished lots and are no longer anxious to build houses on speculation.
One exception to this general weakening in construction activity comes
from a builder-director in southern California.

He claims that construction

is still booming and there still exist shortages of labor (skilled and
unskilled) and several types of materials (especially cement). He notes
that the only slowdown he is aware of is in speculative industrial projects.
This same director expressed serious concern about rising construction costs
which were generated by two phenomena:
and (2) mandated environmental controls.

(1) a serious decline in productivity

The aluminum industry continues to experience very strong demand.
Kaiser Aluminum plans a 20 percent expansion in capital spending over the
next year, but virtually all of this will take place offshore.

The market

for lumber is generally characterized by strong demand, and American producers are having difficulty supplying the tremendous export demand. Producers do note two trends:

(1)

the demand for "dimension lumber" is be-

ginning to flatten out which suggests a possible slackening in the housing
boom, and (2) particle board demand is down drastically which indicates a
slackening in the mobile home industry.
A number of strikes are currently underway on the West Coast. A
strike against Safeway continues in San Francisco.

Grocery clerks are also

striking in parts of Oregon, as are pulp and paper workers and some railroad
workers.

The total number of workers currently involved in labor disputes

in Oregon is the highest it has been since 1970.

