CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 14, 1979

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 9
Fourth District-Cleveland page 12
Fifth District-Richmond page 16
Sixth District-Atlanta page 19
Seventh District-Chicago page 23
Eighth District-St. Louis page 27
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 30
Tenth District-Kansas City page 33
Eleventh District-Dallas page 36
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 39

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.]
Current conditions vary considerably among the Districts.

General

characterizations range from ongoing growth in the Minneapolis District to
emerging recession around Boston.

Near consensus exists, however, as to

pervasive weakness in the automobile and housing sectors.

Strength persists,

nonetheless, in some other manufacturing sectors, and non-auto retail sales.
There is also general agreement that inventories, in general, across the
economy, pose no immediate problem, although there are underway widespread
efforts to pare current stocks and reduce what have become heavy carrying
costs.

Financial market conditions are tending to depress the growth of

loan activity in most districts.

Mortgage and automobile lending are generally

weak, but business lending continues to expand moderately, at least in most
regions.

In general, loan demand continues buoyant despite some moderation

in its recent growth.
Real personal consumption expenditures are being depressed by the
dearth of automobile sales, but continue to show resilience in other sectors.
Only Boston and Minneapolis see general weakness in retail sales.

Dallas

has

perhaps the strongest report, with unit sales at department stores ahead of a
year-ago.

In several districts sales continue to advance from earlier in

the year despite being down somewhat, in real terms, from a year ago.

Chicago

finds consumption of durables, luxury goods, and services down, while Kansas
City perceives recent strength in sales of appliances, home furnishings,
and energy related home improvement items.

In several regions, however, much

of the recent vigor of sales is attributed to aggressive promotional activity.

In the Richmond District, where sales are up, retailers are preparing
promotion programs for an expected softening in demand.
Most districts report marked slowing in residential construction
and in sales of existing homes.

Usury ceilings are cited as a major im-

pediment in a number of states, but even in the states with no such restrictions, financial market conditions are not conducive to vigorous activity
in the housing sector.

In some areas, notably the St. Louis, San Francisco,

and Atlanta Districts, commercial construction remains strong, offsetting
the weakness in residential activity.

Dallas reports that substantial con-

struction in progress is propping up the volume of real estate loans outstanding.

New York, on the other hand, finds construction to be "the principal

exception to near-term strength in business activity."
Manufacturing activity is particularly spotty.

The automobile

sector is exhibiting pervasive weakness, but there exist definite areas of
strength.

St. Louis finds, with the exception of autos, a relatively high

level of manufacturing and particular strength in several industries including
most capital goods, basic metal products, aircraft, and textiles.
reports broadly based strength in industrial production.

Minneapolis

Dallas characterizes

manufacturing as flat with weakness in consumer durables being about offset
by strength in nondurables and construction related areas such as primary
metals and stone, clay and glass products.

Meanwhile, the Third District is

reportedly five months into a general downturn in manufacturing activity.
Chicago reports high operating rates, but declining order backlogs at most
capital goods producers.

The capital goods sector in the Cleveland District

is still experiencing backlogs admidst some concern that they might soon

face reductions in orders.

San Francisco sees most sectors except auto and

construction related ones doing well.
Despite the prevailing level of interest rates, more stringent non-price
lending terms, and tighter credit standards business loan demand continues
to expand in most areas.

Funds apparently remain available to businesses

who are taking advantage of that availability.

The most common characterization

of business loan activity is a moderate slowing in the rate of growth.

Kansas

City and Atlanta report credit demand dampened by interest rates and Boston
perceives a softening in commercial loan demand, but these cases appear to
be exceptions.

Mortgage lending, on the other hand, seems to be severely

and broadly depressed.

In regions where mortgage money is available interest

rates and down payment requirements have increased sharply in recent weeks.
Some district report non-price rationing of funds, while other find some
lenders having withdrawn completely from mortgage lending activity.
Reports on agricultural activity are generally favorable with good
crops and firm prices holding farm incomes up in the Midwest and plains
states and in the Far West.

Atlanta, however, reports sharply higher feed

costs and low market prices for broilers and hogs widening loss margins
of producers.

Cutbacks in production of hogs and broilers is resulting.

In the Midwest transportation bottlenecks and inadequate storage facilities
are impeding marketing efforts.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

More and more First District respondents are reporting signs of a
recession.

Retail sales are soft.

Manufacturers generally report that

business is fairly good but "good" seems to have been redefined over the past
few months.

Previously it meant that unit sales were growing, now it seems

to mean that sales are holding even with last year.

In the financial sector,

loan demand seems to have slowed slightly although it still remains quite
strong.

Mortgage money continues to be available although at high rates-

lenders are rationing by price.
Retail sales in New England are quite weak.

There have been occasional

weeks in which sales have been vigorous but these have been followed by periods
in which sales have been very depressed.

The erratic nature of demand is

making inventory management very difficult.

The head of a large department

store chain with national ties believes that sales in New England are considerably
weaker than those elsewhere.

This same firm is reassessing its expansion plans.

Reports from the manufacturing sector are significantly less gloomy
but respondents no longer question whether we are really in a recession.

Thus,

the head of a firm making graphics reports that business has been quite strong
but that he is reevaluating capital spending plans and reassessing factory
schedules in expectation of a weak first quarter.

A large futniture maker

notes that attendance at a major trade show was down 20-25 percent from last
year; aggressive firms fared well, but the weaker companies had very little
business.

A manufacturer of building materials also reports that demand has

fallen off.
month

Customers who normally stock up their inventories over the winter

are not doing so this year.

This firm, which sells heavily to the

rehabilitation market, believes that high interest rates will mean that much
less rehabilitation will be done in 1980 than customarily occurs in recessions.
Repair and rehabilitation activity is usually quite strong in recessions as
contractors, who normally prefer new construction, accept less attractive
rehabilitation jobs.

Defense contracts continue to be a source of strength.

A number of businessmen report that collections from customers have slowed.
In the financial sector, banking directors from northern New England
have seen some softening in loan demand, primarily on the commercial side.
However, a large bank from one of the southern states reports that after
levelling off loan demand has picked up again.

None of the business firms

contacted was experiencing difficulties in securing funds.

In addition, a

survey of small businesses, conducted in the last two weeks of October by one
of the area's large banks, found that most small firms were still able to get
funds at or slightly above the prime rate.

A majority of these firms expect

funding to be more difficult to obtain in the future, but at the present time
they still view inflation as the greatest problem.
are still available.

Home mortgage loans

Institutions in the region are taking advantage of the

secondary market to secure funds and are allowing the price to ration demand.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Tobin, Solow and Samuelson were
available for comment this month.

Eckstein supports the "new monetary policy";

however, he believes the aggregates will not be fully under control until the
economy itself is under control,

"Having embarked on this course of control-

ling reserves, we should see it through, with the proviso that we watch the
financial system closely.

With the impending business slump there are risks

of serious financial disturbances, especially for 'second tier firms'."
Eckstein suspects that the "real crunch has yet to come."

He hopes that the

new policy will allow interest rates to fall as rapidly as they rose when
business activity declines in late 1979 and early 1980.
Houthakker is pleased that the Fed is now concerned more about
controlling reserves than controlling interest rates.

He believes, for

example, that a 15 percent funds rate is appropriate given today's market
conditions, but the rate should be free to change when conditions change.
He cannot fully endorse the new procedures, however, until he knows which
concept of reserves
is trying to achieve.

is now under control and what reserve target the Fed
Houthakker believes we have been in a recession

since the beginning of 1979; the recession will be lengthy, but not deep.
He expects the growth of GNP in the early 1980s will be much like that in
the late 1950s—-business

activity will expand slowly and unevenly.

Because

the current consumer price index temporarily exaggerates the true inflation
rate, fiscal and monetary policy could reduce inflation to 7 or 8 percent
by the end of 1980 "without undue damage," but the unemployment rate may have
to rise as high as 7.5 or 8 percent.

In any event, Houthakker thinks the

eradication of inflation will take years.
Tobin believes the benefits of the new control procedures have been
exaggerated.

Because his research shows little or no connection between

short-term movements in reserves and money aggregates or total credit, he
is not convinced the Fed's control of the money stock is now more reliable.
Tobin believes that there is now a high probability of a recession in 1980
and that it is dangerous "to keep tightening until we see the whites of
the recession's eyes.
round of restraint."
in his opinion.

We should get our bearings before embarking on another
The high inflation is not the fault of monetary policy,

If OPEC raises prices again, he hopes the Fed realizes it

cannot costlessly offset the inflationary shock.

In the event of an oil price

increase attainment of a satisfactory unemployment rate and inflation rate is
impossible:

higher real oil prices must either depress production or increase

domestic inflation.
Solow has mixed feelings about the October policy.

The higher

marginal reserves on banks' "bought funds" is "unambiguously a good step."
He believes the sharp increase in interest rates was exaggerated, however,
perhaps to defend the dollar at the October 6 parity.
particular exchange rate is an equilibrium rate.

He is not sure that this

He questions whether

maintaining the exchange rate with high interest rates best serves our domestic
needs or best serves the interests of German exporters and German monetary
policy, a policy whose objectives certainly are not very sensitive to our
domestic problems.

Before Solow can fully evaluate the new control procedure,

he must see it in action.

To the extent that wider tolerance bands for the

funds rate reduce wide procyclical swings in the money stock, the new policy
is to be commended.

To the extent that smoother growth of the aggregates

destabilizes GNP and employment growth, however, the new policy is a
"destructive step backwards."

Solow argues that stable money growth may

not be consistent with stable GNP growth; "the Fed needs to take a broad
view in forming policy, especially now that the money demand function may
have come loose at the seams."
Samuelson also has mixed feelings about the new monetary procedure.
Now that interest rates may "float," in theory, the Fed may have more success
in attaining its money targets.

In practice, however, he notes that contem-

poraneous reserve accounting, among other reforms, must be adopted before the
Fed can achieve this goal.

Samuelson believes there are substantial dangers

in any procedure that has no "safety-valve": the old policy, though it had
its faults, could accommodate shifts in money-demand without disturbing GNP.
Samuelson is worried that the Fed may make stable money growth—rather
than high employment with low inflation—the ultimate goal of policy.

Our

experience of rising inflation does not prove that counter-cyclical monetary
policy has been a failure, rather it suggests the trend rate of money growth
has been too high.

Now that the consensus forecast anticipates an imminent

recession, it is prudent and rational to avoid further monetary restraint.
"If our goal is zero growth, we have overshot the target, not by accident,
and it is hypocritical to be surprised if we have a recession."

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District continues to expand moderately
according to directors, business economists and business leaders contacted recently.

At the same time, however, there is growing concern and anxiety over

the prospects of a national economic downturn.

Consumer spending remains

fairly strong, although there is evidence of a weakening in the automotive
sector.

Inventories generally appear to be in good balance with sales.

Never-

theless, in view of the economic uncertainties, businesses are concerned over
the level of inventory stocks.

At least at this point, it appears that the

October 6 policy initiatives have had little affect on the behavior of nonfinancial corporations.

On the financial front, the demand for business

credit has slowed at large commercial banks.

At the same time, banks and

finance companies appear to have become more selective in their lending,
tightening nonprice terms and standards of credit worthiness.
Department store sales continued to advance in the Second District
in October and early November.

Indeed, most merchants reported that sales

were ahead of plan throughout the region.

As one executive of a leading national

chain put it, "if this is a recession, we [retailers] need more of them."

There

were some reports of extra promotional activity, but these were not widespread.
Retail inventories are generally in good balance with sales, but as an executive
noted, the upcoming Christmas seasons is critical.

None of the retailers con-

tacted perceived any evidence of a recession in their recent sales figures.
In contrast to the strength at department stores, sales of new cars
were mixed in the District.

Sales of small, foreign cars were very strong in

October, running well ahead of last year; but some of these purchases were

thought to be the result of lagging deliveries in September.

While order

backlogs are sizeable for selected smaller models, at the dealers contacted
inventories have generally been restored to adequate levels.

With respect

to larger domestic makes, there appears to have been a considerable falloff
in sales.
Outside of consumer spending, business activity appears to be
fairly strong.

While most companies are convinced that a downturn will occur

in 1980, shipments have continued to expand.

With a few exceptions, inventories

are generally reported to be adequate and in good balance with sales.

One

respondent noted some hedging in raw materials inventories which was more than
usual, but this appeared to be an exception.

Inventories of paper products

are below desired levels due to a strike at the beginning of the year.
The principal exception to the near-term strength in business activity is the construction sector.
according to one director.

Homebuilding is at a stand still in New York

State usury ceilings on mortgage loans, which are

far below market rates, have led most thrift institutions to abandon the mortgage market.

Construction financing has also become less available.

One

director reported that shopping center development plans have been deferred
due to the limited availability of credit.

At the same time, many business-

men also report a noticeable increase in their accounts receivable as their
customers have become tardier in paying their bills.

Along these lines, the

chairman of a major conglomerate noted that food chains were passing up the
discount for early payment of their bills, which is very unusual.

There is

widespread concern among business economists, directors and business leaders
that the Federal Reserve's October 6 actions will lead to a credit crunch.
As yet, however, no serious borrowing problems have been reported.

Although

large corporations are not expected to experience difficulty in obtaining
financing, it is anticipated that small companies may face problems in obtaining
funds.
Respondents from several major commercial finance companies, which
are headquartered in the Second District, noted that the recent jump in interest
rates has had little effect on borrowing demand by businesses.

In their view,

the high interest rates have, at least at this time, not led to adjustments
in inventories and receivables.

A few lenders have, on a highly selective

basis, reduced rates on a temporary basis to those borrowers whose income statements appear particularly vulnerable to current high interest costs.

The

commercial bankers contacted indicated the October 6 policy initiatives had
led to a tightening in lending terms.

They indicated they were evaulating

requests for credit very carefully, and tightening of standards of credit
worthiness.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports from the Third District indicate that business activity is mixed again
in November. Bankers are reporting strong loan volume, and expect interest rates to
level out as the nation enters a recession.

In the industrial sector, manufacturers

continue to report production cutbacks and expect overall business conditions to continue
to deteriorate. Retail sales, however, are up, with much of the increase being attributed
to heavy promotional efforts. As for the future, representatives from all three sectors
predict that the next six months will bring a substantial drop in business activity.
The downturn in local manufacturing activity has continued into its fifth
month, according to respondents to the November Business Outlook Survey. New orders
at the firms polled have dropped again, while shipments remain stable. Hence, producers'
lead times continue to grow shorter, and manufacturers have once again pared inventory
levels. Factory employment remains unaffected by the slowdown, however, with neither
payrolls nor working hours being cut at local plants.
For the longer term, manufacturers surveyed in November foresee a
continuation of present trends. Further deterioration in general business conditions is
expected to occur over the next six months, with no improvement anticipated in either
new orders or shipments. Consequently, no inventory rebuilding is forecast between now
and late spring. And, while there should be no significant reduction in the size of work
forces at area factories, a shortening of working hours is expected.

On the price front, inflation continues in the local industrial sector in
November. Three out of five of the firms surveyed this month report paying more for
raw materials than they did in October, and two out of five are charging more for the
goods they produce. As for the future, 87 percent of the respondents expect to be facing
higher costs for inputs in six months, and 68 percent plan to be charging more for their
finished products by that time.
Retail sales in the area are reported to be "surprisingly strong" at this time.
Current dollar sales at local department stores are reported to be 5 to 6 percent over
year-ago levels, and generally slightly better than had been anticipated for this period.
Merchants say this is because the long-awaited recession they had been planning for has
failed to materialize thus far.

Another factor, however, has been heavy promotional

efforts on the part of many retailers in the area.

Aggressive promotion and pricing

policies have been pursued recently in an effort to trim inventories somewhat. Inventory
carrying costs have become prohibitive with recent interest rate hikes, according to
merchants contacted, and the cost of financing stock now outweighs the income that
stands to be lost should they be caught in an inventory-short position.

Retailers

emphasize that fear of a recession is not their primary reason for cutting inventories.
Looking ahead to the next six months, local merchants are moderately
optimistic. Sales should pick up somewhat with the coming of the Christmas season, but
year-over-year comparisons for December will be misleading, according to one source,
because last Christmas was such a boom. Sales are expected to be sluggish to moderate
in the first half of 1980 with increases over year-earlier levels of 2 to 5 percent
anticipated.
Bankers contacted say corporate and consumer loan demand is still strong.
Business loan volume is on target or higher at most commercial banks, while consumer

borrowing is up more than 10 percent over last year. Area bankers, in response to the
events which occurred in early October, have tightened credit considerably and are not
aggressively pursuing corporate or consumer loans at this point. Speculative loans are
being avoided, and maturities are being reduced where possible.

Mortgages are still

being made by commerical banks, but some nonprice rationing is observed. The rate
being charged for mortgages is close to the usury limit at most banks and downpayments
required are in the 25 to 50 percent range.
Looking ahead, most contacts are forecasting a dip in loan activity over the
next six months, as the economy moves into a downswing. Projections for the prime rate
(currently 15 1/2 percent at all of the banks contacted) indicate a slight increase,
followed by a plateau through the first quarter of 1980.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Most bankers and economists in the Fourth District believe that
October 6 policy changes have virtually ended prospects for a soft-landing
and have increased prospects for a deeper than previously anticipated recession.
While the capital goods sector is still experiencing backlogs, economists are
concerned that the higher cost of financing inventories will cause inventories
and hence new orders to be reduced.
expected in 1980.

However, some abatement in inflation is

Banks have generally tightened credit and raised interest

rates for mortgage, instalment and C&I loans.

The housing market is now

expected to be slow through the first half of 1980.
The 26 economists who attended the Fourth District Economists Round
Table meeting held at this Bank on November 9 generally agree that the economy
has already peaked.

All but two expect a decline in real GNP in the fourth

quarter of 1979; the median forecast of the group indicates a 2.1% decline in
real GNP from the third quarter of 1979 through the third quarter of 1980,
considerably deeper than they expected last June.
scenarios emerged with respect to the outlook.

However, at least three

Despite weakening auto

production to 9.7 million in 1980 compared to 10.4 in 1979, an auto industry
economist expects a brief, mild recession in the first half of 1980, followed
by a mild recovery in the second half.

Mortgage markets have improved because

of structural changes, inventories are more tightly controlled, and money
stock growth will likely remain at about the same rate as 1979.

However, a

bank economist feels that classical business cycle adjustments will override
the structural changes.

Thus, the need to rebuild savings and reduce debt

levels as employment declines will tend to weaken the recovery.

Several

economists point out that stepped-up consumer spending during the third quarter
of 1979 to avoid higher prices may have been a form of savings for consumers.
Finally, an economist for a durable goods producer expects a sharp recovery
after mid-1980, based largely on a 350 basis point decline in short-term interest
rates by spring 1980 and a substantial tax cut for businesses and consumers
late next year.
Auto producers and suppliers have scaled down their estimates of
domestic car sales and production for this quarter and for 1980.

A group of

eight economists now expects domestic new car sales this quarter of about 2.1
million units and 8.1 million units next year.

Dealers claim carrying costs

of new car inventories have jumped to as high as $150 monthly per car, and
assert that dealers will trim stocks and orders.
Capital goods producers continue to be relatively optimistic, with
one official in specialized machinery expecting backlogs to carry plant and
equipment expenditures through the first half of 1980.

However, a bank

economist notes that nonresidential spending and real nondefense orders have
already peaked.

An economist with a transportation equipment firm considers

the truck cycle to be in an early contraction phase that will continue through
the third quarter of 1980, followed by a strong rebound in truck sales.

Thus,

the recovery should be lead by capital expenditures.
Several economists state that businesses have pursued cautious
inventory policies and perceive little inventory problems, except for automobile
and auto-related industries.

However, one major tire producer reports no

serious inventory accumulation either at the plant or among its dealers.

Steel

inventories are believed to be excessive, and one steel economist expects steel
consumers will begin to liquidate stocks this quarter and continue well into 1980.

While inflation continues at a strong pace in October, the median
forecast of the Fourth District Round Table economists shows a decline in the
GNP implicit price deflator from a 9.3% annual rate in the fourth quarter of
1979 to a 8.0% annual rate in the fourth quarter of 1980.

One bank economist

believes that interest rates and inflation are at secular peaks.

Several

economists point to somewhat larger productivity gains in 1980 to help offset
increases in labor costs.

An agricultural economist expects food price

increases to slow in the first half of 1980, assuming no supply constraints,
but to rise sharply by the end of the year.

Several economists expect oil

prices to rise sharply again in 1980, as a higher proportion of world supplies
is shifted to the spot market.

A housing slowdown is generally expected to

provide relief for the home ownership component of the CPI in 1980.
Housing prospects have been scaled down as a result of October changes
in policy actions.

While several S&Ls in Ohio report little change in lending

policy other than higher mortgage lending rates, the effect of credit rationing
by price has substantially cut the number of low downpayment loans and
eliminated many potential buyers from the market.
many S&Ls apparently curtailed lending.

In western Pennsylvania,

Although most S&Ls are expected to

be able to honor commitments already on the books, one S&L economist expressed
concern about the shift of S&Ls back to short-term markets for funds which
could become costly in the near future and could create serious roll-over
problems.

Still, several S&L officials report that every attempt is being

made to continue lending activity.

Housing starts, according to a FHLB

economist in this District, are still expected to reach their earliest forecasted level of 1.8 million in 1979 despite the latest surge in mortgage rates.
However, starts may fall to 1.3 or 1.5 million units in 1980, as net outflows

of deposits restrict the availability of funds to S&Ls.

If the market is

threatened by such steep declines, one S&L economist expects FHLB and other
housing agencies to institute programs that will support an additional 0.3
million starts in 1980.
District banks apparently have tightened lending activity, especially
among consumer and C&I loans.

One bank economist states that large firms so

far are unaffected by high interest rates and some are taking advantage of
rates by being net suppliers of funds.

However, middle-sized firms will be in

serious trouble if high rates continue for 6 to 9 months.

Two large banks note

a decline in C&I loans, which may be the result of anticipatory borrowing in
previous months.

According to a capital goods producer, banks have showed

greater reluctance since October 6 to buy secured paper of small job shops,
which is making it difficult to finance machinery sales.

Auto dealers complain

that banks have tightened credit terms and have sharply curtailed lines of
credit.

Finally, some banks report that the rejection rate for consumer loan

applications has risen since early October and new borrowers without much
credit experience must now obtain co-signers.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

The latest survey of Fifth District business conditions reveals a
mixed pattern of recent developments.

Manufacturers, in general, continue

to report declining levels of new orders and order backlogs, but also indicate increased shipments, some extension of the average workweek, and reduced inventories over the past month.

Retailers surveyed report a pickup

in overall sales, but some weakness in relative sales of big ticket items.
Responses suggest inventory reductions in this sector as well.
growth appears to have moderated.

Bank credit

Except for mortgages, however, funds are

available to qualified borrowers willing to pay high rates.

Some large banks

seem eager to make business loans and are actively seeking new customer relationships.

Richmond directors see recent events in financial markets begin-

ning to affect adversely real estate markets and residential construction.
Manufacturers continue to report slowing of new orders and reductions
in order backlogs.

But respondents increased their shipments in October and

were able to reduce both materials and finished goods inventories from September
levels.

Inventories remain above desired levels at about one-third of the re-

sponding firms, but have apparently been generally well controlled over the
past three months.

Employment among manufacturing respondents declined slightly

over the month, but hours worked per week increased.

Current plant and equip-

ment capacity is near desired levels at two-thirds of the responding firms and
there remains virtually no sentiment for altering current expansion plans.
The weakness in new orders suggested by our survey results has not
become generalized among manufacturing sectors.

Much of the slowing has taken

place in apparel, furniture, and building materials industries.

Meanwhile,

such industries as textiles and non-electrical machinery continue to show
basic strength.
Retailers responding to our latest survey experienced an increase in
total sales during the past month, although relative sales of big ticket items
were reported down in most cases.

Several respondents noted that better quality

merchandise is still selling well.

Some retailers are prepared to initiate pro-

motional activities to maintain sales should they begin to weaken.

Most re-

tailers responding this month were able to reduce inventories, bringing them
somewhat closer to desired levels.

Forty percent of these retailers still feel

current stocks are excessive, but all are satisfied with the present number and
size of outlets.

Total employment among responding retailers was also down over

the month.
Our respondents remain overwhelmingly pessimistic about the nearterm outlook for the national economy and most expect the level of activity in
their respective markets areas to weaken over the next six months.

Manufacturers,

in particular, are much less negative about the prospects for their individual
firms, but a slim majority of retailers expects little or no change in their
own sales over the next six months.
Richmond directors are seeing widespread evidence of slowing in the
real estate and residential construction sectors.

Nearly three-fourths of

them report housing starts in their areas down substantially from earlier in
the year.

They also report a decided slowing of home sales. About one-third

of our directors report disproportionate effects of recent changes in financial
market conditions on small businesses.
Bank credit growth appears to have moderated in the last month, but
lenders indicate that the results of recent tightening are only beginning to
show up.

Business loans have been expanding moderately, but much of the

increase in recent weeks reflects deals negotiated in September.

Applications

for new loans are down, and lenders report that the record prime rate is discouraging borrowing.

Large banks indicate that the liquidity of their com-

mercial customers is generally good and that there is little evidence of
distress borrowing or unusual inventory financing.

Credit standards have

tightened on both installment and credit card applications, with large down
payments required on auto purchases and higher income/debt ratios required
for revolving credit approvals.
loan applications.

There has been a fairly sharp drop in new

The mortgage market is experiencing the tightest conditions.

Rates are up sharply with the typical 80 percent conventional mortgage contract
now bearing an interest rate in the 12 1/2 to 13 1/2 percent range.

Moreover,

many thrift institutions have either withdrawn from the mortgage market or are
rationing credit.
Results of the third quarter survey of farm credit conditions in the
Fifth District were highlighted by somewhat weaker—but still relatively
strong—farm loan demand, sharply higher interest rates, and continued pressures
on liquidity at some banks.

Loan-to-deposit ratios of banks reporting rose

to an average of 68.2 percent, up from 66.8 percent a year ago and equal to
the record level set in June 1978.

Many bankers continued to report problems

with availability of farm loan funds, although the proportion was not quite
as large as in the previous quarter.

Bankers who said they were actively

seeking new farm loan accounts remained at roughly three-fifths of those
reporting.

While some slowdown in loan repayment rates was evident, loan

renewals or extensions continued at about the same level as in tb.e second, quarter.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

A serious downturn in the District economy has not occurred, but
weaknesses are becoming increasingly evident.

Generally, retail sales have

remained steady; however, auto sales declined.
construction decelerated abruptly.

In many areas, new home

Presently, commercial building is prop-

ping up the construction industry, but record interest rates will likely have
a severe dampening effect on future projects.

Across the board, inventories

are expected to remain low because of nearly prohibitive financing charges.
Delinquencies on consumer credit are rising, but unemployment remains relatively low.
Retail sales gains were moderate, but retailers are becoming less
optimistic about future prospects.

Retailers at a major mid-Tennessee shop-

ping mall report that sales are not meeting expectations.

In south Alabama,

most soft goods merchants report very slow sales, while a major Birmingham
retailer indicates extremely strong sales in the first half but weak sales in
the second half of October.

Comments from Florida were still upbeat; however,

two south Florida directors see signs of sluggishness.

As with automobiles,

the pleasure boat business has turned sharply downward because of abruptly
increased financing costs.

Also, high financing costs for retailers' inven-

tories will keep these inventories to a minimum.

Many contacts report that

consumers are becoming very price and quality conscious and that credit
buying is being curbed.

Consumer credit delinquencies continue to increase

at many banks.
With the expiration of Chrysler's initial rebate program and the
jump in auto loan rates in October, auto sales turned down.

Increasingly

strict credit requirements by lenders for auto loans are further dampening

sales.

Dealers are keeping inventories to a minimum because of drastically

increased floor plan expenses.
The two GM plants in the Atlanta area, which heretofore have not
experienced large-scale, indefinite layoffs, recently announced that the
entire Doraville night shift of 2,200 workers and the truck assembly line of
650 employees at Lakewood will be laid off near the end of November.
Declines in residential construction are prevalent throughout the
District except in Florida, which so far has experienced unchanging resiliency.
Comments from northeast and central Florida indicate continued buoyancy.
Housing starts in Nashville and Knoxville are down sharply.

In northern

Alabama, one contact reports that very few starts are expected for the rest
of 1979, while another says new construction activity is at a "virtual standstill."

Residential mortgage funds in most of the District are becoming

scarce.

Nonetheless, some S&L's report adequate funds, together with drasti-

cally reduced demand and a dearth of qualified applicants.
Commercial and industrial construction continues to prop up local
economies throughout the District.
projects were funded long ago.

However, contacts caution that ongoing

Present commercial construction levels are

providing relief for some building materials suppliers who would otherwise be
faced with declining orders resulting from a drop-off in residential construction.

Record interest rates and decreased availability of funds do not augur

well for a continuation of healthy nonresidential construction activity.
Additionally, a northern Alabama contact reports that new orders at architectural firms, the initial step of a construction project, have slowed markedly.
The sharp spurt in interest rates has had pervasive repercussions.
The sophistication of savers is evidenced by a noticeable flow of funds from

banks to higher-yielding money market instruments.

For most District banks,

loan demand is down, and an increasingly cautious attitude is being taken
regarding borrowers and liquidity.

One commercial banker reports he is making

loans to preferred customers in the interest of goodwill.

An Atlanta credit

union has stopped loans entirely for furniture, appliances, and furnishings.
It is their intent to seriously curtail all lending activities, but they have
not forbidden all loans because of a concern for customer relations.

In

Tennessee, it is reported that large institutional investors, such as
Prudential and Metropolitan Life, have taken their money out of the long-term
market and placed it in short-term commitments.
District-wide, employment remains firm.
nudge steadily upward in coming months.

Unemployment is expected to

However, contacts from localities

with a diversified, service-oriented economic base repeatedly express confidence regarding the ability of their area to perform better than the nation
in the event of adverse economic developments.

Atlanta, New Orleans,

Nashville, and most metropolitan areas of Florida are the most noteworthy
examples.
The Tennessee Valley Authority plans to construct a coal gasification complex valued in excess of one billion dollars in eastern Tennessee or
northern Alabama.

This facility is projected to supply one-third of the TVA

region's energy needs by the mid-1980s, and will be the world's second largest
coal-gas plant.

The diversified paper products firm, Kimberly-Clark, which

recently divulged plans to construct a division headquarters and research
facilities near Atlanta, announced an initial construction commitment of $300
million for a manufacturing plant and distribution center in the Augusta
area.

This commitment is the largest ever in Georgia.

In another forest-

industry development, the United Furniture Workers of America made public a
plan to relocate its headquarters from New York City to Nashville.

The move-

ment of most of the furniture industry to the South and lack of unionization
of southern furniture workers are the primary reasons.
Sharply higher feed costs and very low market prices for broilers
and hogs are significantly widening loss margins for most producers.

These

losses are causing hog farmers to cut back planned production, and the number
of eggs incubated for broiler chick placements has declined dramatically.
Soybean yields are up this season.

Prices have dropped from early summer

levels, but compare favorably with prior harvests.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
The recession in the motor vehicle and residential sectors appears to
have deepened in the Seventh District with no early reversal in sight. Some
major unions have gone on strike over disputes involving work scheduling and
other problems not related to compensation offers, which are substantialConsumer purchases of durables, other than vehicles, and luxury goods and
services also have slowed. Sales of some capital goods, including farm and
construction equipment, have turned down. Backlogs of many companies are said
to be eroding, while shipments remain strong. Most companies are attempting
to reduce inventories, but there is little evidence of serious gluts. Price
inflation continues with undiminished virulence. Record corn and soybean crops
have been harvested, but storage and transportation facilities are seriously
inadequate. All classes of lenders are tightening standards because of reduced
inflows of deposits and the high cost of purchased funds.
The overwhelming majority of consumers, business executives, and
lenders believe the nation is in a recession which will run well into 1980.
Many observers are puzzled by the strong performance of government data on
employment, retail sales, new orders, and "leading indicators." Nevertheless,
there is virtually no evidence of panic, such as occurred in late 197^.
A surprising number of executives, even in S&Ls, have publicly supported the Fed's tougher policy stance even though they believe painful
adjustments lie ahead. However, builders, realtors, labor leaders, and
certain politicians are openly hostile.
The deep and involved problems of Chrysler are unique among wellknown companies headquartered in this District, insofar as we can determine.

Chrysler's difficulties are of concern to its suppliers and dealers who employ
more people than Chrysler itself.
The slump that hit the auto and light truck industries early this year
shows no sign of abating.

Sales of "big ears were helped by heavy rebates on

1979 models in August and September, probably at the expense of 1980 models.
Inventories of large cars and light trucks remain excessive and new production
cutbacks are announced periodically.

Deliveries of heavy trucks have begun to

slide, and new orders are far below factory shipments. Huge order backlogs
are reported for popular small cars, but many people are believed to have
placed multiple orders, and some have placed orders with a view to immediate
resale at a profit upon delivery.

Under these conditions some dealers refuse

to quote expected delivery dates.
Despite periodic scares, supplies of gasoline and diesel fuel appear
adequate currently. Demand for motor fuel continues well below year ago.
Reduced use of vehicles is associated with lower recreational expenditures,
and reduced demand for tires, parts, and maintenance.
The Deere labor pact covering 30,000, concluded after a three-week
strike, parallels the auto industry agreement. Wages will rise 36 percent in
three years, assuming 8 percent additional per year for COLA—more if the CPI
increases at a faster pace. Workers also will get 12 additional days off for
a total of 46 paid days off annually.

Since late October, strikes have been

in progress at Caterpillar (40,000) and International Harvester (35)000). The
main issues are said to be grievance procedures at "Cat," and mandatory overtime at I-H.
Analysts believe these strikes, which affect suppliers of steel and
other items, will last for some time. Demand for the farm and construction

machinery, and heavy trucks made by these companies had begun to decline in
late siimmer. Production continued at a high level in order to build inventories of finished goods as a bargaining lever. A decline in output would
have occurred whether or not labor negotiations were concluded without a strike.
Most capital goods producers continue to operate at high rates.
The Milwaukee area, which concentrates on capital goods, appears to be the most
prosperous of all large District centers. However, most companies report order
backlogs declining, particularly if allowance is made for 10 percent inflation
in the past 12 months.

(We do not hear reports of cancellations, such as

occurred in late 1974.) Slackening in the equipment sector is also suggested
by a slump in orders for heavy castings.
Record crops of corn and soybeans are assured.

Transportation and

storage facilities are stressed taut. Fitful service on the bankrupt Rock
Island and Milwaukee Road railroads, both vitally important to Iowa, is being
maintained with federal guarantees and court-ordered expedients. Motor transport is also strained. The bottleneck dam and locks on the Mississippi near
Alton impose a 4-day wait on barge traffic moving South.

Storage capacity for

grain is full. Transport and storage problems have resulted in a substantial
adverse price spread for grain held in the western portion of the District.
Liquidity pressures on rural banks, apparent all year, intensified in
October.

Interest rates are pressing against usury ceilings in some states,

especially in Iowa.
According to our survey, District farmland values rose almost 6 percent
in the third quarter, double the pace of the second quarter.

On October 1,

prices averaged 17 percent above last year.
Mortgage money has "dried up" throughout the District in the past 6

weeks, even in Indiana and Michigan where usury ceilings have not been a
problem. Because of outflows of funds, high borrowing costs, and the temptation to keep funds in high-yield money market instruments, lenders have cut
new commitments to a trickle.

But past commitments are being honored.

Some

S&Ls have stopped taking loan applications entirely, while others have reduced
activity by restricting loans to customers, raising down payments, and lowering
loan maximums. Mortgage rates are at 13.5-14 percent in Michigan where they
are free to move.

On November 8 Illinois suspended its mortgage usury rate

which had restricted loans to 11.5 percent for November. The largest S&L
immediately announced rates of 13.5 to 13.75 percent, plus 2.5 to 3 points,
with down payments of 25 to 35 percent.
Housing has been hit harder in the District than elsewhere.

Permits

for single-family hones in the Chicago area were 59 percent below last year in
September, and down 51 percent for 9 months. The situation is similar in other
areas in the District. Transactions in existing homes are very slow. People
desperate to sell houses are being counseled to use land contracts, a generally unfamiliar and unpopular device.

Housing in the District probably has

been affected more than in the nation because of the relative unimportance of
speculative building, lack of growth in many areas, and some exodus of weaklings oppressed by three successive severe winters.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District remains near the level of
a month ago according to district businessmen.

Manufacturing activity with

the exception of automobile production remains about unchanged, but at a
relatively high level.

Residential building continues down, largely

offsetting the rising commercial construction.

Sales at department stores

have declined in real terms from a year ago, but are about the same as a
month ago.

Inventories generally remain at moderate levels.

Farmers

remain relatively prosperous with net incomes expected to approach record
levels.
Most manufacturing operations continue at about the same level as a
month ago.

Output of basic metal products, aircraft and aircraft parts,

electric motors and parts, most capital goods, boxboards, and textiles
remains at a high level, and in some cases these industries have large
backlogs of orders.
orders on record.

One woodworking plant reported the largest backlog of

Automobile production, however, has declined sharply and

all of the Eighth District plants have laid off workers.

Also, output in

automobile-related industries has declined.
Construction activity in October remained at about the same level
as in September.

Commercial building remains relatively strong.

Residential construction has been about 25 percent below levels of a
year-ago for most of this year and is beginning to slow further as new home
sales have virtually come to a halt over much of the District.

This

reduction in new home sales largely reflects local usury laws which have
generally failed to allow mortgage rates to rise in step with market
interest rates.
Retail sales at major department stores are above year-ago levels
in nominal dollars, but less in real terms.

Reports on sales changes in

recent weeks are mixed and no significant change in overall volume is
apparent.

Sales of some software are down, but sales of home improvement

items are good.
minor exceptions.

Retail inventories remain at desired levels with a few
One major chain of stores reported a 16 percent increase

in shoe inventories from year-ago levels which must be worked off.

A

common complaint among retailers is that consumer debt is excessive and
that new credit to consumers is expected to level off for six months or
more.
Credit demand in the District has continued up during the past
month.

The volume of loans outstanding at commercial banks has increased

despite the higher interest rates.

Savings and loan associations report

that they have been making very few mortgage loans in Missouri since the
maximum legal interest rate in October, under the floating rate formula,
was only 11.4 percent or well below the market rate; and for new
commitments a down payment of 40 percent or more is required.

Mortgage

lending has come to a standstill in Arkansas and Illinois for similar
reasons.

In Tennessee, where the usury rate floats with national mortgage

rates, such lending continues but at a reduced volume.

The restrictive

usury rates have led to some special lending arrangements in Missouri.

Some mortgage lenders, for example, have agreements with some large
companies to finance home sales or purchases of the company's transferred
employees provided the company deposits sufficient funds with the lender to
cover the loan.

Another result of usury restrictions is the sharp increase

in older homes for sale.

In St. Louis the number of used houses on the

market is three times the number a year ago.
The agricultural situation in the district is generally good.
Harvesting weather has been favorable; large crops were harvested and
prices received were generally above year-ago levels.

Hence, an increase

in net incomes of farm operators is projected for this year.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Lending has been curbed by usury ceilings and by customers' reluctance
to pay higher interest rates. Reduced lending, though, has not changed our Bank
directors' assessment of district economic activity.

Due to strong industrial

activity and generally favorable agricultural conditions, the region's economy
is still growing.

High Interest Rates Have Reduced Bank Lending
District banks are having to pay higher rates to attract funds.

As

money market rates go up, for example, banks have had to sell more money market
certificates in order to retain deposits.

In fact, one director reports that

his area's bank customers are cashing in lower-yielding certificates and taking
interest penalties in order to take advantage of the more favorable rates on
money market certificates.
These higher interest costs are curbing bank lending.

In areas and

markets where banks' interest costs are approaching or exceeding usury ceilings, lending is no longer profitable.

Directors indicate usury ceilings have

recently dried up mortgage credit in South Dakota and Wisconsin with their 12
percent usury ceilings.

Consumer and agricultural lending in some areas has

also been curtailed by usury laws.
And where higher interest costs can be passed on, bank customers are
becoming hesitant to borrow.

Directors report that commercial loan requests

have slackened in response to recent interest rate increases.

Many merchants,

auto dealers, and farm implement dealers would now rather pare inventories than
pay higher interest costs.

But District Economic Activity Has Not Felt the Effects Yet
This letup in lending activity

has yet to change our

directors'

assessment of the district economy. This Bank's previous Redbooks reported that
the district economy was not in a recession, despite problem areas.

Industrial

activity had been strong, and agricultural conditions had been generally good,
despite troubling weather and transportation bottlenecks.

Our reports, how-

ever, did indicate some softness in consumer spending, especially for automobiles and housing.

This assessment is still valid in early November.

District

industrial output is expanding. Directors from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan,
Minnesota, and Wisconsin state that manufacturing in their areas is expanding
briskly.

While in Montana, industrial production related to energy supplies is

increasing.
This greater production is reflected in the region's strong demand for
workers.

Several directors indicate that employers in their areas are seeking

additional workers.

One large Minneapolis/St. Paul manufacturer, for example,

is trying to hire 180 production workers.

These observations are confirmed by

the district's recent high volume of help wanted advertising.
Complementing

the

district's

region's generally good agricultural

strong

industrial

conditions.

activity

According

are

the

to our latest

Agricultural Credit Conditions Survey, most agricultural producers' current
incomes are either the same as or greater than they were last year.
Some developments, however, are troubling two sectors of the district
economy.

First, poor weather and transportation bottlenecks are restricting

some farmers' incomes.

Wet October weather is retarding the corn harvest.

In

southwest Minnesota, for example, about 89 percent of the corn crop is still in
the fields.

But even if farmers could have completed the harvest, a lack of

rail transportation would have made getting it to market difficult.
some difficulties are being experienced by retailers.

Second,

Modest October sales are

reported by a large Minneapolis/St. Paul area retailer.

Also, directors de-

scribe their area's recent retail sales as "soft," "mixed," or "spotty."
they describe their area's home and automobile sales as "weak."

And

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Continued inflation and a slowing economy, but no excessive inventory
accumulation, characterize the Tenth District economy.

Purchasing agents

report that quarterly price increases have now become standard.
tinue to hold inventories under tight control as do retailers.

They conThe latter

group seems to be experiencing money illusion, as increases in nominal
dollar sales at a rate less than the rate of inflation are viewed optimistically.

In District agriculture, a larger seeded acreage of winter wheat

than last year is expected.

Commercial banks have significantly tightened

their credit policies in the past month.
Purchasing agents in the Tenth District report input price increases
of at least 8 per cent over last year, with almost half citing price rises
of 15 per cent or greater.

The large majority have experienced price gains

in the past three months, and anticipate further hikes in the very near
future.

Many report that quarterly price increases have become standard.

The input availability problems experienced earlier in the year have been
alleviated, and the consensus is that inputs will continue to flow smoothly
in the coming months.

Materials inventories in the Tenth District have

been trimmed and are being held under tight control due to the uncertainty
concerning sales and to high interest rates.

Over half the companies

contacted report a moderate amount of excess plant capacity, with just one
company expressing a need for plant expansion.

District firms do not appear

to be having any problems due to labor shortages.
The majority of retailers contacted in this month's survey report
gains in year-to-date sales of approximately 5 per cent to 12 per cent.

Appliances and home furnishings have been selling best in recent months,
while energy related home improvement products have also been strong.
Most retailers are satisfied with current inventory levels and anticipate no
major adjustments during the coming Christmas buying season.

With little

feeling of inventory overhang, almost all retailers expect clearance sales
to follow the same timing as last year.

Sales expectations for the remainder

of the year are basically optimistic, paralleling strong gains in the most
recent three months.

Some retailers, however, do expect sales to flatten

out this Christmas season.

Prices are expected to rise as cost increases

are passed along, but these anticipated increases do not include any
increases in profit margins.

Retailers will try to maintain current profit

margins in the uncertain months ahead by continuing to exercise tight control
over inventory levels.
Recent rain and snow over much of the Southern Plains hard red
winter wheat belt brought some relief to generally dry conditions.

While

additional moisture is needed, farmers are completing final seeding—delayed
because of dry weather.

A larger seeded acreage than last year is expected,

since there will be no 1980 required acreage set-aside for farmers to be
eligible for wheat target price protection and Commodity Credit Corporation
grain loans.

Late seeding and dry weather mean there will be only limited

amounts of wheat pasture available for fall and winter grazing of stocker
cattle.

This, coupled with the high interest rates on cattle loans, has caused

farmers to delay stocker cattle purchases.

As a result, the demand for, and the

prices of, cattle to be placed on pasture this fall are somewhat lower than
would otherwise be true.

Prices for most raw farm products important to

Tenth District producers registered declines in October.

An especially sharp

drop of 4 per cent in meat animal prices was recorded.

Prices for cattle,

hogs, calves, soybeans, corn, and broiler chickens declined, while the only
Tenth District farm commodities showing increases were wheat and milk.
Tenth District banks surveyed this month report a significant tightening of credit policies since October 6.

In addition to raising interest

rates where not prevented from doing so by usury ceilings, banks report that
they are being much more careful in their credit evaluations.

There is a

widespread fear that some potential borrowers may not have sufficient cash
flow to make repayments at current levels of interest rates.

Several banks

specifically mentioned that they are trying to avoid loans to finance speculative activity.

District banks have become especially restrictive in the

consumer lending area, particularly in Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, and New
Mexico where state usury ceilings are holding down rates.

In these states,

many banks appear to have completely abandoned automobile lending.

Banks

throughout the District report that they are becoming more restrictive in
credit card lending.

High interest rates appear to have significantly dampened

credit demand, except for loans to firms in the energy industry.

District

banks with significant energy-lending activity report little if any decline in
the demand for credit.
halt in the District.

Mortgage lending appears to be rapidly grinding to a
In states where usury ceilings are a factor, both banks

and savings and loans have virtually stopped making commitments.

In other

states, a shortage of funds has caused many mortgage lenders to deliberately
set interest rates at levels that they feel will choke off demand.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS

The Eleventh District economy continues to expand sluggishly.

Manu-

facturing activity is flat, although some nondurable goods industries report
continued recovery from a first quarter decline in output.

Auto sales are

running well below a year ago with little recovery likely under the current
tight credit conditions.

Unit sales at department stores are also lackluster

although maintaining an edge over a year ago.

Higher interest rates are

slowing loan demand only slightly, and banks are raising credit standards.
Financial institutions caught by usury ceilings are bearing the brunt of
the rise in interest rates.
Total factory output has been flat all year, with durable goods production declining and nondurable goods output on the rise.

Demand for labor

remains high with shortages of a wide range of skills persisting in large
urban areas.

The unemployment rate in Texas is 4.5 percent.

There appear to

be no major material shortages among manufacturers.
Primary metals and stone, clay, and glass remain among the strongest
regional industries because of the high level of construction in progress.
Furniture manufacturing is at a much reduced level from a year ago, while
machinery output has recently shown signs of weakness.
is off slightly from a year ago.
shortage of newsprint.
rail traffic.

Printing and publishing

Area newspapers report no easing in the

The shortage was aggravated by disruptions in

Newsprint inventories are currently running at about a seven-day

supply compared to the desired 30-day supply.

Despite the shortage, newspapers

are expected to be able to meet the growing demand for advertising space as
Christmas approaches.

Retail sales are mixed.

Department store executives report that unit

sales are running slightly above the level a year ago.

However, to maintain

that level of sales retailers are cutting prices and advertising heavily.
Department store sales, although generally described as lackluster, are nevertheless ahead of many store executives expectations.

Auto sales remain 20 to

25 percent below a year ago, despite strong sales of foreign models.
Retail inventories volumes are down from a year ago and are near planned
levels for most goods.

However, low apparel inventories prompted buyers from

throughout the country to order heavily at the recent Dallas apparel market.
Auto dealers are stocking approximately one-third fewer cars because of higher
carrying costs and the decline in sales.
Sharply higher interest rates since October 6 are clearly affecting
those financial institutions bound by low usury ceilings.

Credit unions sub-

stantially reduced the avialability of credit by increasing interest rates and
limiting the size of loans.

Conventional mortgages from savings and loan

associations have once again all but dried up in Texas as the state's two and
one-half month
interim

old floating rate has reached the maximum allowed by law.

An

legislative committee is currently debating alternative changes to

the current usury law, but no action to raise the ceiling rate is likely
before spring.
Demand for most types of loans remains high, but banks have tightened
credit standards and commitments to lend are being made much more
now than prior to October 6.
slowdown in growth.

cautiously

Most areas of lending are experiencing a moderate

Commitments to speculative residential builders, in

particular, have taken a noticeable decline in recent weeks.
are contributing to a reduction in consumer lending activity.

Slower auto sales
The high level

of construction in progress within the District is keeping real estate loans
outstanding from declining significantly.
Except for money market certificates deposit inflows are very sluggish
at banks, savings and loans, and credit unions.

Savings and loans are experi-

encing marginal net savings inflows, and credit unions report a sharp upturn
in the number of deposit account closings.

Money market certificates remain

the major source of funds for banks and S&L's.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The tightening of credit caused by the Federal Reserve Board's policy
initiatives of October 6, 1979, has been felt strongly throughout the Twelfth
District.

Residential construction and resales have been particularly affected,

with new lending and building activity off sharply in this area.

There have

been repercussions in the District's lumber and plywood industries despite
continued significant non-residential construction activity.

Automobile sales

are extremely weak, except in the case of small (particularly foreign) cars.
There are few other signs of weakening in the economy; retail sales remain
quite strong, harvests have been good, and "boom" industries such as electronics
continue to stimulate labor demand.

However, there is widespread uncertainty

about the future, and considerable pessimism about employment conditions in the
near future.
The major change in the economic picture of the Twelfth District from
last month is in the housing and mortgage credit areas.

The prime mortgage

rate is as high as 14% and, in many cases, mortgage money is not available at
all.

Realtors in most areas report fewer listings and fewer sales in the

resale marker and new residential construction has fallen off sharply.

The

usury laws that are in effect in several states in the District have significantly reduced new mortgage commitments at savings and loan associations. In
Washington, for example, a 12% usury limit has caused the two largest savings
and loan associations to stop making home loans altogether.
Commercial construction has not been adversely affected as yet because
of previous construction commitments.

Estimates of the length of the "pipeline"

of such activity range from 3 months to a year.

Demand for new commercial and

industrial space remains very strong in the southern California, Portland, Seattle

and Salt Lake City areas.

A new 653,000 square foot mall in Salt Lake City,

for example, already has 95% of its lease commitments.
Automobile sales are extremely weak in the District, except among small
foreign car dealers.

The high cost of floor credit and consumer financing is squeez-

ing dealers between increased costs and reduced demand.

One dealer of Cadillacs

and Buicks feels as if he is "giving the cars away" in order to reduce inventories and avoid $200 per month flooring costs.
normal" sales volumes in October.

Some dealers report "half of

There appears to be little interest in the

1980 domestic models.
In contrast to the gloomy picture in automobile sales, retail sales of
soft goods remain strong.

A Sears and Roebuck official in Salt Lake, for example,

reports sales "way ahead" of last year.

Shopping malls in Washington report good

business volumes as do merchants in the southern California area.
signs of caution, however:

There are

Seattle merchants are keeping trim inventories and

are going into the Christmas season with only 75% of traditional inventories.
Industrial production and employment had fallen off primarily in those
sectors affected by developments in the housing and automobile markets.

The

plywood industry is reported to be "badly off" and lumber mills dependent on
housing grade studs and dimension lumber are expected to be hit hard.
Motor Company is laying off 25,000 workers
work off inventories.

The Ford

in Los Angeles county in order to

A number of bankers in the District expect small and

medium sized companies to be in trouble in the near future as high credit costs
"reach the bottom line."

In the Northwest, the strength of the aerospace and

electronics industry is expected to offset the weakness in other industries.
There were scattered reports of reduced capital spending in the District;
a major food processing firm, for example, reports holding back on plans to add

to its distribution facilities.

However, other industries report continuing

with previous capital spending plans.

A major aluminum manufacturer for example,

expects to increase its rate of capital spending by 25 percent in the next few
years.

The primary effect of this activity will be to gain efficiency and

energy savings, however, rather than increase gross capacity.
The agricultural picture in the District is quite bright.

Wheat,

apples, and poultry production were reported as being particularly high.

The

diary business is indicated to be "strong," with good feed availability.

Seafood

prices are currently high, but the effects of high interest rates on the cost
of frozen seafood inventories may encourage some liquidation of these inventories with concomitant softening in prices.
The financial markets have displayed a sharp response to the changes
in credit conditions.

New non-commercial loan demand is sharply down.

The

commercial loan demand picture is mixed; some bankers report steady demand and
other indicate a decline.

Similarly, some lenders report strong deposit out-

flows and others report no net outflows but considerable shifting of deposits
to interest-sensitive accounts (MMC's and CD's).

There is widespread concern

about the future of lender profitability and some evidence of problems.

The

Idaho State Employees Credit Union, for example, will not be paying a dividend
this quarter (for the first time in its history).
A survey of the District's directors indicate that many expect a
reduction in inflation in the near term (several months to a year) as a
result of the new monetary policy initiatives.
in economic activity in the months ahead.

Most also forecast a downturn

