CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 12, 1979

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 20
Eighth District-St. Louis page 23
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 26
Tenth District-Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District-Dallas page 32
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

RED BOOK NATIONAL SUMMARY*

This month's Redbook reports indicate that there are areas of
weakness in the economy, but also that evidence of a recession is not
widespread.

The major area of decline has been automobile manufacturing.

Other manufacturing activity —

particularly capital goods production

appears to be holding its own.

Residential

—

construction remains weak,

but its losses have been offset by gains in non-residential

construction.

Record crops are reported in most parts of the country, and no petroleum
supply problems have been noted.

Demand remains strong for most types of

c r e d i t , and with the exception of t h r i f t s ,
relatively strong deposit flows.

lending institutions

Widespread price inflation

report

continues,

however, apart from declines in prices of certain farm products.

Also,

most businesses surveyed remain pessimistic about the future strength of
the economy.
Virtually all of the districts reported continued weakness in
retail

s a l e s , although back-to-school purchases have added temporary

strength to the f i g u r e s .

New York was the major exception to this picture;

one large chain headquartered there reported sales 20 percent ahead of last
year.

The more typical

"disappointing"

retail

response was that of Boston, which reported
sales volume.

Automobile sales have recovered somewhat in most d i s t r i c t s .
manufacturers'

The

program of rebates on large cars generally has stimulated

sales and pared inventories, although S t . Louis and Minneapolis s t i l l

[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.]

report excessive inventories.
Atlanta and New York.

Small-car sales are especially brisk in

Heavy truck sales appear to be holding at record

l e v e l s , but the recreational-vehicle market is still very weak.
Automobile manufacturing,
weakness.

however, shows pronounced signs of

All three plants in S t . Louis have reduced their work force

substantially.

Chicago reports that about one-third of Chrysler's

workforce is on indefinite l a y o f f .
plant will

hourly

I t is feared that at least one major

be closed permanently.

Most other manufacturing activity has been f l a t or growing, although Philadelphia observes deterioration in the industrial

sector.

Capi-

tal-goods manufacturers in the various districts generally report increases
in sales and backlogs.

Machine-tool manufacturers in the Cleveland

for example, report delivery times extended well
orders for steel dropped sharply in August —
automobile production schedules —

into 1980.

district,

Although new

in line with the cut in

shipments to most other industries

remain above last y e a r ' s l e v e l , and the industry does not expect a worsening
picture.
Residential-construction activity continued its s l i d e from last
month in most d i s t r i c t s , although there are spots of strength in areas such
as Florida.

Nonresidential-construction activity has compensated for this

weakness in many d i s t r i c t s ,

however.

As a result of the relatively stable condition of the non-automotive
sector, employment remains high in most areas.
San Francisco and Kansas City —

Several d i s t r i c t s —

report shortages of specialized

Demand is particularly strong in commercial construction,
aluminum and tool-and-die manufacturing.

notably

labor.

aerospace,

The continued rapid growth ef the

P a c i f i c Northwest economy has particularly strengthened the demand for
labor in that region.
Farm production reports are generally favorable.

Kansas City

and Chicago expect record crops in such commodities as wheat and soybeans,
although storms recently damaged grapefruit crops in Florida and
acres of cotton in Texas.

600,000

Pork and poultry production have increased.

As a result of the increased production in many commodities, farm prices
have f a l l e n ,

so that farm incomes are likely to fall considerably short of

earlier Department of Agriculture forecasts.

The Rock Island strike and

the grain-handler's strike at Duluth/Superior pose grain transportation
problems.
Most d i s t r i c t s report continued strength in demand for all
of loans.

types

However, Atlanta reports slack loan demand, and Dallas reports

resistance to high residential-mortgage rates.

The supply of funds at

commercial banks appears to be holding up, with money-market c e r t i f i c a t e s
compensating for outflows from other savings categories.

Cleveland and

Richmond observe, however, that thrifts are experiencing more d i f f i c u l t y
obtaining funds.

Atlanta sees a "softening" of deposit flows in general.

Although the economic picture remains relatively good at the
present time, the business community generally appears pessimistic about
the future.

Respondents to Philadelphia's Business Outlook Survey appear

to be bracing for a further slowdown.

Boston reports that business firms

have learned a lesson from the last recession, and that they are watching
inventories closely; throughout the d i s t r i c t s ,
levels of inventories in most industries.
inflation in input prices are widespread.

this is reflected in moderate

Meanwhile, reports of continued

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Respondents in the First District report increasing signs of weakness
but not all see evidence yet of a recession. Retailers are generally the most
pessimistic; sales are disappointing.

Some manufacturers report a fall off

in the demand for certain products, but for many business is still good. In
the banking sector, loan demand remains brisk although there has been a slight
softening in the last couple of weeks. Growth in demand deposits has picked
up significantly.
Retailers throughout New England report that sales are weakening.
However, experiences have been quite varied, with the softening much more
pronounced for some than others.

The heads of two general merchandise chains

believe that inventories are too high, but that a good fall season could bring
them back into line without the need for major readjustments.

One of these

companies is part of a national organization; its figures indicate that the
slowdown in New England has been greater than for the country as a whole.
Among manufacturers, business is still quite brisk for the most part.
The defense business is an important source of strength and international sales
of many different products are doing well. A diversified company producing
automotive products, products for the home, and small appliances sees no change
in the volume of activity.

Home cleaning and related products have also been

unaffected, while in northern New England the electrical machinery, machine
tool and wood products industries continue to do well. On the other hand, a
manufacturer of industrial safety equipment, sales of which are considered
indicative of future changes in manufacturing activity, has been a noticeable

weakening in sales during this month. A producer of large household appliances
also reports disappointing sales. All manufacturing respondents believe that
they have learned from the experience of the previous recession and are watching
inventories closely; however, no major adjustments are planned.
Banking directors report that loan demand is strong, although in northern
New England there has been a slight softening.

All have experienced a signi-

ficant increase in demand deposits. At one medium-sized bank regular savings
deposits have just increased for the second month in a row for the first time
in a year. Despite current high interest rates, the head of one large bank
reports that large borrowers who can shop around and use the commercial paper
market can still get funds at very attractive prices. The big banks are extremely competitive and are reducing balance requirements and commitment fees
and are charging less than the prime rate for these customers.

Foreign banks

are taking the lead in reducing commitment fees.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin were available for comment
this month. According to Eckstein, there is no doubt that a recession is underway; real GNP in late 1980 will be no higher than it was in the beginning of
this year. Eckstein also sees disturbing parallels between the present and
past recessions:

first, monetary policy tightens until the economy is "on its

back," "inviting" the Congress to cut taxes, then easy monetary and fiscal
policies "pump the system full of liquidity." He noted as another danger, a
reversion to "the disastrous exchange rate regime of the 1950s and 1960s"
using the taxpayers' money to attempt to support the exchange value of the
dollar at an "indefensible" level.

Tobin also suggested we are repeating the 1974 experience, although
he believes the recession may not be so severe this time. Recent one-shot
shocks have temporarily raised the rate of inflation but, because wages have
not accelerated, have not increased the "core" inflation rate. The Fed has not
only refused to accommodate them but actually is trying to drive down the inflation rate. Tighter monetary policy will primarily hurt output and reduce
inflation little more than would have happened anyway once the price shocks
work through the economic system.

Tobin agrees with Eckstein that a stringent

monetary policy will simply foster an undesitable monetary-fiscal policy mix.
Samuelson feels that higher interest rates are warranted because
recent money growth has exceeded the targets. He insists, however, that
monetary policy be linked to domestic objectives and warns that tying policy
to defending the "prestige of the dollar" places the Fed in an "unnecessary
and unfortunate box."

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK
Business activity in the Second District appears to have regained
some of the ground it had lost earlier in the summer, according to recent
comments of directors and other business leaders.

Consumer spending strengthened

from its summer doldrums. Using heavy promotions and large price markdowns,
department stores registered record sales and pared inventories to leaner
levels. Sales of new automobiles also posted a strong gain, helping dealers
get out from under their bloated large-car inventories. Outside of retailing,
most respondents remain cautious.

New orders have been sluggish, but production

schedules have been adjusted to prevent an excessive inventory buildup.
Although there is widespread agreement that the economic slowdown will not
bottom out until next year, most capital spending plans remain unchanged. On
the financial front, business loan demand continues strong with little evidence
of tightening in credit standards or nonprice lending terms.
Consumer spending in the Second District turned in an unexpectedly
healthy showing in August. Retailers chalked up record sales; one nationwide
chain reported that its sales were more than 20 percent ahead of last year.
As in recent months, sales at New York City stores outpaced those at suburban
branches; but with the easing of the gas shortage, the suburban branches have
lately made a strong comeback.

Still, retailers are unanimously conservative

in their outlook for coming months, expressing some concern that the upturn
may be the shortlived result of heavy promotions and markdowns.

Thus, while

stores are planning to replenish their depleted inventory stocks, they intend
to keep inventories on the lean side.

In recent weeks, there has been a noticeable improvement in the
automotive sector. Small-car sales continue to boom, with no letup in sight.
Lately, moreover, there has been an advance in the sales of intermediate- and
full-size vehicles.

Dealers attribute this pickup both to an easing of the

gas shortage and to heavy price promotions. Price incentives have reportedly
been running about $700 per GM car, and to as much as $1900 per Chrysler car.
Used car sales have been brisk.

As a result, the bulging stocks of new and

usedlargeresizemodels have now been brought down to more manageable levels.
Truck sales are also up, though they remain well below the rapid pace of early
1979. Respondents are not aware of any financing problems, and consumer credit
seems readily available.
ening loan maturities.

It does appear, however, that consumers are length-

Four-year auto loans now are becoming quite common.

Outside of retailing, business activity appears to be holding up
fairly well.

New orders do seem to have weakened a bit, but most businesses

report no change in their capital spending plans. One major steel company
feels that it will be well insulated from an economic downturn, as any future
slackening which may occur in capital goods production will be compensated for
by a rebound in the production of consumer goods. In general, however, the
consensus forecast is for a relatively mild slowdown, brought on by sluggish
consumption spending and lasting through the early part of 1980. Yet, apart
from the auto sector, there is little evidence of a recession in either
western New York or the downstate region. Nor are there reports of any
involuntary inventory accumulation.

Indeed, one metals company has been

running such a tight inventory policy that it experienced stock-outs of
certain items. Other companies report that they are shipping goods out about

as fast as they are producing them, maintaining their inventories at
comfortable levels.
On the financial front, there were no signs of a let up in credit
demands.

Senior loan officers at major New York City banks indicate little

change in bank lending policies on business loans and do not expect a nearterm slowdown in the demand for such credit. While a few respondents expressed
less willingness by their banks to extend loan commitments at predetermined
interest rates, most revealed no tendency to tighten the criteria used to
screen business loan applicants.

The consensus of respondents expects business

loan demand to continue at the present rapid pace.

Inventory investment was

the factor most frequently cited as bolstering loan demand. With respect to
mortgage markets,financing in New York State is extremely tight according to
the comments of the Buffalo branch directors. Because of the state usury
ceiling, the state-chartered lending institutions are committing little, if
any, new money to mortgages while the national banks are allocating limited
new funds at 11 1/2 percent interest which are being absorbed very quickly.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District are that economic activity is
mixed in September. Representatives of the industrial sector report further
slippage this month, but at a reduced rate, and retail sales are sluggish.
Bankers, however, report strong loan volume.
in all three sectors are bearish.

For the longer term, contacts

A further downturn in manufacturing is

anticipated, along with continued softness in retail sales. And, bankers
expect that, as we move into a recession, loan demand will taper off as
well.
Respondents to this month's Business Outlook Survey report further
deterioration of general business conditions in the industrial sector, but
at a reduced pace from that recorded in July and August. New orders are off
fractionally in September, while shipments are up slightly.

Consequently,

producers' backlogs continue to shrink and inventories have taken another
dip. Factory labor remains unaffected by the three-month old slowdown
though, as neither payrolls nor weekly hours have been cut in September.
As for the future, responding manufacturers look for continued
dampening of the business climate over the next two quarters, and appear to
be bracing for a further slowdown. With both new orders and shipments projected to take significant drops between now and March, survey respondents
are planning to trim the size of their work forces and cut working hours as
well. Moreover, expenditures on plant and equipment are expected to be no
higher in six months than they are right now, possibly indicating that manufacturers are finally taking the threat of a recession seriously.

On the inflation front, prices are up again in the local industrial
sector.

Two thirds of the executives polled in September report paying more

for raw materials than they did in August, and half are charging more for their
finished products.

For the longer term, more of the same is expected. Nine

out of 10 manufacturers are projecting higher inputs costs six months out, and
3 out of 4 are planning to boost the prices of the goods they sell.
Third District retailers report some growth in sales in September, but
not enough to yield an increase after adjusting for inflation. Reports of
current sales levels range from 3 to 6 percent over year-ago figures — about
as expected on average. Merchants point to higher outlays by consumers for
gasoline and an overall lack of confidence in the economy as factors that are
keeping a lid on sales at this point.

Retail inventories are in basically

good shape despite the apparent sluggishness, a direct result of cautious
planning in earlier months.
Looking ahead to the first quarter of 1980, local merchants are
generally pretty cautious. They expect some gains to be posted between now
and March, but none large enough to offset inflation, which they expect to
be in the 8-10 percent range.
Area bankers say total loan demand is strong in September, with much
of the strength coming from a pickup in business borrowing.

Real estate and

construction money is still very much in demand, and C&I loans are up between
10 and 14 percent from September '78 levels.

Consumer loans are doing well

also, in fact, too well, for bankers who are trying not to make many fixedrate loans in anticipation of further interest rate hikes.

Bankers contacted

believe much of the strength in the business loan area stems from unplanned
inventory accumulation in the industrial sector. A tapering off of loan
demand towards the end of 1979 is projected, as manufacturers enter an inventory liquidiation phase and consumers stop spending for autos and other
durables.
A Director of this Bank confirms the reports of soaring loan demand,
particularly for consumer and mortgage loans, and he sees no immediate slowdown.
The prime rate at all of the banks contacted this month is at 12 3/4
percent and expected to go higher soon. An increase of about 25 basis points
is projected within 4-6 weeks, followed by a plateau lasting at least through
the first 3 months of 1980.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Business conditions in the Fourth District have shown evidence of
further inventory accumulations in August, but the consumer-centered recession
has not yet spread to the capital goods sector. Most businessmen and economists
forecast a shallow recession extending into the second quarter of 1980. Manufacturers
report

that inventories have been accumulating at a slow rate, but few are

concerned that inventory liquidation would pose a serious problem for the remainder
of this year. Bankers and retailers have mixed viewpoints over prospects for
a moderate comeback in consumer spending, but

even those more optimistic do

not expect a comeback that will be strong enough to reverse the downward trend
of the economy.

The housing market has continued to show surprising strength

as mortgage loan demand has remained unchanged from last month.

The city of

Cleveland has slipped deeper into default.
Most manufacturers report that involuntary inventory accumulation
has been occurring in the Fourth District. However, most had expected some
accumulation to occur as consumer spending slowed, but have been unable to
alter production schedules in anticipation of a decline in orders.

The inventory

buildup, so far, has been concentrated in material parts and components related
to the auto industry. A producer of consumer items reports that his inventory
buildup resulted from special market conditions for those items.

The standard

view remains that tight controls on inventories over the past year have kept
inventories at satisfactory levels which can be adjusted by slowing the rate
of accumulation into the first quarter of 1980.
Capital goods producers, in general, have experienced little direct
effect from the recession. An official in the machine tool industry reports

no major change in new orders, although the peak in orders occurred early in
the year.

Some softness in machine tools is expected over the next six to

twelve months and one official expects a "sudden" softening in the fourth
quarter of 1979. However, because delivery times are extended well into
1980 and backlogs are still increasing, layoffs have not occurred. A manufacturer
of truck parts notes some weakness in heavy-duty trucks which can be attributed
to the general slowing of the economy. He also states that a rebound in light
truck sales could lead a recovery in the second quarter of 1980. A steel economist
reports that new orders for steel dropped sharply in August, but are not expected
to get worse. However, he is apprehensive that declines in the demand for metal
building materials may be a preliminary sign of the recession spreading into the
capital goods sector. The steel industries' operating rate is likely to drop
sharply next quarter to about 70% operating rate, according to one economist.
Most producers are concerned that capital goods spending will soften over the
remainder of the year if availability of money tightens and the consumer recession
spreads.
Retailers report some improvement in consumer demand related to backto-school purchases, which are predominately seasonal, and to new car sales.
Although operating at a satisfactory level, one manufacturer of apparel notes
that unit sales are off 20% for the Fall season and are expected to be about 6%
off this year from last. Sales of nondurables have been on a down-trend all year,
but one super market official expects that any further retrenchments by the consumer
will be concentrated in durable goods. Consumers have been increasingly shifting
purchases away from inflationary items and one retailer is concerned about the
effect of income redistribution in consumer buying, especially from rising food
prices. However, a District banker reports that consumer loan demand has been
strong In his area and has suggested that final demand will remain strong

enough through the Christmas season to spark a temporary consumer comeback. A
few others have taken a less sanguine view. They expect consumer spending to worsen,
because of increased consumer resistance to high prices.

In response to declining

real incomes, one retailer expects GAF sales next quarter to show about a 4% yearover-year increase, about half of the increase that he expects for the third
quarter.
Housing market conditions have continued to experience relative strength
despite the recession. Building suppliers state that 1979 has been better than
expected, but they are skeptical about 1980 prospects. A major regional builder
of homes reports that housing starts have been accelerating since June and are
expected to be "rapid" through October. Although a banker is concerned about
housing inventories being increasingly financed through borrowing, a builder
reports no excess inventories at this time. Sales of existing houses have continued
to be slow in August, with a rising number of requests by home owners for banks
to finance both the old and the newly purchased house until buyers can be found.
Mortgage and consumer loan demand has been strong in August, but S&Ls
are still having trouble competing with commercial banks for loanable funds. Bankers
report increasing funds flowing into the banks, but S&Ls continue to borrow heavily
from FHLBs. Mortgage loans over the remainder of 1979 are expected to be below
last year's peak and interest rates on 80% mortgage loans are set to increase by
another twenty five basis points to 11-1/4% in some parts of the District early in
September. Consumer installment loan demand has picked up, according to one area
banker, because of a switch from vacations to home recreation purchases. A banker
notes that even auto loans have made a comeback from April to June levels.
The city of Cleveland has gone into its second default after failing to
roll over $3.3 million in city-held waterworks notes. The first default last December
amounted to $15 million. A second default became certain when City Council refused

to allow the transfer of general operating funds to the waterworks fund,
because of the questionable legality of the transfer. A third default on
$14 million in city-held notes, also held by the waterworks fund, is now
probable in October. However, the city was able to pay about $500,000 in
interest payments on the original default.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Fifth District business and financial conditions remained spotty during
the past month. The slowing of manufacturing activity seems to have spread.
Manufacturers surveyed this month indicate declines in shipments, new orders,
backlogs of orders, and employment.

On the other hand, inventories rose only

very slightly and price increases became less widespread.
report business gains over the month.
ticket items apparently kept pace.

Retailers, however,

Sales were up and, except for autos, big

Consumer loan demand may have firmed some-

what in recent weeks while business loan demand has fallen off a bit. USDA's
crop production estimates as of August 1 indicate that the District's 1979
harvest of tobacco, peanuts, some of the small grains, and apples will not be
as bountiful as in 1978.

But bumper harvest of soybeans, wheat, and corn are

in prospect.
Of manufacturers responding to our survey nearly one-half experienced
declines in the volume of new orders in the past month and over one-third had
reduced shipments.

In addition, there was a slight decline in order backlogs.

Employment and the length of the workweek were down substantially.

Current

plant and equipment capacity is increasingly viewed as excessive and there is
virtually no sentiment in favor of enlarging current expansion plans.
With some significant exceptions retail sales continue firm. Department stores are doing respectably but with notable weakness in some apparel
lines.

Building materials are doing well and consumer durables are holding

their own. District retailers surveyed this month report gains in total sales
with big ticket items keeping pace. Automobile sales have improved, apparently

stimulated by recent promotions.
the month.

Employment among retailers also rose over

These retailers note extensive price shopping by consumers and

keen competition among sellers. The action remains in the moderate and higher
quality lines, however, as bargain hunters seek lower prices but not cheaper
merchandise.
Inventory accumulation still does not seem to have become a problem.
Inventory levels among survey respondents rose moderately over the past month,
but without any commensurate rise in concern over positions. Nearly two-thirds
of the manufacturers surveyed are comfortable with current stocks as are all
retail respondents.

Three-fourths of our Directors queried on this point see

no evidence of inventory problems in their respective areas.

Instances of

inventory problems were almost exclusively related to the automobile sector.
Consequently, there is little evidence of any explicit action on the part of
district businessmen to reduce current stocks or even to prevent further
accumulation.
Despite their mixed views of where the economy stands, our respondents
are largely in agreement as to where it is headed. An overwhelming majority
expect the level of activity nationally to decline over the next six months
and a clear majority expects similar developments in their respective market
areas. Nonetheless, only about one respondent in three expects production in
his own firm to fall over that period.
In the financial sector, consumer nonmortgage credit.demand has shown
signs of strengthening, although this strength appears limited in terms of the
uses of funds borrowed.

The recent improvement in automobile sales has resulted

in increased demand for instalment financing, while borrowing for other purposes
continues to moderate. Also, larger and metropolitan area banks seem to be
experiencing stronger consumer loan growth than smaller rural banks. Business
loan demand has weakened in recent weeks, with loans to retailers showing the
largest decline. Loans to both durable and nondurable goods manufacturers
have also softened. There are indications that banks are making occasional
price concessions to stimulate commercial loan demand.
appear to be active mortgage lenders.

Commercial banks still

It appears, however, that there is

growing caution in approving construction and land development loans.
Deposit flows continue to be adequate to support loan growth at banks,
and the liquidity condition of larger commercial banks is good. Area thrift
institutions are still experiencing outflows of deposits other than money
market certificates, and reliance on this source of funds is increasing
steadily.
Market demand for flue-cured tobacco this season has generally been
weaker than a year ago. A stronger market and better quality offerings have
been in evidence in recent weeks, however, and prices have improved. The
season average price as of August 30 was running about 5 percent above a year
earlier, but with the volume of gross sales down by 5 percent the value of
gross sales was fractionally below the same period last year. The size of
the 1979 flue-cured crop is now expected to be 15 percent below 1978's output, so, unless there is a sharp improvement in prices during the remainder
of the season, flue-cured tobacco earnings for the year may well be significantly below those a year ago.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
District businessmen generally feel that they are in a recession,
that it will be mild, and that it will have very little effect on inflation.
Alabama directors see the current recession concentrated in middle-income
buyers. Luxury goods and discount stores are doing very well, but chain
stores in middle-income markets report very sluggish sales and rising delinquencies. Many directors think inflation is here to stay and that counterrecessionary policies to come will only worsen inflation.
District-wide, retail sales gains continued to fall behind inflation.
Rebates are succeeding in bolstering sales of larger automobiles. Loan demand
is slack and delinquencies are up. Residential housing construction remains
stable despite some notable declines. Gains in commercial and industrial
construction helped offset residential losses. Employment held firm. Tourism
activity recovered from early summer declines. Plentiful rainfall augured
well for agriculture throughout the District.
Most contacts reported increases in retail sales not commensurate
with inflation.

Back-to-school sales were helpful. A few contacts reported

considerable softness in big-ticket items such as furniture and appliances.
Inventory levels are considered manageable. One contact is even keeping
inventories high in anticipation of brisk sales. Rebates on mid-sized and
large-sized 1979 models boosted sales after several sluggish months. Demand
for compact cars remains intense. Many dealers are reporting very low
inventories.
Generally speaking, loan demand was weak. A few contacts, however,
reported strong demand. Deposit inflows have moderated, with increased money

market certificates offsetting sagging passbook savings. Delinquency problems
appear to be on the increase, particularly among middle-income families. Consolidation loans are reported up.
Residential housing construction remains stable, mainly because of
strong increases in Florida. New Orleans, Baton Rouge, Nashville, and central
Mississippi experienced notable declines.

In Nashville, inventories of higher-

priced homes are excessive. A Knoxville savings and loan executive reports
that mortgage funds are drying up, but his report is not typical. Districtwide, mortgage money is generally available, and applicants are being screened
very closely.
In the states registering declines in residential construction,
commercial and industrial construction gains are compensating. New Orleans,
Baton Rouge, Nashville, and the Mississippi Gulf Coast are all experiencing
good growth in office buildings, shopping centers, and new plants and expansions.

In Florida where residential construction is good, commercial and

industrial construction is strong. The International Minerals and Chemical
Corporation will spend approximately $450 million on a major expansion of its
phosphate rock and chemicals production.
The region's forestry-related sector was strengthened by several
recent announcements. Kimberly-Clark, a diversified paper company, will
construct a division headquarters and research facilities near Atlanta.
Outside the Jacksonville area, a large sawmill for pine dimensional lumber
will be built by Owens-Illinois and a large wood chip handling facility by
Georgia-Pacific.

In the Florida panhandle, the St. Regis Paper Company will

expand substantially its paper manufacturing complex and a new company will
develop a wood-processing plant to produce fiber pellets for use as fuel.

Employment throughout the District is fairly steady so far, but many
contacts believe unemployment will trend upward in the coming months. Additionally, new Comprehensive Employment Training Act regulations that limit
CETA employment to 18 months, effective October 1, and heavy federal budget
cuts will nudge unemployment even higher at a time of anticipated slow economic
activity. For example, more than 1,500 CETA workers in Atlanta are expected
to be laid off by the end of the year and 182 are scheduled to lose their jobs
in East Baton Rouge Parish.
After appreciable declines for June and July, attendance at many
attractions showed reassuring increases in August. Tourists dealt with higher
gasoline prices by continuing to visit attractions within a shorter driving
range. Campground business remains very weak throughout the District because
of a reluctance to travel too far with gas-guzzling recreational vehicles.
Abundant rainfall throughout the District has enhanced yield prospects
for crops, particularly soybeans, corn, peanuts, and cotton, and improved
pastures. Resultant higher quality pastures helped maintain the good physical
condition of cattle herds during the hot summer months. Pork and poultry
producers are experiencing a profit squeeze, resulting from declines of approximately 15 percent for pork and 20 percent for broilers from year-ago levels.
Hurricane David did not seriously damage most major cropping areas of Florida
and Georgia; however, an estimated 10 to 20 percent of Florida's sugarcane
crop was lost and, according to early reports, the grapefruit crop along the
Coast also incurred appreciable losses.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
The view that the economy has entered a recession is widely held in
the Seventh District, but many companies have not been affected directly and
foresee no crisis. The dichotomy between weak consumer markets and relatively
vigorous capital spending continues. However, orders for equipment are slowing
and backlogs of some companies are declining. Labor markets have softened in
most areas. Price inflation has not abated. The farm sector is generally
prosperous.
Most executives in the district apparently accept the view that the
economy is in a recession that will be "short and shallow." Frequently, they
state that they have seen no sign of a decline themselves, but, nevertheless,
they are taking the usual precautions of tightening up on new hiring, inventory
investment, and, in some cases, capital appropriations.

They insist that their

operations are not as vulnerable as in late 197^, because of "lessons learned"
in 1975.
Although employment has probably leveled off overall in the district,
substantial layoffs have been confined to the motor vehicle and recreational
vehicle industries. Even in the depressed residential sector, there are few
signs of idle workers. But new hiring is down. Help-wanted ads in Chicago
papers dropped sharply in August, after remaining at a high level through June.
Consumers continue to show caution on major purchases, but they appear
to have ample funds for "back-to-school" items and everyday purchases. Lowerpriced general merchandise chains appear to be benefiting at the expense of
luxury-oriented stores.
Substantial price cuts on overstocked autos have stimulated sales in

recent weeks. Nevertheless, 1980 model production schedules for larger cars
are still being reduced with periodic shutdowns of assembly lines. Demand for
light trucks and recreational vehicles continues very weak.

Sales of heavy

trucks are holding at record levels, but analysts are convinced that a decline
is inevitable with 1980 down 20 percent or more.
About one-third of Chrysler's hourly workforce is new on indefinite
layoff. Chrysler's future is of particular concern to the City of Detroit
where it is the largest employer. There are fears that at least one major
obsolete plant will be closed permanently. With supplementary benefit$ laid-off
auto workers receive up to 95 percent of their normal take home pay. However,
depletion of Chrysler's SUB fund threatens this portion of the benefits.
Orders for steel from the motor vehicle industry have been cut in line
with production schedules.

Shipments to most other industries remain well

above last year. However, new orders, especially advanced bookings, are well
below shipments and backlogs are declining.
While most capital goods producers continue to operate at high rates,
the picture is increasingly spotty.
strong, and above earlier estimates.

Sales of farm equipment continue very
Electrical components are still vigorous.

Demand for construction equipment and materials handling equipment, however,
has eased off. New orders for metal-cutting machine tools have leveled off,
but backlogs are expected to keep most producers going full blast into next
year. Orders for freight cars dropped suddenly in June. The freight car
backlog is large, but cancellations are possible.
Gasoline supplies appear adequate if not ample. Many gas stations
have extended operating hours, but not to normal standards. Much of the
improvement reflects reduced driving. Summer traffic on Interstates in

Illinois was lU percent below last year, compared to a 22 percent shortfall in
early June. The month of May had been even with a year ago.
Heating oil supplies are further below desired levels in the Midwest
than elsewhere. However, experts believe that no serious shortages will occur
this winter, unless same new supply problem develops.
Nonresidential construction is still vigorous, especially for office
buildings and hotels. Builders are rushing construction of at least 10 large
office buildings and hotels in downtown Chicago. Recently another large office
building of 1.1 million square feet was announced. Some of the first buildings
started in the current wave will be occupied soon. Leasing is said to be proceeding at a rapid pace. Existing high quality space is in tight supply.
Rents are reported to be up 25 percent from last year and 60 percent from 1977»
partly because of escalation contracts. Hotel occupancy is also strong and
room rates are up 20 percent in about 18 months.
The market for single-family homes in the Chicago area is probably the
weakest of any large metropolitan area. This situation does not reflect a depressed local economy because employment and unemployment data compare fairly
well with national trends. Moreover, mortgage money has been available, at
about 10.5 percent on 20 percent loans. The weak home market is blamed partly
on three successive severe winters, which may have encouraged net out-migration
and a rapid expansion of the condominium market.
Chicago area residential permits were k2 percent below year ago in
July, and off Uo percent for seven months.

Single-family permits were off U5

percent for July, and off 1+9 percent for seven months. An unusually large
number of existing homes are listed for sale, and houses remain unsold for unusually long periods. Meanwhile, the inventory of finished new homes is slim

as few starts have been made without firm orders. Prices of existing homes have
declined in many areas, especially on higher-priced units and units located away
from built up areas. Prices of new homes have continued to rise with costs of
labor and materials.

Similar reports are heard from other large urban areas in

the district.
A growing number of contractual payments, not only wages, but rents
and other outlays are automatically escalated. Many contracts cite the local
index. In July, when the all-city CPI was 11.3 percent above last year, the
indexes for Chicago, Detroit, and Milwaukee were up 13.5, 12.8, and 1U.9 percent, respectively.
At this point, corn and soybean crops in the Midwest appear to be heading for records or near-records. However, a severe early frost could cause
losses because of late plantings.

Transportation tie-ups in moving grain have

been worsened by the Rock Island strike.

EIGHTH DISTRICT —

ST. LOUIS

According to interviews with District businessmen, overall
economic activity in August was unchanged from July, but is below that of
the first quarter of the year. The decline appears to be mild, except for
the automobile and housing industries. Consumer spending, which has been
sluggish in recent months, registered gains at about the current rate of
inflation.

Inventories are being closely watched as several businessmen

expect the economic slowdown to continue for several months. Output in the
manufacturing sector appears unchanged in recent weeks following a decline
in the second quarter. Construction activity, as a whole, remains strong
with losses in residential building offset by gains in other types of
construction.

In the financial sector, inflows into savings and loan

associations continue to register small but positive gains. Reports
indicate that mortgage loan demand has slowed in recent weeks, whereas
reports are mixed about the strength of commercial loan demand.
Indications from area retailers are that real consumer spending
was unchanged from July to August.

Some large department stores posted

nominal gains of 10-12 percent and a few retailers noted some improvement
in sales of household appliances and back-to-school items. On the other
hand, other retailers reported only small gains and expressed
disappointment about their recent sales volume. Automobile sales improved
in August as incentive programs offered by dealers and manufacturers to
reduce heavy inventories helped generate sales. Car sales in the St. Louis
District (eastern Missouri and southern Illinois) of one major U.S.
manufacturer were down only slightly in August compared with a year ago.

However, sales on a year-to-date basis were down about 15 percent from a
similar period last year.
In general, inventories are reported to be at satisfactory levels
but inventories of automobiles, certain types of appliances, and some
apparel items are considered excessive. Automobile inventories, however,
are down substantially from a month ago as a result of recent sales
efforts. Some firms reported efforts to reduce inventories in order to cut
carrying costs and to bring them in line with expected slower sales
volumes.

Some expressed the reservation that an unwanted buildup of

inventories may occur, since consumer purchases did not seem strong enough
to sustain current production levels. Also, some respondents reported more
hand-to-mouth buying of raw materials and fewer long-term commitments.
Manufacturing activity appears to have stabilized in recent weeks
after noticeable declines in the second quarter. The declines occurred
largely in the automobile, lumber, furniture, textile, and apparel
industries. Layoffs have occurred at most District automobile assembly
plants. All three plants in St. Louis have reduced their work force, with
one plant cutting back workers by one-third. Some manufacturing firms,
particularly those producing capital goods, continue to report strong
activity. A major capital goods manufacturer noted that incoming orders
continue at "good" rates. Several smaller manufacturers of such items as
industrial motors, lubrication equipment, pumps, welding and cutting
equipment, and machine tools noted continued increases in sales and, in
some cases, growing backlogs.
Construction activity in the District remains at a high level,
despite declines in homebuilding. Housing construction appears to be down

about 15 to 20 percent from a year ago. Nonresidential building activity,
however, has registered sizable gains, and decreases in labor employed in
home construction have been largely absorbed in the nonresidential building.
Savings and loan association representatives reported some gains
in savings inflows in August, but the rate of gain was slower than in the
first half of the year. Among individual S and Ls, however, the pattern
varied substantially, with those offering premiums and advertising heavily
attracting most of the new funds. The slower growth of savings deposits is
attributed to increased competition from Treasury bills, money market
certificates at banks, and money market funds. Mortgage loan demand was
reported to have slowed in the past two months, but with fewer loanable
funds, rates on 80 percent loans remain relatively high at 11-1/4 to 11-1/2
percent. Some commercial bank representatives reported brisk demand for
commercial loans while others noted a recent slowing in demand for such
loans. Arkansas banks have cut back drastically on consumer lending due to
the high cost of funds relative to the "low" usury ceilings on such loans.
The agricultural picture remains generally favorable for farmers.
Crop production is expected to be relatively large. However, as a result
of the recent decline in farm product prices, farm incomes may not be quite
as large as anticipated earlier in the year.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Although the national economy appears to be in a recession, the Ninth
District economy remains relatively strong.

Last month, our report indicated

that the district's economy was not yet in a recession, but that several
developments were threatening it.

The consumer and agricultural sectors, in

particular, are still worrisome, but a strong industrial sector is allowing the
district to avoid a recession.
Consumers Buying Less
District consumers are still reluctant to spend.

Several directors

indicated that retail sales, which were weak in July in comparison to a year
ago, continued to be weak in August. Close to half of the merchants responding
to a University of Minnesota survey also reported that their sales were down
from a year ago. Even in South Dakota, where the dollar value of retail sales
was about equal to what it was a year ago, fewer goods were sold.
Auto and home sales continue to be weak, too.

In August, car sales

fell below year-earlier levels, as they did in June and July, and large car
inventories are still excessive.

District consumers likewise continue to be

hesitant to purchase homes; in August the number of homes listed for sale was up
substantially from a year ago.
Farmers' Earnings Threatened
The agricultural sector, like the consumer sector, has problems.
District farmers' earnings are threatened by transportation problems and poor
weather. Last month a grain handlers' strike at Duluth/Superior aggravated the
district's already strained grain transportation system, and this dispute has

yet to be settled. Even if the grain handlers begin working soon, the remaining
shipping season will not be long enough to move all the grain that would
normally have been shipped from this port.

This grain will have to be either

stored or shipped overland to other ports; either alternative raises costs and
reduces earnings.
Farmers' earnings also could be reduced by smaller-than-expected
crops.

A month ago district farmers were expecting a good harvest, and many

still are. But in Minnesota, the district's largest crop-producing state, wet
and cloudy August weather has kept crops from maturing, and an early frost now
could substantially reduce crop yields.
No Recession in Sight
Despite the continuing weaknesses in the district's consumer and agricultural sectors, the district's economy is not yet in a recession. None of the
signs usually associated with a recession have yet appeared in the district.
In a recession, firms normally lay off workers, but many district firms
are now scrambling to hire additional ones. Some labor markets are so
tight that one large firm distributed

handbills throughout its

community calling for more workers.
In a recession, business earnings normally decline, but this hasn't
happened.

For the second quarter, the profits of the district's 41

largest companies were up from a year ago—29 percent this quarter.
In a recession, business requests for loans let up, as businesses
consolidate operations.

But directors report that the demand for

loans remains strong at district banks, as many firms continue to
expand.

Industry Doing Well
Probably the main reason the district is not in a recession is that
industrial sales are so strong.

Manufacturers responding to our Industrial

Expectations Survey reported that their second-quarter sales were up 17 percent
from a year ago and that they look for a 15 percent gain in the current quarter.
Directors from throughout the district indicate that industrial activity
remains strong in their areas, confirming the survey's results.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Declining sales, planned inventory reductions, and rapidly rising prices
characterize business conditions in the Tenth District. Purchasing agents report
continued strong price increases for their inputs. Reflecting in part expectations of declining sales, both purchasing agents and retailers plan to trim
inventories in the months ahead. U.S. farmers expect record crops and, as a
result, prices received by farmers have fallen recently across the board. Agricultural loan demand continues to show strength, however, as does general
business loan demand.
Purchasing agents in the Tenth District report that almost all input
prices are up an average of 7 to 12 per cent over last year, with half reporting
general increases of 10 per cent or more. A large majority of purchasing
agents noted substantial increases within the past three months, and nearly
all those contacted expect further price increases for the remainder of the year.
Input availability seems to be stabilizing according to most companies
contacted, although several reported delivery problems earlier in the year.
Current availability problems are believed to be temporary or seasonal and
are expected to be alleviated soon. Materials inventory levels are generally
satisfactory in the Tenth District, with only a few companies reporting levels
that are too high. However, most purchasing agents contacted are planning to
reduce their inventories.

Reductions are planned because of expected future

declines in sales, and adjustment for prior inventory buildups designed to
avoid further price hikes. Most companies surveyed report adequate or excess
plant capacity. A shortage of tool and die workers and experienced welders
exists in the District, while other workers are in adequate supply.

Tenth District retail sales have generally declined in real terms,
in the year to date, with sales in the past three months slowing somewhat
further.

Some stores had a slight increase in sales during August, probably

due to school resuming. Weak items have been furniture and appliances,
possibly due to a decrease in demand for new homes. Clothing of all types,
especially sweaters and outerwear, and back-to-school items have had strong
sales during the past three months.

Some stores have scheduled clearance

sales earlier this year (2-3 weeks), because of earlier school openings or the
need to improve turnover of merchandise. A majority of the retailers have
not changed their margins but have passed wholesale price increases on to the
consumer. Most stores feel inventory levels are slightly higher than they
would like, and thus anticipate some inventory trimming during the remainder
of the year.

In the final months of 1979, total sales are expected to reach

a slightly higher level than in the 1978 period, with prices expected to rise
further.

Inventory purchases will be approximately the same or slightly lower

than in 1978. Overall expectations for the remainder of the year are cautiously
optimistic, as retailers are apparently not yet experiencing the full effects
of the recession.
Prices received by U.S. farmers in August fell 4 per cent from July
levels. All three major U.S. crops registered price declines as record production forecasts for corn (7.11 billion bushels) and soybeans (2.13 billion
bushels) and a near record forecast for wheat production (2.13 billion
bushels) were released. Prices have declined for meat animals as well,
reflecting increased pork and poultry production and lagging consumer incomes.
While decreased farm prices may signal future moderation in food prices,
consumers can expect an increase of about 11 per cent for this year. Although

farm prices are 11 per cent higher than a year earlier, recent broad price
declines—for cattle and hogs particularly—will likely reduce this year's
cash receipts from farm sales below earlier projections.

Consequently, net

farm income this year may be near the bottom of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's forecast range of $30-34 billion. Until recently, net farm
income had been projected in the upper end of that range.
Most bankers contacted in the Tenth District report that loan demand
is up, both over a year ago and over the last month. Business and agricultural
loans are particularly strong in this District. However, some banks report
stable or weakening demand for consumer, real estate, and construction loans.
All bankers contacted raised their prime lending rates in the last month. As
of September 4, most of the metropolitan area banks had prime rates of 12 1/4
per cent, following the lead of the large money center banks. Most bankers
contacted expect further increases in the prime rate of 1/4 to 3/4 percentage
points by yearend.

Some bankers mentioned tightening other lending terms.

One bank, for example, has shortened maturities on new real estate loans.
Another will only consider floating rates on business loans of over 90 days.
Most bankers said that in general they are being more selective. Demand
deposits grew moderately or were down at most banks. All banks report
declines in savings and small time deposits, but large CD's and money
market certificates have increased at nearly all Tenth District banks.
Most banks contacted believe that deposit growth will improve in the near
future due to seasonal factors.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT - DALLAS
Economic activity in the Eleventh District continues at the reduced
pace of recent months according to Directors and businessmen.
have helped boost auto sales in recent weeks.

Sales promotions

Deposit growth at banks is

sluggish, and many savings and loan associations report net savings outflows.
Mortgage lending in Texas is up slightly, but the availability of credit
remains somewhat constrained by the state's new floating usury ceiling. Bank
lending is at a high level, but the rate of growth appears to be down from
earlier in the year. Manufacturing activity is flat.
Retail sales are improving following a two-month lull. Most of the
gains are coming from improved sales of large cars that are heavily supported
by advertising and price cutting. Most domestic auto dealers report sales are
running at year ago levels. Excess inventories of large cars are slowly being
reduced. Department store sales are described by most executives as recently
improved, but they express concern that sales will weaken in coming months.
Buyers at the recent apparel market in Dallas were quite restrained
in their outlook for clothing sales this coming winter and expressed concern
that declining consumer sentiment would lead to a relatively weak Christmas
sales season. Overall, new orders at the market were level with last year
when adjusted for price increases.
Deposit growth at banks and S&L's is slowing with the decline in real
disposable income and with savers opting for short-term, high-yielding market

instruments.

Respondents report losing savings accounts to money market funds.

Money market certificates remain the mainstay at S&L's, while longer-term
certificates of deposit meet with little popularity at banks and S&L's.
Demand deposits continue to grow at a moderate pace, while activity in ATS
accounts remains flat.
Convential mortgage lending activity in Texas is up slightly following
the adoption of a new floating usury ceiling late last month. However, S&L's
in Texas continue hard pressed for loanable funds. The current permissible
mortgage rate of 11 percent is about 1/2 percentage point below yields in the
secondary market, limiting sales of mortgages by local S&L's in the secondary
market.

In addition, S&L's in the District report either very weak net savings

inflows or actual outflows.

FHA/VA mortgage lending is very strong. Mortgage

rates of about 11 1/2 percent in Louisiana have met with much borrower resistance,
and lending activity has not increased significantly since the lifting of that
state's usury ceiling two months ago. Mortgage-backed municipal bonds are
supporting lending activity in some Louisiana cities.
Bank lending appears to be growing at a somewhat reduced pace compared
to earlier in the year as the rise in the prime rate is having a mild effect
on loan demand.

Commercial borrowing remains strong, while consumer borrowing

is tapering off. Real estate borrowing generally remains strong in Dallas,
Fort Worth and Houston although it appears to be easing somewhat elsewhere in
the District.
Consumer goods industries are posting declines in output, while
capital goods industries continue to show moderate gains. The slowing of

retail sales of furniture and apparel is resulting in declining employment
and output at the manufacturing level. Most furniture manufacturers report,
however, that backlogs remain heavy while new orders are down slightly. Home
furniture sales are slowing, but institutional furniture sales generally appear
to be keeping pace with increased commercial building activity. One furniture
manufacturer noted that thin profit margins are constraining new hiring.
Material supplies are tight, and prices continue to rise rapidly. There
appears to be no large buildup of inventories at the manufacturing level.
Capital goods industries generally report favorable outlooks. Some
slowing of orders for heavy construction equipment is noted, but construction
activity remains strong in the District, keeping production of equipment at a
high level. New orders for mining equipment are strong with one major producer
crediting the large expansion of uranium and lignite mining operations in
South Texas for increased bookings. Large backorders of drilling equipment
were reduced during the first-quarter downturn in drilling activity, and
delivery times have been reduced substantially.

Although new orders are once

again picking up, there is some concern that the expansion of industry-wide
capacity over the past several years may prove to be excessive next year,
especially among drill bit manufacturers.
A buildup of inventories near the end of the distribution channel of
petrochemicals is expected to lead to a reduction of petrochemical output
early next quarter. Inventories at chemical plants remain lean. Several
producers expressed concern that current plant expansions will be coming on
stream just as new orders begin tapering off, resulting in excess capacity.
Exports of petrochemicals continue strong as U.S. producers maintain a price

advantage over the rest of the world. But some softening could occur as more
European chemical facilities come on line.
A series of hail storms damaged approximately 600,000 acres of cotton
in the southern High Plains of Texas in late August.

Corn, soybean, milo, and

sunflower crops were also affected by the storms. Total losses are estimated
to exceed $100 million.
The out-of-control oil well in the Gulf of Mexico is a cause of much
concern for fisheries, resorts, environmentalists, and property owners, and
a substantial decline of tourist business has been reported.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO
Economic strengths continue to overshadow weaknesses in the nine-state
area served by the San Francisco District, although many firms are becoming
increasingly cautious about the outlook.

Capital spending plans for both the

inmediate and longer-range future have not been altered by fears of recession.
Hiring continues strong in most labor markets of the district. Retailers
report relatively strong sales, but have become cautious about future sales,
especially in Southern California.
A large Washington bank reports that the Northwest is still experiencing
very rapid economic growth. A large metals firm says that its capital-spending
plans remain unchanged, and that its capital spending in 1980 should exceed
even its 1979 record. A Southern California utility reports that the expected
slowdown in the housing market has been built into its regional-growth estimates
and financial plans. And a major aircraft producer reports that the crucial
aerospace industry — a "lagging indicator" — has not been measurably affected
by the economic downturn.
Inventories at the manufacturing level have remained relatively
constant. Most retail firms are watching their inventories closely, and are
attempting to keep them quite lean.
Southern California retailers appear to be feeling more of a pinch
than most Westerners, and are becoming increasingly concerned about further
softening in sales trends and overaccumulation of inventories.

Some of these

retailers are scaling back orders for the Christmas season, with the expectation
that holiday sales will be weak to mediocre. Financial institutions involved

with auto-dealer loans are watching their dealers more closely, mainly with
regard to their stocks of unsold cars.
Employment continues high in the West, with demand for skilled labor
skyrocketing, as measured by a continued high volume of help-wanted ads. In
Utah and Idaho, businesses are complaining that they can't find enough applicants
for available positions. Academic institutions in the Northwest continue to
experience significant shortages in the supply of clerical support staff.
And a Los Angeles food-products firm finds very few qualified people available
to fill recurring vacancies in good-paying positions.
Hiring programs remain strong at Northwest aluminum plants, where
operations are running at maximum capacity.

Similarly, the Southern California

aircraft industry, which has a substantial backlog, continues to hire aggressively.
In fact, employment demand remains strong in all components of the regional
aerospace industry.

Demand is also high for workers on commercial construction

projects throughout the West.
Current bank-lending practices remain relatively unchanged, after
having been tightened several months ago. Loan demand has continued very
strong, while the availability of loanable funds has tightened in comparison
with earlier years. Because of rising loan-to-deposit ratios, many bankers are
curtailing real-estate lending activities, and are closely scrutinizing the
quality of all existing credit lines.
Commercial-loan demand is still strong, reflecting the sustained high
levels of business activity.

In general, banks have been willing to accommodate

the demand for short-term business loans, and in Los Angeles, banks are
continuing to compete keenly for this type of loan.

In the area of real-estate

lending, however, banks are exhibiting a healthy degree of caution. Still,
the availability of mortgage credit has held up quite well in the West, although
interest rates have escalated to new highs. Instalment-loan volume is
beginning to soften because of both the energy problem and the softening in
auto sales.

In view of rising consumer-debt ratios, many Western financial

institutions are placing additional emphasis on consumer-loan quality.

