CONFIDENTIAL

(FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 14, 1980

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 7
Fourth District-Cleveland page 10
Fifth District-Richmond page 14
Sixth District-Atlanta page 17
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 25
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 28
Tenth District-Kansas City page 30
Eleventh District-Dallas page 33
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 36

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
Economic activity slowed markedly across the country according
to this month's district reports.

Led by a sharp falloff in automobile

sales, consumer spending has weakened substantially.

There is evidence

of a contraction in sales of other durable goods as well as of nondurables.
The outlook outside the consumer sector was generally pessimistic as well.
Residential construction has ground to a virtual halt, although nonresidential
building remained brisk in several districts.

With a few notable exceptions,

mainly the defense, energy and machine tool industries, a wide crossection
of manufacturing firms reduced their workforces in the face of declining
new orders, shrinking backlogs and rising inventories.

Many firms also began

to reassess capital spending plans, but other than in the auto industry, there
has been little actual retrenchment thus far.

On the financial scene, despite

lower interest rates, business and consumer loan activity remained dormant.
Agricultural loan demand, however, rose about in line with past seasonal
patterns.
Consumer spending weakened across the nation in April.

While the

largest cutbacks continued to be in big-ticket durable items especially autos,
purchases of nondurable goods also slackened.

As a result, there were reports

of excessive retail inventories in several districts.

In the Chicago area,

where demand was particularly depressed, merchants offered large price
reductions and discount programs to trim accumulating stocks.

In contrast,

inventory-sales ratios were reported as acceptable in both Philadelphia and
New York.

Auto stocks were generally lean.

Nevertheless, many dealerships

have gone out of business in the Atlanta, Dallas and San Francisco regions.
Declining consumer credit card usage nationwide contributed importantly to
weakening demand.

Existing credit balances were significantly reduced

according to Atlanta and Richmond, and new credit purchases were down as
much as 20 percent from last April in Dallas with cash buying, as evidenced
in the weak growth in currency nationally, not taking up the slack.
debt collection and bill payments

Slower

were noted in Philadelphia, Chicago and

San Francisco.
Outside the consumer sector, overall business conditions deteriorated
in recent weeks.

Backlogs were worked down, as new orders declined and

lead times were shortened in a variety of industries ranging from
steel in Cleveland and Chicago, to furniture and floor covering in Boston,
to chemicals and electronic supplies in New York.

Inventory liquidation was

reported in Philadelphia, Chicago and Kansas City although excessive stocks
are not yet a problem for New York manufacturers.

As a result of decreased

production activity, workweeks were shortened in Richmond, Philadelphia and
Chicago, and l a y o f f s — b o t h temporary and p e r m a n e n t — h a v e spread.

Both hourly

and salaried employees have been dismissed in the automobile and related
industries in the Chicago and Cleveland areas, while workers in homebuilding
and construction industries have been particularly hard hit in Atlanta and
San Francisco.

Reassessments of capital investment plans were underway by

firms in Boston, New York and St. Louis, but little actual retrenchment has
taken place except in the auto industry.

As with auto employment, these

cutbacks have been concentrated in the nation's midsection.

Input prices

continued to rise in Philadelphia and Kansas City although metals, lumber
and paper prices have all softened in the Boston district.

In contrast to these generally bleak conditions, machine tool
manufacturers in New York and Cleveland appear relatively insulated from
the recession.

In Boston, Dallas, San Francisco and St. Louis the manufacturing

base has been strengthened by the defense industry.

In Minneapolis, defense

procurement contracts have grown by 30 percent in the last two years.
Residential construction continued to stagnate with activity at
a virtual standstill in Atlanta, Cleveland and St. Louis.
are 50 percent below last year in Kansas City.
building have also been especially depressed.

Housing starts

Industries related to home
The plywood industry in San

Francisco has been operating at less than half capacity.

Estimated joblessness

in construction and related industries ranged between 20 and 40 percent in
Chicago.

At major lumber and plywood mills in the San Francisco district,

one-sixth or more of the workers have been furloughed.

Nonresidential

building, however, remained brisk in Minneapolis, St. Louis and San Francisco.
Reflecting weakening loan demand across the nation, shortterm interest rates declined sharply.

Still, relatively high interest rates

and growing economic uncertainty continued to discourage business and consumer
borrowers alike.

Moreover, nonprice lending terms were tightened in Kansas

City, New York and San Francisco.

Business loan demand eased in all districts

although demand by energy industries remained strong in Dallas.

New York

reported some companies shifted to the long-term bond and commercial paper
markets to meet credit needs.

Although home mortgage rates are well below

recent peaks, little activity was noted in Kansas City or Cleveland although
in Chicago and St. Louis, a few loans were made.
personal bankruptcies was noted.
in Richmond.

In Atlanta, a surge in

Auto instalment loans were especially weak

Agricultural loan demand rose seasonally but this sector, as
others, was affected by comparatively high interest rates and escalating
uncertainty.

Some bankers are concerned about repayment ability because

of generally rising agricultural costs and declining prices for food.
Farm credit was tight in Chicago but adequate in Atlanta, Dallas and
Richmond.

Slower repayments and increased renewals and extensions, how-

ever, became common in Richmond, while in Chicago many farmers restricted
purchases, especially df equipment, in order to ease their credit needs.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Signs of recession are becoming more widespread
Retail sales have slowed.
nonresidential activity.

in the First

District.

Homebuilding is depressed although there is still
Manufacturers of consumer products have seen a

marked decline in demand, but firms producing capital goods continue to do well.
Input prices are softening.

A number of respondents commented on the suddeness

of the change; sales in March were very good but April brought a decided
weakening.
Retail sales have slowed.
experienced a falling off in demand.

Department stores and specialty shops have
However, sales at discount

stores remain strong and may even have picked up.

department

The head of a chain with

both general department stores and discount operations observes that

discount

sales in early April exceeded expectations while sales of general merchandise
suddenly fell behind.

Consumers are said to be very price

In manufacturing

conscious.

there is a clear distinction between the experience

of firms in consumer related areas and those producing capital goods.

Those

selling to consumer markets have seen a sharp deterioration in sales.

A wide

range of products has been affected, including such diverse items as appliances,
handtools and hardware, silverware, and eyeglasses.

The furniture and floor

covering industries were said to be weak several months ago, but now they are
described as "disaster areas."

The weakness at the consumer level is having

second and third order effects although changes at this level are not as severe
as in the manufacture of the consumer goods themselves.

Orders are down for

motors used in air conditioners, automobile plastics and for packaging materials.
The capital goods industries, on the other hand, are still doing well.

However,

several firms said they are reassesing their own capital spending plans.
remains a source of strength.

Input prices are softening.

and zinc prices are all down from the end of the year.

Defense

Copper, lead, tin,

Lumber prices are said

to have weakened a lot and there has been a softening in paper prices.

Some

plastics prices remain low even though plastics are petroleum based and costs
have increased sharply.
Loan demand has slowed although two large banks in southern New England
report that demand remains surprisingly strong.

Banks are looking carefully

at loan requests.
Professors Samuelson, HouChakker,
comment

and Eckstein were available

this month.
Samuelson believes

in a recession."
deep and

long.

that "the medicine has w o r k e d — w e are

He is not confident, however,
Although

the demand

for domestic

for some time, consumption spending generally
resiliance" until a month or two ago.

that

certainly

this recession will be

autos may remain

showed

depressed

"special signs of

"The consumer has not

learned a

permanent

lesson;" so even though

quarters,

it is too soon to say that consumers are now adopting more

conservative

spending habits.

demand ana the general
the impending

the saving rate may rise in the next

This

fundamental strength

lack of "excess

inventories" may

two

in consumption
limit

the size of

slump.

Samuelson believes

the large increase in April's unemployment

"may contain some noise, but there is still plenty of message
Fed."

for

"This is precisely

stock coupled with
that money demand

the time for easing off."

the larger-than-expected
is very weak.

Unless

for the

The declining

drop in interest

interest rates drop

rate

rates

money
implies

further, money

growth will fall short of the Fed's targets.
rates to rise sharply
exceed

the target.

The Fed allowed

in 1979 and early 1980 so that money growth would not

Unless

it is a "foul weather friend," the Fed must now

allow rates to fall to keep money growth on target and build
for its new operating

interest

credibility

procedures.

Houthakker sees no radical surprises in the latest economic

data.

He still believes real output at the end of this year will equal output
year-end

1979.

His research suggests that consumption and

demand will not collapse during

investment

1980.

Houthakker supports the current
however, should be prepared

for

targets for Ml growth.

The Fed,

to allow interest rates to fall enough so that

money growth does not fall below target.

Even if the slump is more

severe

than he now foresees, Houthakker encourages the Fed not to revise its money
growth

targets.
Eckstein believes real GNP will decline about 8 percent at an

annual rate this quarter led by falling consumption spending; over the
course of the coming recession, output will decline 3.5 percent; and the
unemployment rate will peak at 8.5 percent.

Eckstein believes that "the

recent credit controls confused and frightened people," and the lesson he
draws from this experience is that the "government should not play with the
psyche of consumers."
Eckstein believes that the Fed should try to achieve its current
M-1A growth targets.
now endorse.

This is a better policy than any other the Fed might

"With this monetarist principle,

interest rates should

decline sharply and then rebound abruptly later in the year, a V-shaped
profile."

SECOND D I S T R I C T — N E W YORK

Business activity in the Second District continued to lose momentum
in April.

Consumer spending weakened at major department stores across the

district at the same time that automobile sales were lethargic.
consumer sector, the outlook was generally pessimistic.

Outside the

Manufacturing

firms

in many industries have started to reduce their workforces in the face of
declining new orders and shrinking backlogs.

Cautious inventory

however, appear to have kept stocks from growing excessive.

policies,

Many firms also

have began to reassess capital spending plans, but there has been only limited retrenchment

thus far.

On the financial side, business loan demand at

major New York City banks slowed as some companies shifted to the long-term
corporate bond and commercial paper markets to meet credit needs.
Consumer spending in the Second District weakened in April.
eleven-day transit strike in New York City contributed

The

to the downturn at

metropolitan stores, but a similar slackening occurred throughout

the region.

While monthly sales comparisons are distorted by the effects of the transit
strike and timing of the early Easter selling season, merchants voiced

con-

cern that the recent poor performance of sales was indicative of a more
prolonged economic slowdown.

Credit financing of sales fell at a major

department store chain, while another store reported a shift from credit to
cash transactions.

This downturn is occuring although relatively

little

reportedly is being done by these respondents to directly discourage credit
card usage.

In spite of lagging sales, conservative inventory policies have

kept stocks at acceptable levels.

Domestic car sales fell sharply in A p r i l .

With few

dealers in the Second District reported a severe falloff
truck purchases.
50 percent.

exceptions,

in new car and

In some instances, sales declined by as much as 40 to

In the last 10-day selling period in the month, floor

at one dealership
being booked.

reportedly ceased

traffic

and as a result, no new orders w e r e

Demand for used cars, however, has remained relatively

strong

and their prices are rising sharply due to the increasing scarcity of

supply

as potential buyers postpone the replacement of their old models until they
are no longer serviceable.

Dealers in New Y o r k State w e r e concerned

the state's usury ceiling on automobile loans was restricting

that

financing.

A l l of the respondents felt that local financing problems w e r e being

exag-

gerated by media coverage, which was scaring away even those customers
eligible for finance company loans.

Dealer stocks are lean,

reflecting dim sales prospects and the high cost of financing

still

however,
inventories.

Outside the consumer sector, overall business conditions also have
deteriorated

in recent weeks.

A sharp, dramatic falloff in new orders and

a shortening in lead times was reported by manufacturers

in such diverse

industries as paper products, chemicals, consumer and industrial metals,
electronic and photographic supplies and steel.

Several firms have begun

to reduce their staffs both through attrition and layoffs.
of a major metals manufacturer,
workforce.

In some

layoffs have affected 30 percent of

divisions
the

In contrast to other District producers, m a c h i n e tool manufac-

turers so far h a v e been relatively insulated

from the downturn.

at these firms are still growing as new orders remain strong.
raw m a t e r i a l prices have abated, cost pressures remain intense.
and energy costs have continued

to rise.

Despite the uncertain

Backlogs
W h i l e some
Both labor
economic

conditions and the high cost of financing, however, relatively few firms
have marked down their capital investment plans.

With the exception of a

major chemical firm, which reported excessive inventory stocks,

inventories

remain at acceptable levels.
In general, the industrial outlook became more markedly pessimistic
during April.

Expectations of a longer and deeper recession have grown.

Upstate business leaders note widespread layoffs in construction and autorelated industries.

Downstate, further economic dislocations are imminent

with the planned closing of a major New Jersey auto plant in June.

This

shutdown will result in direct permanent job losses to 3,700 workers in
addition to the 800 already laid off.

Further job cutbacks and losses in

income are expected as the ripple effects of this plant closing work through
the local economy.

Most respondents do not anticipate a recovery in national

business activity until the first half of 1981.

But, with the exception of

a steel industry spokesman who feared the effects of continuing inflation and
foreign competition, the long-run outlook for the 1980's remains positive with
strong growth in demand expected for all products.
The weakening in business activity has been reflected in credit
demands.

New York City banks have experienced a sharp easing in business

loan demand, which they expect to continue over the remainder of the year.
While there has been some tightening in non-price lending terms, senior

loan

officers attribute most of the weakness to a combination of the recessionary
environment, the lean inventory situation, and some shifting to long-term
financing.

Moreover, given the current spread between the prime rate and

commercial paper rates, some firms apparently have recently turned to the
commercial paper market for short-term funds.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District in May point to a slowdown that is gaining
steam and spreading to a variety of sectors. Manufacturers in the District say industrial
activity has taken another large dip this month, and retailers report sluggish, but still
better than anticipated, sales. Representatives of both sectors say the future holds only
bleak prospects. District bankers say C<JcI loan volume is up from a year ago, but has
virtually dropped off the board since March. Further declines are expected as the U.S.
slips into a recession.
Area manufacturing activity appears to have slowed quite a bit this month,
according to the most recent Business Outlook Survey. About half of the manufacturers
polled in May say general business conditions are worse than they were in April,
continuing the slump in the industrial sector that began nine months ago. Recent trends
in specific indicators of business activity have been consistent with this general decline.
Both new orders and shipments are down again and producers' backlogs have diminished
substantially. Inventory liquidation has continued. On the employment front, almost a
quarter of the respondents to the survey have trimmed their payrolls and cut working
hours.
For the longer term, survey respondents are projecting only a marginal
increase in overall business activity in the next six months. New orders are expected to
increase, with shipments rising as well, but inventories will remain tight. Employers still
foresee some cuts in the average workweek, with fewer predicting layoffs.

Prices are up again in May in the industrial sector. Input costs are higher this
month for about two-thirds of the surveyed manufacturers, while prices of finished goods
they sell have been increased by about half.

As for the future, 71 percent of the

respondents expect raw material costs to be higher by November and 62 percent plan
price hikes for their products.
Area retailers report only slight growth in sales in April, with hard goods
bearing the brunt of the slowdown. Current dollar sales are running 1 to 6 percent over
year-ago figures, which is better than was generally anticipated. Most retailers surveyed
had expected a decline in nominal terms of 1 to 2 percent, but balmy summer weather
has bolstered sales to some degree.

Having anticipated a slowdown, retailers cut

inventories accordingly, so inventory-sales ratios are in good shape.

All retailers

contacted said collection of debt had slowed somewhat, but responses were mixed
regarding consumer willingness to continue to buy on credit.
Local merchants are projecting a continued decline in sales through the next
two quarters, with a possible pickup in December. They feel the election in November
should help, as consumers have traditionally been optimistic after Presidential elections,
and that the overall economy may start to show signs of recovery by year-end.
In the financial sector, bankers report mixed activity in May. Commercial
loan volume is up 10 to 13 percent over a year ago, but activity in the last month has
dropped off sharply. Consumer loans are down, as bankers continue to discourage retail
borrowing. Looking ahead to the next six months, projections indicate that loan volume
will continue to drop as the economy slips deeper into a recession.
Bankers in the Third District are currently quoting a prime rate of 17 1/2
percent. Projections of the prime show a continued drop, leaving the rate 300 to 600
basis points below its current level by the third quarter, and even lower by year-end.

Deposit flows at commercial banks are "not dangerously tight" at this point,
and bankers anticipate improvement as interest rates fall. Many consumers are starting
to move out of money market certificates, as yields drop, and into the longer-term thirty
month certificates in order to lock in a higher return on their money.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Respondents

in the Fourth District generally agree that the economy

is in the early phases of a deep recession, but opinions vary on the depth
of the recession and the extent of the recovery.

Perhaps the most

optimistic

comments came from the machine tool officials who still report better-thanexpected strength in new orders.

However, the business sector as a whole is

apprehensive amid signs that the slump in automobiles and auto-related

products

is spreading to other consumer goods.

District banks have experienced

declines

in consumer loans, mostly concentrated

in auto loans, and a dramatic decline in

the growth of C&I loans as a result of high interest rates and credit
Housing continues to slump despite declining mortgage

restraints.

rates.

The economic outlook continues to deteriorate, with rising prospects
for a worse than "average" recession.

An auto industry economist states that

April figures will show that the recession is no longer concentrated in autos
and housing.

A durable-goods producer is concerned that the sharp decline in

April may be a harbinger of a recession rivaling 1973-1975.

He, along with

several other economists, expects the second quarter decline in economic
activity to be about the worst of the recession.

However, the decline is so

sharp and so sudden that several respondents now see a recovery to be sluggish.
An economist for the steel industry states that firms have not had time to
adjust to the collapse in orders, so that no firm or industry will be in a
position to lead a recovery.

A bank economist notes that even the decline in

interest rates is unlikely to provide much stimulus because the decline has
been so sharp that it has raised expectations of further declines in the near
term.

A few economists, however, expect a sharp rebound in response to the

rapid decline in interest rates, a tax cut, and completion of

inventory

liquidation.
The machine tool industry has not exhibited any major softening in
orders in recent weeks, according to several industry spokesmen.
nominal terms have held up better-than-expected.

Orders in

Effects of the recession

on the industry will be delayed until the profit squeeze among customers is
intensified and evidence of the severity of the recession is apparent.

A

capital-goods producer reports that capital spending plans have not yet been
cancelled.

However, a major auto producer recently announced plans to cut

back capital spending over the next few years, except for retooling, and a
steel producer is petitioning the EPA to allow stretching of compliance deadlines until cash-flow improves.

Nevertheless, an economist for a machine tool

builder states that a decline in machine tool orders

(in nominal or real

terms) is unlikely to be as serious as in 1974-1975 because of continued need
for retooling in the automotive industry, strength in the aerospace

industry,

a buildup in defense spending and a tendency for some companies to look
beyond the current

recession.

Some retailers are uncertain over where the trough in consumer
spending is, and see little happening to build consumer confidence in the
near-term.

Among nondurable goods, consumers are reacting to high prices by

reducing usage and shifting to generic names, according
household products.

to a producer of

Several retailers note a majority of consumer

since February has concentrated on sale items.

purchases

A spokesman for a major food

chain reports that consumers are shifting to fresh rather than prepared
although frozen food discount stores are thriving.

foods,

The decline in retail

business is not expected to result in layoffs, but will

lead to a reduction

of hours worked, according to an area retailer.
Automobiles and auto-related products continue to be the hardest hit
consumer goods.
dismal.

Spring car sales, according to an industry economist, are

One official blamed high interest rates, credit restraints, and shift

in consumer preference to 4 cylinder cars for the drop in domestic new car
sales.

Some improvement is expected by fall because of new small cars by Ford

and Chrysler.

If interest rates drop further and credit restraints are

lifted, auto dealers are not expected to carry large inventories and are
unlikely to discount as heavily as in recent weeks.

Several auto dealers

report that the slump in sales also includes used cars, which is unusual for
recessions.

Tire shipments, which are 30% below year-ago levels, reflect

slump in auto sales, although an industry economist states that

the

inventories

are at a two-month level, compared to a nearly three-month supply in 1974-1975.
Gasoline sales are off as much as 10% from year-ago levels as a result of a
shift to more fuel-efficient

cars and higher prices, according to a petroleum

economist.
Weakness in consumer spending has led to sharp production
among consumer-goods manufacturers and their suppliers.

cutbacks

A major producer of

household appliances reports that a weak replacement market, coupled with the
housing slump, has contributed to a widespread decline in consumer durable
goods orders.

Order books for steel, according to an industry economist, have

collapsed, with order entries now 50% below month-ago levels and
well above normal.

cancellations

Except for oil field drilling equipment, the decline in

orders is pervasive and would sustain only 50% of existing steel capacity.

Although still relatively strong, orders in the aluminum industry also dropped
substantially in the last two weeks of April, according to an industry
District bankers report little problem staying within credit
guidelines.

economist.
restraint

High interest rates have finally discouraged C&I loans, according

to a bank economist.

Several bankers report that funds are available and an

area manufacturer reports that some banks are initiating offers of expanding
credit lines.

An economist in the capital goods industry notes that

declining

interest rates have resulted in replacement of old debt, but not much new
borrowing.

Several auto dealers report an inability to sell commercial paper

to banks because of bank restrictions on the growth of credit.

A bank

economist reports that credit card purchases have also declined and bank
credit card cash advances are off 5% from a January peak.
Mortgage lending rates by S&Ls dropped sharply in recent weeks.
Several S&Ls report lowering mortgage notes from a 16-17% range to a 14-15% range,
with some to 13%, because of weakening demand and declining marginal cost of
funds.

However, some officials feel that a 12-13% range may be

to stimulate housing demand.

insufficient

The severe slump in new housing sales continued

through April and a major regional builder of new houses reports net sales
are 25% of year-ago levels and cancellations have been heavy.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Most indications are that business activity in the Fifth District
during April.

slowed

Manufacturers surveyed report declines in shipments, new orders,

and order backlogs.

Retail sales also weakened, although much of the decline

may be attributed to durable goods, particularly home furnishings and
which often involve credit sales.
ductions in credit sales.

appliances,

A number of retailers note significant

Despite lower interest rates, commercial and

trial loan activity has weakened considerably in recent weeks.

re-

indus-

The weakness

in consumer credit, especially auto instalment loans, and home mortgage loans
continues.

On balance, the high interest rates and increased costs of other

farm inputs have combined to reduce demand for farm loans at banks well below
a year ago.

Much slower loan demand than a year earlier was also in evidence

at production credit associations and Federal land banks.
Over half of the District manufacturers surveyed experienced
in new orders and order backlogs over the month.
down by more than a third of the respondents.

declines

Shipments were reported

Inventories of materials were

unchanged and stocks of finished goods rose only very slightly in April.
Nonetheless, more manufacturers find inventories excessive now than a month
ago.

Manufacturing employment has shown

little change in recent weeks, but

the length of the workweek has fallen at a number of establishments.

The decline

in manufacturing activity has been, to date, more remarkable for its breadth
than for its depth.

Industries experiencing softness in their particular

markets include textiles, building materials, chemicals, primary metals, and
furniture.

This weakness does not seem to pervade any industry, however, but

is affecting individual plants.

One sizable plant formerly producing

fibers and employing over 900 workers has closed

permanently.

synthetic

Recent retail sales activity may be best described as spotty.
According to our directors and retail respondents sales activity in home
furnishings, home improvements, and appliance lines has been very weak.
Activity in other non-auto lines, however, seems to have held up well in
most areas.

On balance, retail respondents experienced

month-to-month

declines in total sales and in relative sales of big ticket items.

In-

ventories at the retail level also fell over the month but remain somewhat
above desired

levels.

Expectations of District respondents deteriorated
past month.

sharply over the

An overwhelming majority of retailers and manufacturers

expect

the level of general business activity nationally to worsen over the next
six months.

A majority of manufacturers also expect business in their

respective market areas and individual firms to weaken over that time
period.

Of retailers surveyed half foresee declining activity within their

market areas and individual

firms.

Declines in market interest rates are showing up in consumer loan
markets and mortgage interest rates have fallen 1 to 2 points in many areas.
Large Fifth District banks have kept pace with the money center banks in
lowering their prime lending rates.

Nonetheless, commercial and

loan activity has weakened considerably in recent weeks.

industrial

The weakness

appearing now partly reflects a movement to cheaper, nonbank sources of
funds by large national customers of area banks, especially utilities and
nondurable goods manufacturers.
auto instalment loans, continues.

The weakness in consumer credit,

especially

Outstanding instalment loans at weekly

reporting banks have actually declined over the past month, reflecting
reductions in auto loans and personal cash loans.

These declines seem

largely related to changes in consumer attitudes toward borrowing and to

the high price of credit.

It has also been reported that consumer

attitudes

toward use of credit cards is becoming more conservative, with usage falling
and repayments rising.

Delinquencies on consumer loans have not become

a problem to area banks.
Our first quarter survey of farm credit conditions suggests that
District farmers, by and large, have been hard hit by the effects of inflation, the sharply higher interest rates, and recent monetary policy
actions.

The supply of production credit seems adequate to meet demand

in most sections of the District.

On balance, higher interest rates and

increased costs of other farm inputs have combined to reduce demand for farm
loans at banks, production credit associations, and Federal land banks
well below a year ago.

Bank supplies of loanable funds declined

during

the quarter but remained only slightly below year-earlier levels.

While

there is some evidence that liquidity pressures are greater than in the same
period last year, loan-to-deposit ratios of surveyed banks averaged
fractionally above a year ago.

only

Loan repayment rates have slowed and are

sharply below a year earlier, while renewals or extensions are significantly
higher.

Moreover, collateral requirements have risen to a new high.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

District economic conditions were decidedly recessionary.
sumers retrenched, and real sales for merchants contracted.
dealers continued

to face reductions in unit sales.

Con-

Automobile

Residential

struction and real estate sales crept along at a snail's pace.

conAlthough

nonresidential construction was vigorous in some areas, many developers
are postponing construction starts until interest rates recede.

Layoffs

advanced sharply at automotive and building materials establishments.
considerable rise in personal and business bankruptcies

occurred.

The normal spurt in spring sales failed to materialize
retailers.

A

for most

Excluding automobiles, reports of shrinking retail sales

volumes were typical and represented activity in nearly all parts of the
District.

Appreciable reductions in restaurant

purchases were frequently mentioned.

traffic and credit card

Many retailers observed a pickup

in repayment rates for charge accounts.

After a 25-percent decline in

credit report requests, a credit bureau director believes consumers are
in a state of shock and are now sitting on the

sidelines.

Automobile dealers struggled with the falloff in sales.
sales were below March figures and sharply below year-ago

Unit

levels.

Numerous contacts believe potential customers are waiting for automobile
loan rates to descend, and, until then, an upturn in sales is not expected.

Inventories remained at lowest possible levels.

The most

strik-

ing comment came from an Alabama director who said 21 auto dealers in
the state closed

their doors during April.

The residential real estate sector remained

in the doldrums.

Housing starts were at very low levels across the District, even in
Florida, and ubiquitous drops in residential building permits did not
augur well for the future.

Also, home sales slid drastically

eastern Florida and were off significantly

in Birmingham.

in south-

In a small

northeastern Tennessee city, the inventory of unsold houses was at its
highest level in many years.
Nonresidential construction activity and plans were
fairly brisk.

still

Numerous announcements regarding hotel, office,

and/or

retailing complexes were made; however, most developers were expected
postpone the commencement of construction until relatively
financing terms can be arranged.

The announcements

hotel, office, and retail shopping complex intended

to

favorable

included a large
to revitalize down-

town Mobile, two substantial complexes in New Orleans, and one in Tampa.
Also, six large-scale projects, including a 50-story World Trade Center,
were in progress or are planned for Miami.

The projects

in the planning

stages will be delayed until QIV:1980 or QI:1981 due to the lower
rates anticipated at that time.

interest

Jacksonville and Baton Rouge reported

good nonresidential construction activity.

On the other hand,

commercial

construction was judged to be at a low ebb in Birmingham and in Tennessee.
Layoffs dealt a resounding blow to automotive and building
materials firms throughout the District.

The 'shortfall in auto sales

caused the indefinite layoff of nearly 350 workers at two Mississippi
Packard Electric facilities where automotive wiring harnesses are assembled, 200 employees at GM's Saginaw Steering Gear Division in Decatur,
Alabama, and about 750 workers at the Nashville Ford Glass Plant.

Also,

cutbacks at tire manufacturing

firms in Alabama, Georgia, and

Tennessee

were abundant.
Work force reductions in construction-related
peppered

the District.

industries

ITT-Rayonier laid off about 90 employees at a

lumber mill near Augusta, Georgia, and almost 200 combined at two Florida
lumber mills.

St. Regis Paper Company curtailed operations at three

lumber mills in Georgia and one in Florida.

Weyerhaeuser shut down a

lumber mill in central Alabama, placing 150 workers on unemployment.
Georgia-Pacific closed indefinitely

four plywood mills in the D i s t r i c t —

one in Alabama, two in Georgia, and one in Louisiana.

The

construction

downturn also caused the laying off of 700 workers at a central Alabama
foundry due to a reduction in pipe orders.
manufacturing

An Augusta, Georgia, brick

concern closed one of six plants, displacing about

100

workers.
Several contacts commented on a surge in bankruptcies.

A

southern Alabama contact, who predicts a disaster in the consumer borrowing field, reported an accelerating rate of bankruptcies

in his area.

In one central Alabama city, personal bankruptcies jumped from March to
April, and in a northeastern Tennessee city business and personal bankruptcies advanced markedly over year-ago levels.

Business loan demand

was very soft in central Alabama despite prime rate reductions.
central Florida, a banker reported

sagging loan demand

in all

In

sectors.

Consumer loans were down for a Miami bank and showed no growth at a
large Atlanta bank.
The District's agricultural sector was burdened with widespread
uncertainty created by high interest rates, escalated production

costs,

and an unstable, mostly declining, price structure for farm products.
Many encountered
even.

a credit crunch and will have a difficult

time breaking

Hog prices, which have fallen for many months, reached an eight-

year low and, consequently, have depressed prices of broilers, a close
substitute for pork in consumers' diets.
considering

leaving the business.

Numerous hog producers are

Cotton plantings grew by almost

12

percent due to anticipated higher prices, 30 percent above year-ago
levels.
various

Recent periods of dry weather encouraged
crops.

the rapid planting of

SEVarcH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

The business decline that developed on a broad front in March, spread
to additional sectors in April and May.
for large items and luxury goods.

Retail sales have slumped, especially

Reports of layoffs and short weeks are fre-

quent from manufacturers of a wide variety of consumer and producer goods.
Residential construction activity already has dropped much more than in 197**75, and nonresidential activity is expected to weaken in the second half as
existing commitments are worked out.

Easing credit conditions of the past

several weeks will have a salutary effect on seme of the businesses, consumers,
and farmers who have been hardest pressed.

While gloom prevails in agricul-

tural areas because of poor income prospects, plantings are off to a fine start.
Economists have been revising economic forecasts downward.

For

example, one of Chicago's best-known bank economists told reporters on Friday
that conditions have deteriorated faster than expected, and that the recession
may be the "longest and most severe since the 1930s."

Among the industries

that have made new cuts in sales estimates for 1980 are motor vehicles, steel,
building materials, farm equipment, and construction equipment.
We have no evidence of an upswing in defense procurement in line with
the Administration's statements.

Defense contractors located in this district

say that any acceleration has been in R&D contracts, mainly in New England.
Parchasing managers in Chicago and Milwaukee report that the March
declines in output, employment, new orders, backlogs, and inventories accelerated in April.

In Milwaukee, where capital goods predominate, April's drop

was described as "precipitous," and reflected preparations dating back 12
months or more when recession ferrs were first expressed.

For Milwaukee,

58 percent reported shorter lead times on purchased items in April, -while only
2 percent reported longer lead times, an almost exact reversal of the report
for April 1979*

Price increases have moderated with bids reflecting more

competitive markets.
National retailers report sales depressed everywhere, but with major
areas of the Seventh District particularly bad.

Consumers have been holding

back on big-ticket items and have restricted credit use.

One retailer ex-

presses regret that it will not have to establish a special deposit under the
credit restraint program.
mainly by lenders.

Before March, consumer credit was being restricted

Now, restraint appears to be more from the demand side.

Inventories that had appeared slim now seen excessive, and reduction programs
are underway.

Many retailers have been offering unusual price concessions,

to stimulate sales, e.g., 10 percent store-wide discounts, substantial reductions on men's clothing, special cuts on multiple purchases, etc.

Air travel

has declined since February, and is now expected to be off 6 percent for the
year.

Consumers are said to be delaying payments on bills owed to profes-

sionals, and postponing new obligations, especially in the case of dentists.
Prospects for the motor vehicle industry continue to deteriorate.
Further

layoffs—temporary, indefinite, or permanent—are reported for parts

and materials plants, as well as assembly plants.
nent, are underway for salaried workers.

Deep cuts, probably perma-

Capital spending programs for sub-

sequent years are being scaled down, mainly by reducing the number of new
models requiring retooling.

So far, regular jobless pay and SUB payments,

increasingly supplemented by "trade adjustment assistance," are helping to
maintain worker incomes.

But the longer-term picture is grim for Michigan,

which has almost ko percent of vehicle employment.

Michigan concentrates on

the hard-hit big cars and trucks, it has most of the redundant overhead personnel, and it has most of the obsolescent plants to be closed.
Revival of the motor vehicle industry will be made more difficult
because of the demise of numerous large dealers, seme located in prosperous
areas, who are essential for maximum sales.

Auto companies also complain that

dealers are not carrying adequate stocks to take advantage of sales opportunities.
Substantial layoffs have occurred, or are scheduled, in the farm and
construction equipment industries.

This is significant because the three

largest companies had strikes in the current fiscal y e w that lasted 18, 79 >
and 172 days, respectively.
Orders for steel dropped abruptly in late March and have remained depressed.

Cuts by motor vehicles producers continue, and new weakness has

developed in farm and construction equipment, structural steel, and prefab
buildings.

A local steel company has reduced its estimate of second quarter

shipments by 15 percent in recent weeks.
Paperboard orders in physical units, which had leveled off in the
spring of 1979, were 6 percent below last year in March, and probably by a
similar margin in April.

Many customers have cut back on paperboard orders

as they have reduced workweeks.

Production of household appliances, lawn

equipment, outboard motors, and other large consumer goods shipped in boxes
is down more or less sharply.
Home mortgage rates have been dropping rapidly from the 16.5-17 percent peaks posted in mid-April.

More important, some new loans are actually

being negotiated again, in contrast to the virtual halt in the March-April
period.

The decline in new residential construction will not be reversed

quickly.

Too many builders have called off plans for 1980, and some buildup

in finished properties has occurred.

In the Chicago area, only 700 permits

for single-faaily homes were issued in the first quarter.

This is off 8U

percent from 1978 and 6l percent below the depressed period of 1975.
ment permits are down almost as much.
centers are similar.

Apart-

Reports from other large district

Estimates of the jobless rate for construction workers

range from 20 to Uo percent—with many on short weeks.

Demand for ready-mix

concrete, gypsum board, hardboard, lumber, plumbing fixtures, built-in appliances, and carpeting is way off with accompanying layoffs in manufacturing,
distribution, and installation.

Layoffs by realtors and title companies axe

also significant.
Tight credit conditions and bleak farm income prospects continue to
have an adverse Impact on Seventh District agriculture.
farmland values down in the first quarter.
in only one other quarter—in 1977.

Our survey shows

Since i960 these values dropped

Average rates on farm loans at rural

banks rose from 13.5 percent in January to 17 percent in April.

While bankers

have been rationing credit, they also report a steep decline in demand.
Farmers are restricting purchases of all types, especially equipment.

Recent

evidence suggests that rural credit conditions may be easing as outflows of
funds associated with high market rates slow down.

Spring plantings have

an excellent start, but scanty rainfall and low topsoil moisture raise concern
about seed gemination.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Business conditions in the Eighth District continued to deteriorate
in April.

Consumer spending for durable goods, such as cars, trucks,

appliances, and home furnishings, declined further and some softening in
nondurable goods, such as clothing, was also noted.
reported to be at the lowest rate since the 1974-75
Manufacturing has slowed

New home sales are
recession.

further in a number of industries,

including

automobile assembly and related industries and home building product
industries.

On the positive side, manufacturing activity remains

fairly

strong for some capital goods products, particularly defense-oriented
energy-saving equipment.

and

Nonresidential construction has also held up well,

but fewer new projects were reported.

In the financial area, loan demand

has declined rapidly in recent weeks, and most interest

rates have dropped

sharply.
Consumer spending is reported
weeks.

to have slackened

further in recent

There has been a sizable reduction in consumer credit demand as

reflected

in credit card use.

charge balances.

Consequently, retailers report a downturn

in

Sales of big-ticket items are quite sluggish, and some

soft good sales have also deteriorated, but not to the extent of durable
goods.

Sales of both domestic and foreign-built

to decline in recent weeks, although
large domestic cars.
major

automobiles have continued

the decline has been most

severe for

Automobile dealers point to higher interest rates as a

factor discouraging sales.

On the other hand, dealers in auto parts

and repair materials are reportedly doing well.

Gasoline dealers

indicate

that sizable decreases in gasoline sales have occurred
that inventories are at relatively high

in recent months and

levels.

Representatives of the manufacturing sector reported
declines in unit sales in recent weeks.

further

With decreases in automobile and

truck sales, assembly plants have announced

additional layoffs of workers

and so have industries supplying parts for the manufacture of new
automobiles.

With the sharp decline in sales of new homes, building

materials industries, such as manufacturers

of lumber and connector

plates,

as well as manufacturers of appliances and furniture are experiencing a
decline in new orders.
that depressed

A representative of a major chemical firm reported

sales of automobiles and homes are beginning to affect the

sales of plastics and fiber

products.

Nevertheless, manufacturing activity of industries
energy-efficient

producing

and defense-related equipment remains quite

strong.

Foreign demand for a number of products, such as chemicals and
likewise remains strong.
holding up well

plastics,

While demand for capital goods appears to be

in general, several firms are reported

to be currently

reviewing their capital expenditure budgets in view of the decline in
economic

activity.
Residential building activity remains at a virtual

throughout the District.

standstill

Most home builders have cut back a substantial

portion of their work force, and some are reported
Reports of falling interest

to be near

bankruptcy.

rates are encouraging, but some feel that the

decline in rates will not generate sales in the immediate future because of
the expectation that rates will fall still further.

Nonresidential

building

remains fairly strong, reflecting large backlogs of projects.

General

contractors report that major projects continue to be funded, but that many
small jobs are being postponed or

cancelled.

Loans by major commercial banks in the District
consumers, and real estate developers have declined

to business,

sharply.

Only

agricultural loans have posted gains, reflecting seasonal increases in these
loans at planting time.
few mortgage loans.

Savings and loan associations are also making very

As a result of the drop in loan demand, interest

have begun to fall rapidly.
from about 20 percent

rates

The prime commercial bank rate has declined

to 17 1/2 percent, and the mortgage rate from about

1/2 percent to 15 percent.

16

Some savings and loan officials indicate that

the mortgage rate is likely to fall even more in the near future, and one
association has already reduced the rate to 12 3/4 percent.

In St. Louis,

two savings and loan associations have instigated the new "rollover"
mortgage (which permits an adjustment

in the rate charged), but they have

not been successful in marketing this type of loan.

Savings and loan

industry representatives are more optimistic about the prospects

for

improved profit margins with the decline in money market rates, but point
out that they are still being squeezed by the continuing shift from passbook
savings to higher yielding CD's.
Demand

for farm credit is reported

to be up from a year ago, but

bankers report that this credit is being supplied at competitive rates.

In

a number of communities, bankers are lending to farmers at lower rates than
to others in order to avoid the loss of their customers
Credit Association.

to the Production

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District economy is closer to a recession than it was a month
ago.

Sinoe last month, a decline in farm income, combined with reduced

and spending, has increased
off workers.

lending

the number of firms curbing production and

laying

The recession hasn't arrived, though, because investment

spend-

ing, manufacturing output, and planting intentions indicate district output is
still

increasing.

The Recession Is Getting Closer
Our

last

report

. . .

stated

that

the

district

had

been

moving

toward

a

recession, and in April it moved even closer.
In April

farm

income

fell

again.

Our

last

report

indicated

that

combination of falling prices and rising costs was reducing farm income.
income

fell

further

last

month,

as

farm prices

decreased

4.5 percent

a

Farm

between

March and April.
In

addition,

rates decreased,

lending

they were

declined

further

still very high,

nesses continued to reduce their borrowing.

and

in April.
district

Although
consumers

interest
and

busi-

Home loan applications at Minnea-

polis/St. Paul S&Ls, for example, declined 60 percent from April 1979, following
a 30 percent decline in March.
With

farm

income and

lending

continued to be curtailed in April.
sales of general merchandise,

autos,

still

falling,

spending

and

production

Directors report a further decline in the
homes, and

farm

implements.

In a large

central Minnesota community in April, for example, department store sales were
down 10 to 15 percent from a year ago, whereas in March these sales were down 5
to 10 percent.

With less consumer and farm spending, some manufacturers'

new

orders are still falling, and some manufacturers continue to curtail production
and lay off workers.

Partly as a consequence, Minnesota's initial claims

for

unemployment insurance in both March and April were up about 50 percent from a
year ago.

.

. . But It Still Hasn't Reached The District
Despite

the declines in lending,

trict still isn't in a recession.
and manufacturing
expanding.

output

Businesses,

considerable

would

spending,

and farm income, the

For a recession to occur, investment spending

probably

have

to

decline,

and

they

are

for example, are still investing, as directors

nonresidential

building,

both

inside

and

outside

the

still
report

Minnea-

polis/St. Paul metropolitan area.

Although growth has slowed, directors

report

output

that

attributes

district manufacturing

is still

increasing.

One

also

director

this growth to the district's large number of rapidly growing high

technology firms.
biggest

dis-

Another cause

manufacturers

are

of this growth

defense

contractors,

could
and

be

that

district

the

district's

defense

spending

has increased 30 percent in the last two years.
On the farm, output is also still expanding.

District farmers

to plant 4 percent more acres this spring than a year ago.
weather

has been helping

them achieve

this goal.

intend

So far, dry, sunny

In Minnesota,

for

example,

normally 20 percent of the corn planting is completed by May 4, but this year 36
percent

of

the

corn

planting

nearly

completed, district farmers are now hoping for rain to get the growing

season

off to an excellent

was

start.

planted

by

that

date.

With

their

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS CITY

Economic activity in the Tenth District
markedly.
prices.

is beginning

to slow

Retailers report declining sales and slower increases in
Purchasing agents report a recent slowdown in the rate of

crease of input prices.
being reduced.

Inventories

in retail and manufacturing

Savings and loans report

are

reduced savings inflows ana

mortgage commitments, and homebuilders report
the building and sales of new homes.

in-

significant declines

in

The winter wheat crop is in fair-

to-good condition, while supplies of fed cattle will be tight in coming
months.

Bank loan demand has continued

struction and real estate activity.

to weaken, particularly for

Deposit growth remains

generally

steady, though demand deposits are declining at some District
Retail activity

in the Tenth District

con-

is weakening.

banks.
Some re-

r

tailers report only slight gains in January-April dollar sales over a year
ago, while others report significant declines.
sales have been particularly weak.

Appliance and

All retailers contacted

declines in sales since mid-March, and all expect continued
throughout

the remainder of 1980.

furniture

report
declines

Most retailers report slower

price

increases in recent months, along with declining profit margins.
tory levels are generally considered too high for current sales
tations and are to b e trimmed throughout
Most purchasing agents report

expec-

the remainder of the year.

that input prices have risen by 10

per cent or more over the last 12 months, although many report
have recently begun to stabilize.

Inven-

that

prices

Input availability is not a problem,

with lead

times decreasing

throughout

are cautiously being held down.

the District.

Materials

inventories

Over half the firms contacted have

plant capacity, and about one-third

excess

of the companies have either idled

some

workers, or plan to do so soon.
Savings and

loan associations contacted

in the Tenth

report that savings inflows are down substantially

District

from last year.

Mort-

gage commitments are down significantly, due to a shortage of funds and
high mortgage rates.

However, mortgage rates in the District have

fallen to below 16 per cent, and are expected

to fall further

recently

throughout

the year.
Tenth District homebuilders' associations report that

housing

starts are down about 50 per cent from last year, with single-family
starts leading the decline.

housing

Many association spokesmen believe that home-

building activity will begin to improve within the next three months.
though sales of new homes have been off considerably,

there is not a

critically high inventory of unsold homes, and builders are not
home prices significantly.
out the District at stable

Al-

reducing

Building materials are readily available

through-

prices.

The winter wheat crop throughout

the Tenth District

be in fair-to-good condition at the present
forecasting a large crop for 1980.

time.

is reported

to

Commodity groups are

The Wheat Quality Council has projected

a 362 million bushel crop for Kansas, 12 per cent below the record crop of
1979.

However, area bankers are less optimistic

observing

in their

projections,

that crop conditions are much more variable than last

year.

Wheat prices have shown an increase in recent days reflecting concern about
the lack of rainfall necessary for continued

crop development

in the winter

wheat area and very dry conditions
Canada.

in the spring wheat areas of the U.S. and

Total U.S. wheat acreage is expected

to be up 11 per cent over

Supplies of fed cattle will be tighter in coming months,
producing some increase in cattle prices.

probably

Cattle currently being

quarantined

in feedlots because of DES implants will start coming on the market
week.

That may result

1979.

in only a short-term increase in slaughter

in about a

weights

and numbers marketed.
A survey of bankers in the Tenth District
in loan demand in the last
loan demand

is primarily

two months.

indicates a marked

Most bankers believe the decline in

the result of high lending rates, but they also re-

port that uncertainty about the current recession is contributing
softening of loan demand.

decline

to the

While the demand for all types of loans is generally

weak, the demand for construction and real estate loans appears to be virtually
nonexistent.

Several bankers report continued

strength in the demand

sumer loans.

However, these bankers also report

for c o n -

that they are discouraging

demand because of the Federal Reserve's Special Credit Restraint

this

Program.

In the past month, the prime rate in the Tenth District has declined
from the 19 to 20 per cent range to the 17 to 18 1/2 per cent range.
the majority of bankers on this month's survey have tightened

However,

their nonprice

lending terms, primarily because of the uncertainty regarding the effects of
the recession.
Most bankers report their deposit growth to be generally

stable.

ever, demand deposits are still declining at some banks, as customers
to shift their funds into interest-rbearing accounts.

Money market

and large CD's continue to account for most of the deposit growth,
some bankers are no longer bidding aggressively for these

deposits.

How-

continue

certificates
although

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS
Evidence continues to accumulate to suggest the Eleventh D i s t r i c t
economy is s l i d i n g into recession.

Department store sales adjusted for in-

flation are declining, and auto sales continue to deteriorate.

Residential

construction is well below the year-ago level, and S&L's report a continued
net outflow of savings.

Bank loan demand has softened perceptahly. Factory

output is leveling off, and production cutbacks and layoffs are reported in
a growing number of industries.

The brightest spot in the southwestern

economy is oil f i e l d a c t i v i t i e s , which continue to expand.
Department store executives report real sales are declining as
consumer buying is drying up in anticipation of a deepening recession.
Nominal retail sales fell 2 percent in A p r i l .

Credit purchases have de-

clined as much as 20 percent below last y e a r ' s levels, and cash purchases
are not taking up the slack.

An increasing number of customers are re-

ported to be paying down their credit balances instead of purchasing new
goods.

Inventories have begun to bulge.

As a result retailers are step-

ping up price discounting and are placing fewer new orders.
New car sales continue to decline.
estimated to be 40 percent below last spring.

Sales of domestic models are
Demand for some models, par-

t i c u l a r l y imports, remains strong but is restricted by high prices and a
limited a v a i l a b i l i t y of credit.
their potential sales.

Dealers report closing only a third of

Many dealers are pushed to their financial

by the decline in sales and high inventory costs.

limits

Layoffs are on the in-

crease, and several dealerships have closed in the last month.

Residential construction activity is 20 percent below the level a
year ago, and no indication of a turnaround is in sight.

Further declines

in interest rates are expected to restimulate mortgage demand, and several
c i t i e s are providing funds for home mortgages with municipal bond issues.
However, builders indicate i t will take an estimated nine months for the
market to fully recover when the turnaround comes.
Most savings and loan associations continue to report net outflows of savings.

Overall loan demand continues to decline as most custom-

ers remain priced out of the market.

Demand for home improvement loans

continues to increase, but a majority of associations do not offer such
loans.
About one-half of the large monthly reporting holding companies
and banks appeared to exceed the 9-percent growth in their March reports,
but commercial banks generally report no problems in complying with the
guidelines for loan growth.

The situation has eased with the option of

selecting a base period for covered consumer loans and an increased volume
of loan participations.

Loan demand by the energy and real estate indus-

t r i e s remains strong, although the lack of long-term financing has reduced
the supply of interim construction financing by banks.

Consumer loan de-

mand is slowing and usage of bank credit cards is down s i g n i f i c a n t l y from a
year ago.
While agricultural loans are readily available at D i s t r i c t
banks, bankers express concern over the a b i l i t y of farmers to repay borrowings.

Some loan carryovers from the last two years have been absorbed by

federal programs, leaving banks in a better position to meet r i s i n g credit
needs in agriculture.

But r i s i n g production costs and f a l l i n g commodity

prices are creating concern over the outlook for farm credit.

While most D i s t r i c t manufacturers continue to report high levels
of capacity u t i l i z a t i o n and normal order backlogs, conditions are considered bleak for suppliers to the residential construction industry.

Signif-

icant cutbacks in employment prevail in the fiberglass and aluminum extrusion industries, and more layoffs are expected in 30 to 60 days.
manufacturers also report a rise in layoffs and factory closings.

Apparel
Produc-

ers of construction steel and cement are allowing attrition to reduce
employment levels.

However, the capital goods and defense industries are

proceeding with expansion and hiring plans.
ing has put chemical producers in a squeeze.

The decline in autos and housShipments of chemicals are

down, inventories are up, and prices of feedstocks are r i s i n g , reflecting
the ongoing increases in prices of oil and gas.
D r i l l i n g activity in the D i s t r i c t states is up a third over a
year ago and at a 24-year high.

Both major and independent oil producers

are reported to be cutting back production levels to take advantage of
preferential tax rates under the windfall profit tax.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

Sluggish retail sales, a slumping forest-products industry, and a
very weak housing market have led to a general softening of business
in the Twelfth District.

activity

Most analysts agree that a recession has finally

overtaken the Western region, especially in the timber area stretching
Northern California, across Oregon, and into Washington and Idaho.

from

However,

sharply falling mortgage interest rates in early May provide some hope that
the housing industry will come out of the doldrums.

Rail shipments of autos

and lumber are declining, and the downturn is now spreading to other types
of rail traffic.

On the farm front, good growing weather has been apparent

in most areas except California's Central Valley, but farmers are complaining
about low prices for their products as well as the high cost of labor,
materials and money.
In Southern California, the signs of an economic slowdown have
included a softening of supermarket and department-store sales,

significant

personal savings withdrawals to finance purchases, a downturn in creditcard transactions, continued weakness in consumer-durable sales, bankruptcies
among established auto dealers, and a marked lateness in utility-bill

payments.

Major Southern California department stores recorded a sales decline of one
percent between April 1979 and April 1980, which means a substantial decline
in real terms.

Thus, nondurable-goods sales are now showing the same

weakness that has been apparent in durable-goods sales since last
Other sections of the District all report similar

developments.

fall.

The lumber industry remained very weak in April, with 54,000 lumber
mill workers and at least 13,000 plywood workers out of jobs or working a
curtailed workweek.
half capacity.

The plywood industry has been operating at less than

About 55 lumber and plywood mills in Oregon have curtailed

operations, and some have even shut down permanently, partly because of the
recession but also because of the erosion of their timber base.

Some major

installations have furloughed one-sixth or more of their workers.
other hand, two major forest-products firms reported record

On the

first-quarter

profits, reflecting heavy export demand and strong domestic demand for pulp,
paper and packaging materials.
Real-estate activity has remained very soft throughout the West.
Small builders in particular have been hit hard by the downturn.

Builders

regained some of their optimism in early May, however, when major lenders
retreated rapidly from their 18-percent prime mortgage rate.

The nation's

largest savings-and-loan association went all the way to 12 3/4 percent.
In the nonresidential sector, a major contractor says that demand, while
still strong, may decline later because of a lack of long-term
Some areas of strength still remain visible.
schedules are continuing

Defense

financing.
procurement

to support the Southern California economy.

The

Puget Sound area remains strong because of Boeing's substantial order
backlog.

Military business is strong, especially because of Boeing's

for the cruise missile.

contract

Civilian-aircraft production will be reduced next

year, however, as a reflection of weakness in domestic-airline orders.
a result, Boeing's workforce is scheduled to stabilize later this year.

As

Meanwhile, Alaska's state finances are in good shape because of a $3.5billion surplus resulting

from its oil boom.

The legislature has

of part of this surplus by making subsidized mortgages available
and also by boosting legislative
On the agricultural

front, California's

residents,

San Joaquin Valley has been

from high-90's

rain, during the critical spring-planting period.

temperatures to snow and
Dairy producers

from soft sales and from high operating costs.

Northwest

farmers continue to feel the after-effects of the Russian wheat
But crop prospects in the Northwest
and seed crops.

to

salaries.

plagued with freak weather, ranging

suffering

disposed

are
grain

embargo.

look good for apples, cherries, hay

A deep snow pack and high water tables promise

southern

Idaho farmers their best prospects of the past four years, especially by
allowing crop production in non-irrigated

areas.

In the financial sector, most lenders are continuing
consumer-credit

terms.

Many credit-card

to tighten

lenders have increased

the annual

interest rate, and some have begun to charge annual fees for card use.
Some smaller rural banks report satisfactory operating results because
of a stable deposit base.

But a Southern California banker reports

availability of funds to lend despite continued heavy demand

limited

for loans.

