CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

November 12, 1980

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 16
Sixth District-Atlanta page 19
Seventh District-Chicago page 22
Eighth District-St. Louis page 26
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 29
Tenth District-Kansas City page 31
Eleventh District-Dallas page 34
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 37

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk:Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
Overview.

Reports from Reserve Banks this month indicate, on

balance, some improvement in economic activity.

Manufacturing bounced back

in several areas as have retail sales and to a lesser extent capital investment, but conditions in the agricultural sector are mixed as the effects of
the summer drought continue to be felt.

Any optimism, however, is tempered

by concern over the recent run-up in interest rates.

Accordingly, many respon-

dents are looking either for a pause in the present upturn or for a very
sluggish recovery.

Despite the weak outlook for the economy, inflation is

expected to continue at high rates.

While the demand for business loans

varies among Districts, the decline in home mortgage activity appears rather
pervasive.
Business Conditions and Outlook.

The extent of the recent strengthening

in production and sales activity varies from District to District.

An upturn

in manufacturing is reported in Boston and Atlanta but in Minneapolis, after
three months of improvement, production is down.

Economic conditions in

Cleveland, Chicago and St. Louis were spurred by an increase in steel production, but this heightened demand is viewed as temporary—mainly the result
of inventory replacement.

Retail spending is generally stronger

with the exception of San Francisco, where sales remain belox* last year's
level.
luster.

In New York and Chicago, the market for domestic automobiles is lackWhile the majority of industrial respondents in a Philadelphia survey

look forward to a pickup in business activity during the next six months,
there is widespread concern among respondents that the recent surge in

interest rates will hurt the economic recovery.

Philadelphia, Cleveland,

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas and
San Francisco all cite some deterioration in local housing markets which
they attribute to rising mortgage rates.
Prices.

Purchasing agents in Kansas City report some slowing in

the rate of increase in input prices, but this is expected to be shortlived.
Sharply higher prices for both raw materials and finished goods are also
anticipated in Philadelphia and Cleveland, and wage rates continue to
accelerate in Chicago,

Dallas also notes a further run-up in labor costs,

particularly in energy-related industries, but lumber prices there are well
below the levels of a year ago.
Financial Developments.
Boston and New York.

Business loan demand remains sluggish in

In Dallas, however, commercial and industrial lending

has been buoyed by heavy demand from energy-related industries.

While

declining mortgage activity is linked to sharply higher mortgage rates
by Atlanta and Minneapolis, continuing economic uncertainty and falling real
incomes are considered more significant factors by Cleveland respondents.

A

falloff in loan applications is reported by Philadelphia, and some San Francisco
S&L's have completely dropped out of the mortgage market.

Chicago and Atlanta

note a growing trend towards renegotiable and variable rate mortgages.

Mort-

gage demand remains high in Dallas, but few commitments are being made as
loan defaults and FHA-VA foreclosures increase.

Strong savings inflows are

reported by Kansas City S&L's, while at San Francisco banks, large outflows
have taken place.
Consumer Spending.

New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago,

Atlanta and Dallas all indicate retail sales gains spurred by heavy 'marketing
and promotional activity.

Advances are led by moderate to expensive apparel

items and other soft goods, but low priced soft goods and consumer durables
still lag.

Only a very modest improvement in sales is noted in reports from

Cleveland, St. Louis, Minneapolis and Kansas City.
sales remain at recession levels.

In San Francisco, retail

In Boston, however, stronger sales, even

in constant dollars, are reported for the first time in months.

Despite the

short holiday selling period due to the late Thanksgiving holiday, merchants
in New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta and Dallas are looking forward to a strong
Christmas season.

Automobile sales are being bolstered by the introduction

of 1981 models in Kansas City and San Francisco.
are selling well.

In Cleveland, only small cars

In New York, foreign car sales are brisk, but the demand for

domestic models remains weak. With sales still sluggish, another wave of dealer
closings in the New York area is anticipated.

Automobile sales are described

as disappointing in Chicago,
Residential Construction.

Housing market conditions continue to

deteriorate as rising mortgage rates further discourage demand.

A decline

in home sales is reported by Chicago, St. Louis and Minneapolis and housing
starts are falling in Cleveland, Kansas City and Dallas.

While new home

prices are up slightly in Kansas City, prices are reported stable in Philadelphia and softening a bit for higher priced homes in Dallas.
Business Fixed Investment.
mixed.

The outlook for capital spending is

Atlanta notes strong investment in many parts of its District as a

result of both state and local tax incentive programs, but Boston reports a
downturn in orders for heavy metalworking
and pulp production.

equipment and machinery for paper

In New York, machine tool orders are stronger although

industry spokesmen do not expect full recovery until late 1981.

Construction

of manufacturing facilities is up in parts of New England, particularly among
defense-related industries.

Military hardware production is also strong in

St. Louis, as is production of oil and natural gas equipment.

Chicago res-

pondents expect the demand for heavy trucks to rebound in 1981.
Agriculture.

The outlook for agricultural production and farm

income is mixed as many Districts continue to feel repercussions from the
summer drought.

Richmond reports farm loan demand is weaker than normal,

while repayment rates are falling sharply.

Renewals and extensions are

higher and collateral requirements are stricter. Dallas also notes slower
loan repayments, while Kansas City respondents expect a doubling in the number of
farmers not expected to meet credit standards in 1981.

Many of these farmers,

however, will be eligible for low-cost emergency loans from the Fanners
Home Administration.

The outlook for crop yields is good in Minneapolis and

San Francisco, but the Atlanta Reserve Bank reports that crop production
estimates for the southeast have been lowered again.
Inventories.

Retail and manufacturing inventories are generally

lean. In Boston, stocks of home furnishings are so tight that any strengthening
in demand is expected to translate into an immediate increase in production.
Auto inventories, in particular, are being held down because of the high carrying
costs according to respondents in New York.

Other retail inventories are

reported in line with sales with the exceptions of Kansas City and some areas
of St. Louis where demand remains weak.

These stocks, however, are expected

to be worked down during the Christmas selling season.
Academic and Financial Consultants.

All of this month's academic

respondents agree that the recovery will be weak by historical standards as
a result of tight monetary and fiscal policies.

Professor Eckstein thinks

that there will be a recession in 1981 as a result of the 15 1/2 percent
prime rate.

Eckstein believes that because of the essential inconsistency

between the structure of the economy and the goal of price stability, only a

3 to 4 year recession will reduce the inflation rate significantly.
Professor Houthakker believes 1981 will be characterized by the slow real
growth necessary to control inflation, which he expects to moderate slightly
next year.

Houthakker is not convinced further tightening is warranted and

warns the Fed not to fine tune monetary policy.

Professor Samuelson believes

there is a 20-25 percent chance for a 1981 recession but 2 to 3 percent real
growth is more likely.

He feels that the inflation outlook is unfavorable

and counsels the Fed to try to hit the money growth targets if the price is
not exorbitant.

Profesaor Tobin believes there is a good possibility that

rising interest rates will cause a downturn next year, and he would not tighten
monetary policy any further as a result.
The financial consultants continue to urge the Fed to persist in
its determination to reduce the inflation rate.

Mr. Kaufman expects a

slowing in the pace of recovery in the early part of 1981.

At about the

same time, he anticipates a temporary decline in short-term interest rates
along with a wave of new corporate bond offerings.

Mr. O'Leary strongly

urges the Fed to continue pursuing a policy designed to reduce the inflation
rate and to defuse expectations of inflation.

Mr. Stone feels that the Fed

should soon achieve success in slowing the aggregates sufficiently to meet
its longer term growth targets.

He perceives a drop in short-term rates

over the balance of the year, and while he does not foresee a double dip
recession, a pause in the recovery within the next three months should be
expected.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity in the First District has picked up slightly.
An,important exception, however, is the capital goods sector where demand
has begun to fall off.

Retail sales in the region, which had been just

keeping pace with inflation, appear to have made real gains over the past
four or five weeks.

In manufacturing, firms which make consumer products

or industrial goods used in current production have seen increases in
sales.

On the other hand, orders for capital goods have fallen.

Banking

respondents report sluggish loan growth.
For most of this year retail sales in New England have risen with
inflation, but there has been no volume increase.

However, according to

representatives of two large general merchandise chains, there has been a
marked increase in sales during the past month.

The demand for moderate

to better goods is particularly strong; low priced items are faring less
well.
Surveys of area manufac turers show sizeable increases in
production and new orders.

However, conversations with officers of

individual firms are less encouraging.

The demand for building

materials, home furnishings, packaging and automotive products has picked
up from lows reached earli er this year, but still remains depressed.
addition, orders for capital goods are weakening.

Among the areas

affected are heavy metalworking equipment; machinery for the pulp and
paper, chemicals, rubber and plastics, and shoe industries; and
commercial jet engines.
Despite this indication of declining investment nationally,
several firms stated that they are proceding as planned with their own

In

capital programs and construction of manufacturing facilities is up
strongly in some parts of New England.

The defense business is still

strong, although one executive predicts some delay in orders until the
new president takes office.
Manufacturing inventories appear to be tight.

A representative

of the home furnishings industry, which has been very adversely affected
by the recession, says that despite weak sales inventories in the
industry are at rock bottom and any increase in demand will translate
into higher production.
Several manufacturers expressed considerable optimism about the
prospects of a new administration and the change in the Senate.
senses that some will act in anticipation of future tax cuts.

One
One chief

executive says that the election results have encouraged him to launch a
new sales campaign.
Banking respondents report that loan demand, both consumer and
commercial, is sluggish.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, and Tobin were
available for comment this month.
weak by historical standards.

All agree that the recovery will be

They also agree that tight monetary and

fiscal policies are responsible for this outlook.
Professor Eckstein thinks that with the prime rate at 15 1/2
percent there will be a recession in 1981.

Noting that credit crunches

now are coming six months apart, he argues that this is a period with the
most extreme stop-go policies the U.S. has ever seen.

Eckstein believes

there is no way that monetary policy quickly can overcome the essential
inconsistency between the structure of the economy and the goal of price
stability.

Accordingly, he thinks that only a prolonged recession (3-4

years) will reduce the inflation rate significantly.
Professor Houthakker expects the economy to continue to move
sidewise through 1981.

He believes this period of slow real growth is

necessary to control inflation, which he expectes to moderate slightly
next year.

Houthakker finds the recent rapid rate of money growth

somewhat disturbing, but he is not convinced that further tightening is
warranted.

Since he views money growth as the result of a process of

random fluctuation around a trend that is consistent with the targets,
Houthakker warns the Fed not to try to fine tune monetary policy.
Professor Samuelson believes there is a background probability of
20-25 percent of a 1981 recession, but his best guess is for 2 to 3
percent real growth next year.

He feels that the inflation outlook is

unfavorable, so he expects housing once again to have to run the gauntlet
of high nominal interest rates.

Although Samuelson describes the money

growth targets as nothing more than a shibboleth, he thinks that it will
be taken quite amiss if they are violated this year.

Thus, he councils

the Fed to try to hit the targets if the price is not exorbitant.
Professor Tobin believes there is a good possibility that rising
interest rates will cause a downturn next year.

He thinks that the

crucial issue facing the country is whether to allow a normal recovery or
not.

It is Tobin's opinion that the Fed cannot decide this issue by

itself.

Tobin would not tighten policy further.

He notes that the

combination of rapid money growth near the end of the year and the
special importance pinned to achieving calendar year money growth targets
provides a good example of the hazards of the present monetary policy
strategy.

He believes that the Fed's credibility is important only if a

program of announced monetary austerity is to be followed until inflation
is wrung out of the economy.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District was mixed in October.
Retail sales strengthened during the month, reflecting extensive promotional
activity.

Foreign car sales picked up, while the slump in domestic car

sales deepened.
spring.

No turnaround is expected on the domestic side until late

Outside the consumer sector, some signs of a weak pickup have been

reported in chemicals, machine tools, and paper and packaging products.

The

respondents, for the most part, expect a slight upturn in the fourth quarter,
but do not anticipate any major economic recovery until the second half of
1981.

On the financial side, business loans at New York City banks have

declined since mid-October.

In the mortgage market, rates have stabilized

recently after rising sharply in September and early October.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales in the Second District have generally strengthened
during October.

Sales for the month as a whole, both in the New York metro-

politan area and upstate, were in line with or in a few cases even exceeded
retailers' expectations, and inventories were considered satisfactory.
Although the heavy promotional activity during this period was cited as the
reason for much of the brisk sales, some underlying strength in consumer
spending was perceived, especially for soft goods.

Comparisons between the

city and suburban stores were mixed in most instances.

Similarly, the volume of

cash and credit sales did not follow any pattern with'the relative vigor of each
varying from store to store.

Retailers voiced some concern over November sales

because of the late Thanksgiving but are planning for a strong Christmas.

Automobile sales in the Second District were mixed in October,
with foreign car sales outperforming domestic.

Foreign car sales were

reported to be about as strong as in the comparable month last year with
prospects for further improvement in November.

In contrast, domestic car

sales are below the volume a year ago, and the slump is expected to continue
at least until late spring.

Rising auto prices combined with shrinking

discretionary income were cited as making consumer spending cautious so that
only lower priced, leftover-1980 models appear to be selling.

Consequently,

the domestic dealers contacted expect more dealerships to close.

Wherever

possible, inventories at the dealer level have been kept intentionally lean.
Auto makers voiced concern that any further downturn in sales might place
some capital spending plans in jeopardy.
The Manufacturing Sector
Outside the consumer sector, there are slight signs of improvement.
Some pickup in orders for chemicals has occurred, in part because improving
conditions in the steel industry have increased demand for chemical products
used as inputs in steel production.

Orders for steel increased in August

and September but remained flat during October.

Further advances are

expected during the coming months, principally for customers' inventory rebuilding.

Some improvements were noted in paper and packaging products but

this was felt to be largely due to advance buying to avoid expected price
increases, rather than any strong recovery in underlying demand.

Some

machine tool makers are reporting strengthening sales, though for some companies shipments continue to outpace orders and full recovery in the industry
is not anticipated before late 1981.

Economic Outlook
The outlook of most District respondents remains somewhat bearish.
Although most expect some upturn in consumer spending in the fourth quarter,
they still expect relatively weak growth through the first half of 1981.
Several respondents suggested that this is going to be a W-shaped recession
because the economic fundmentals do not warrant a sustained recovery.

The

second downturn is expected to be seen first in the housing sector where permits began to weaken in October.

Higher interest rates were cited as the

principal cause of a weakening housing market, but the decline is not expected
to be as sharp as earlier in the year.

Respondents also observed that capi-

tal spending has shown no definite signs of recovery.
Financial Developments
Business loans at New York City banks have been weak since midOctober, in contrast to a large increase in loans at banks outside the Second
District.

In the mortgage market, rates seemed to have stabilized at about

14 percent.

The Federal override of the mortgage usury ceiling has resulted in

the first sale of pass-through securities by a New York mutual savings b a n k —
a $10 million private placement with three life insurance companies.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Henry Kaufman (Salomon Bros) .,
James O'Learv (U.S. Trust), and Robert Stone (Irving Trust).
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Kaufman:

While real GNP will probably increase at an annual rate

of at least 3 percent in this quarter, a slowing in the pace of the recovery
is likely in the 1st quarter of 1981, reflecting the impact of higher interest

rates and increases in the Social Security tax.

In the credit market, another

wave of new corporate bond offerings is likely to hit the market in the early
part of next year when short-term interest rates are likely to decline for a
short period of time.
Mr. O'Leary:

We are in the midst of a broad revolutionary change in

the long-term capital markets—a sharp reduction in the availability of funds
for investment in straight, long-term fixed-rate bonds and mortgages.

Since

most investors are convinced that the upward trend of inflation and of interest
rates will continue, there will continue to be a very high-risk premium in the
yields on these instruments and the long-term, fixed-rate markets will continue to be subject to great volatility.

The need for the Federal Reserve

to persist in its determination to pursue a policy designed to reduce the inflation rate and to defuse the expectation of inflation is thus most urgent.
It is imperative that the new Republican Administration aid the monetary
authorities with real fiscal restraint and other long-term policies.
Mr. Stone:

Member bank borrowings have now reached levels that

should enable the Fed to achieve success in its effort to slow the aggregates
sufficiently to meet its longer term growth target.

Success could probably

be assured by holding borrowings at or slightly above current levels for
another three to four weeks.

As markets begin to perceive such success,

short rates will drop very rapidly—probably by 100 to 150 basis points, which
I judge to be the amount of expectational fluff now in the market.

Rates

would then work lower over the balance of the year, closing well below present
levels,

I do not believe that the economy will experience a double dip.

are, however, likely to see a pause some time within the next months, and
this will reinforce the decline in interest rates.

We

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District in November are that business remains
mixed. Manufacturers indicate no change in industrial activity in November from last
month, but expect a significant upswing six months from now. Employment may be given
a boost from this brigthened outlook, but inflation is expected to continue with no
foreseeable relief.

Retail sales are moderately strong this month, owing mostly to

retailers' marketing efforts, however, and not underlying strength in the economy. As
for the future, local merchants are slightly edgy about the first half of 1981 and,
therefore, are planning no changes for inventories. In the financial sector, local bankers
report mixed loan activity in November as C&I loan volume is up but consumer loans are
down. In the housing sector, sales have dropped off sharply in the last few months as
mortgage money has gotten tight. New starts have slowed as contractors and developers
are waiting for sales to pick up.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Area manufacturers responding to the November Business Outlook Survey
report no change from October in overall business activity. This could mean that the
expansion that appeared to be starting in September and October has been choked off,
although it is still a little early to draw any hard conclusions. In terms of specific
indicators, both new orders and shipments have dropped marginally in November, while
inventories appear to be growing slightly. On the employment front, local manufacturers
continue to make small cuts in payrolls and working hours.
Nevertheless, the six-month-ahead outlook is still good according to the
survey participants. Over 60 percent of the respondents expect general business activity
to pick up between now and May.

Both new orders and shipments are expected to

increase substantially over the period, and inventory building is planned at more firms
than ever before in the survey's history.

Labor stands to gain as well from this

brightened outlook, as survey respondents plan to lengthen the average workweek and
hire new employees by next May. Increased capital outlays are also expected.
Prices are up again in November in the industrial sector. Input costs are
higher for about 65 percent of the survey participants and 27 percent report charging
more for the goods they sell. Looking ahead, inflation is expected to continue, as 96
percent of the managers surveyed project raw materials costs to increase by May, and
nearly 70 percent plan price hikes for their finished goods.
RETAIL ACTIVITY
Area retailers report sales to be moderately strong in November compared to
year-ago levels, which is pretty much in-line with their expectations. District merchants
attribute these gains to marketing efforts on their part, however, and not to underlying
strength in the economy. Sales of soft goods, particularly apparel and sporting goods, are
doing well while big ticket items remain sluggish.
As for the future, local merchants are uncertain about November sales
because Thanksgiving falls late, allowing only three post-holiday Christmas shopping days
in the month. A strong Christmas season is expected, though. As a Director of this Bank
in the retail business notes, Christmas sales are projected to be good, particularly in the
days just before Christmas.
Retail inventories are "in-line" to "a little tight" at this point. Area retailers
remain slightly edgy about the first half of 1981, though, and plan no changes for stock
levels, hoping to keep inventory-sales ratios healthy.

FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
Third District bankers report mixed loan activity in November.

C<5cl loan

volume is up 3 to 10 percent over year-ago figures, generally a little ahead of budget.
Consumer loans, on the other hand, are down by about 4 to 5 percent, but are expected to
level off. Looking ahead to the next six months, area bankers project an increase of
about 5 percent in business loans, while retail loans are expected to remain flat, as
consumers wait to see what the new Reagan Administration does economy-wise. Some
area bankers expect a double-dip recession, with a final pick-up expected around the
second or third quarter of 1981.
Local banks are currently quoting a prime rate of 15 1/2 percent.

They

expect the prime to peak shortly, and then to slide back by 200 basis points by mid-1981.
Area deposit flows show little change from recent trends, with deposits
running about 2 percent over November '79 levels.
HOUSING
Housing sales in the District have dropped off sharply in the last few months
as mortgage money has gotten tight. Sales are reported down 20 to 60 percent below
year-ago levels.

Prices are reported to have been stable over the last six months,

particularly because mortgage rates ranging from 14 1/2 to 15 percent have discouraged
many buyers. Rates are expected to drop between 12 and 13 percent in coming months,
though, thereby giving sales a boost. In the meantime, contractors and developers are
holding off on new groundbreakings until sales pick up.

FOURTH DISTRICT—CLEVELAND
Summary

Respondents in the Fourth District anticipate a 1.5 percent increase
in real GNP in 1981 from 1980, despite rising interest rates.
continues to be the major threat to the recovery.

Inflation

A boomlet has developed in

steel orders, but may reflect price hedging that is borrowing from orders in
1981.

Consumer goods producers expect little near-term improvement in con-

sumer spending, but auto dealers are encouraged by new model sales.

Bankers

report business and consumer loan demands are weak, but not worsening since
the latest interest rate increases.

However, S&L officials and home builders

report a substantial decline in buyer interest and applications as mortgage
rates average nearly 14 percent.
Outlook
Economists who attended the Fourth District Economists Round Table
Meeting held at this Bank on November 7 expect the recovery to be sluggish
and a typical for the early stages of an expansion.

The median of 28 forecasts,

made shortly before the election, shows real GNP increasing at annual rates
of 1.5 percent, 2.7 percent, 4.6 percent and 3.4 percent from the first
quarter of 1981 through the fourth quarter, respectively.

Most of the step-

up after mid-1981 is expected to come from higher consumer spending, residential construction and a recovery in business fixed investment.
liquidation is expected to continue into 1981.

Mild inventory

Real GNP this quarter is

expected to increase by about the same rate as last quarter, because of smaller
gains in consumer spending and net exports.

Five of the economists expect real

GNP to decline in the first quarter of 1981 before resuming growth, and one
expects a decline in the fourth quarter of 1981.

Prices
Inflation is re-accelerating and is the key factor underlying a slow
recovery, according to several district economists.

The latest run-up in

food prices stems partly from increased grain exports and a shortfall in farm
output, according to a bank economist.

Despite oil price increases in spot

markets, the Iranian-Iraqi war should not have a significant effect on prices,
according to a petroleum industry economist, unless damage to production
facilities is substantial and OPEC allows the spot market to run prices up.
However, several energy economists expect oil production losses
up by other countries.

to be made

Some economists who expect a small-V shape recovery

in 1981, anticipate that accelerating inflation will contribute to a softening
economy late in 1981 and another recession in 1982.

Several expressed prefer-

ence to check inflation expectations now even at the expense of retarding a
recovery.
Steel
The steel industry has made a sharp turnaround recently, with order
levels currently at 75 percent of operating capacity and possibly reaching
90 percent in November or December.

Steel economists believe this bubble in

demand will be temporary, and represents, in part, a slight improvement in
consumption (mostly from autos), a decrease in imports, but mostly a vigorous
shift in inventory replacement by steel service centers.

Imports have been

dampened by the reinstatement of trigger pricing at levels above domestic
mill prices.

Shipment levels could reach as high as 23 million tons in the

fourth quarter and 85 million tons in 1980, depending on the ability of plant
facilities to shift from a shut down condition.

After January, steel opera-

tions will likely fall back into the 70 percent to 80 percent range, according

to a steel economist, unless the economy is stronger than currently expected.
Consumer Spending
The improvements in consumer spending in the early part of the third
quarter have leveled out in recent weeks, according to several consumer-goods
producers.

An appliance producer reports his firm has not yet experienced a

recovery in either shipments or orders, and a bank economist anticipates no
increase in purchasing power until after a tax cut in the second quarter of
1981.

While nondurable goods remained flat in recent months, sales of food-

store items have held up well relative to past recessions, even during the
sharp decline in the second quarter, according to a producer of consumer
soft-goods.

However, year-to-year volume on consumer-packaged products is

currently increasing at only a 2 percent rate, compared to a normal 4 percent
rate during a recovery.

Fourth District economists expect about a 2 percent

gain in real PCE between the fourth quarter of 1980 and fourth quarter of
1981.

A typically cautious economist with a major retail chain in the

district expects a somewhat larger gain.

According to a bank economist, the

financial position of households remains weak for a recovery; the debt-repayment burden is still high, liquidity is low, and delinquency rates are rising.
Autos
Although auto sales should gradually improve throughout 1981, no
major comeback is expected before 1981, according to an auto industry economist.
Auto sales are expected to average a 9.0 million unit annual rate in the fourth
quarter of 1980 and 9.6 million units in 1981.

Small cars are selling well,

reports an area dealer, but sales of larger cars are sluggish despite improved
mileage ratings.

Capacity of domestic small cars is limited currently by

engine and transmission production.

An area dealer reports that 1980 models

are closing out satisfactorily, but not at the expense of 1981 models*

Ohio

consumers continue to benefit from a $600 average savings on select new models
as a result of the temporary tax cut, manufacturers' rebates and the temporary
price freeze.
Housing
Loan commitments are weaker than last month, and larger-than-seasonal
declines are expected in December, January and February, according to several
S&L officials.

Mortgage lending rates, which rose further in recent weeks,

range from 13.5 percent to 14.5 percent and are expected to reach 15 percent
soon, according to an Economist for a regional FHLB in the District.

However,

rates are already close to a point of shutting off demand, with loan applications in November falling behind last month's pace.

Deposit flows have

weakened, but even large inflows are unlikely to cause mortgage rates to
differ from other long-term rates, according to an S&L official, as more S&L
operate like mortgage brokers.
an increasing problem.

Consequently, affordability of mortgages is

An area builder reports housing starts are down

drastically and the volume of shoppers is now beginning to fall substantially.
Banking
Business and consumer loans continue to be weak, according to several
district bankers, but lending rates continue to rise.

A bank economist,

however, cites uncertainty and declining real income in the local economy as
more important factors in discouraging borrowers than higher interest rates.
Auto loans may not pick up much for another six months because of a usual lag
in recovery in local economies, according to a banker.

Also, usury ceilings

tied to the discount rate have made auto loans unprofitable in Pennsylvania.
Business loan demand from large national firms is stronger than from smaller

local firms, partly because large firms have substituted short-term financing
for long-term until bond markets turn around, according to a bank economist.
Interest rates are expected to continue under upward pressure in the near-term,
according to several economists, because financial markets anticipate further
tightening actions by the system.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

There is little indication of any significant changes in the level of
business activity in the Fifth District over the past month.

In the manufacturing

sector shipments and new orders increased, on balance, but only very slightly.
Backlogs of orders and inventories declined somewhat.

Among retailers there

were some gains as total sales and relative sales of big tickets rose slightly.
There is little evidence of any broad recovery in consumer durables, however.
Employment around the District held steady on balance.
across a broad front.

Prices continue to rise

The view that business activity generally will improve

over the next six months gained adherents over the last month.

Consumer Spending
Despite continued resistance to prevailing prices most retailers
surveyed report a pickup in total sales over the month.

Apparel items seem

characteristic, with consumers responding enthusiastically to price cuts.

There

are also reports of small gains in sales of big ticket items but overall sales
of durables, particularly furniture, television sets, and radios, continue to lag.
There are isolated reports of increased activity in more practical appliances
such as washing machines and refrigerators.

Auto sales vary widely from area

to area, ranging from severely depressed to moderately robust. Reports on housing
sales range from "no activity" to moderate.

The Manufacturing Sector
Activity in the manufacturing sector, even within individual industries,
has been mixed in recent weeks.
orders were up narrowly.
month.

On balance, shipments and the volume of new

Backlogs of orders and inventories are down from last

Stocks of both materials and finished goods were worked down leaving

manufacturers, as a group, more comfortable with current levels.

Employment and

the length of the average workweek apparently declined slightly during October.
Current plant and equipment capacity remains somewhat above desired

levels.

Economic Outlook
Survey respondents are becoming increasingly optimistic about the prospects for business activity over the next six months.

A majority of respondents

now expect the level of activity nationally and in their own firms to improve
while about half expect improvement in their respective market areas.

Despite

this optimism about the direction of change over the next two quarters there is
little support around the District for the view that the level of activity will
soon reach what would be considered normal levels.

Only moderate gains are

expected over the next year.

Agriculture
The serious impact of 1980's drought on farmers' financial and credit
conditions is pointed up more and more as the harvest season progresses.

With

farm income significantly lower, loan repayment rates in the third quarter were
down sharply from both the previous quarter and a year earlier, while renewals
or extensions were substantially higher.
siderably weaker than usual.

Farm loan demand continued to be con-

Bank supplies of farm loan funds were up from

both the summer quarter and year-ago levels, however.

Interest rates on farm

loans were up slightly, and collateral requirements were much stiffer.

The Financial Sector
Consumer borrowing has picked up in recent weeks.
are now considerably higher than in most recent months.

Year-to-year gains

The feeling, however,

is that overall borrowing has not yet reached what would be considered normal

levels.

Despite holding recent gains in some localities mortgage lending

activity continues quiet.

Many lenders have become more restrictive in

their lending practices in expectation of slowing deposit growth.

Recent

interest rate increases have caused some lenders to fear disintermediation
in favor of money market funds should rates rise much further.
part, however, such effects have not been felt to date.

For the most

Our directors in

the banking and thrift industries find personal bankruptcies in their
markets rising in line with recent national patterns.

SIXTH DISTRICT—ATLANTA

Economic activity has been "better than expected" recently in the
district.

Merchants are optimistic about Christmas sales, and industrial

concerns are lengthening their workweeks and recalling workers as orders have
picked up.

Business men are concerned, however, that the rapidly escalating

cost of money may forestall a strong recovery.

Recent increased weakness in

housing markets lends substance to their fears.
Consumer Spending and Inventories
Retail sales contacts indicate sales about even with or up slightly
from last year at this time.

Apparel sales, which had been sluggish, picked

up, and appliance sales have strengthened, especially microwave ovens.
furnishings remain a weak area.

Home

Although many customers are burdened with

debt and requests for payment extensions are still common, there was a report
of a large department store soliciting new customers for the store's credit
card.

Merchants are building stocks in anticipation of strong holiday sales

and are determined to move their inventory even if strong pre-Christmas
promotions are required.
New car sales are holding up, particularly x-cars and k-cars, but
there is dealer concern about rising interest rates.

Good sales in northern

Alabama were attributed to customers rushing to get the 1980 models still in
stock.

Relatively strong demand for mid-size and large used cars reflects

buyer resistance to the prices of the 1981 models.

Many buyers are paying

cash and are more willing to draw down or borrow against savings rather than
pay the high conventional finance.

Financial and Construction
Mortgage lending is beginning to weaken due to rapidly rising
interest rates.
squeezed.

Commitments are slowing and speculative builders are being

In Atlanta, savings and loan associations reported that increasing

interest rates are dampening applications.

Many potential home buyers are

being forced out of the market by the 14 percent mortgage rate now common
throughout the region.

Existing homeowners are choosing to stay with their

low mortgage rates rather than "trade up." Corporate transferees provide the
bulk of sales in some areas.

Builders are reportedly reducing outlays by

acquiring smaller lots and cutting back on square footage and other amenities.
A builder of large homes reports a recent slowing of unit sales.

One very

large savings and loan association suggested that it would be out of the
fixed rate mortgage business in the near future, reflecting a growing trend
toward renegotiable and variable rate mortgages.
In general, not much optimism can be found about the real estate and
home construction industries.

Nonresidential is doing well in comparison,

with several large office building projects announced recently.

New Orleans,

in particular, is quite strong.
Employment and Industry
Most industrial contacts note a feeling of optimism due to the
results of the presidential election.

Defense spending is expected to

increase, affecting many industries in the district.

The lengthening of the

factory workweek and reopenings after partial shutdowns of numerous plants
indicate that industries are moving back toward full production.
being recalled by steel, textile, and equipment manufacturers.

Workers are
Oil support

companies are bolstering the economy in south Mississippi, and in Louisiana,

the petrochemical industry is still expanding.

Industrial orders posted gains

over the last month.
Recent statistics indicate that Florida attracted more investment
in the first six months of 1980 than for all of 1979.

Local option tax breaks

are expected to benefit industry-hungry north Florida communities, which in
the past have had little to offer to compete with tax incentives offered by
bordering Alabama and Georgia.

Alabama's liberal program offers property

tax exemptions for as long as 40 years and easy-to-obtain revenue bond
financing.
Georgia has topped the $1 billion mark in new and expanding manufacturing investment in 1980.

Pratt and Whitney aircraft has recently announced

plans to build a $100 million plant in Columbus, Georgia, to produce parts
for its civilian and military engines.

Plans call for a major expansion and

upgrading of the state docks at the port of mobile, following a record year
of tonnage handled.
Ground was recently broken for the only world's fair scheduled for
the 1980s.

It will be held in Knoxville, Tennessee, from May through

October of 1982.

The theme of the fair is "Energy turns the World."

Financing for the World's fair will come from private sources.
Agriculture
Crop production estimates were lowered again in the southeast,
reflecting the drought's severe impact.

Prices of cotton, tobacco, and

vegetables (crops of great significance to this region) declined from
September's levels.
expectations.
a month ago.

The Florida citrus Corp., however,- exceeded growers'

Grain prices were higher.

Most livestock prices declined from

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
Stannary. Activity in the Seventh District shows mixed trends, "but
remains depressed overall, especially in contrast to the nation. Reaction
to the election was very favorable on the part of management. But sharply
higher interest rates are causing great uneasiness. Price inflation has
accelerated, partly because of rising labor costs. Retail sales have improved somewhat, but sales of autos and trucks have been disappointing.
Airline traffic is sharply lower. Producer equipment output is declining.
Steel demand has improved further. Housing remains bleak. The financial
position of farmers has improved, and farmland values are on the uptrend
again.
Reaction to election. Business and financial executives seem to be
almost unanimous in their enthusiasm over the extent of the conservative shift
registered in last week's election, unmatched since 1952. They realise that
any policy changes will take time to implement, but anticipate less onerous
administration by regulators and less antagonism toward the profit system,
which should encourage risk taking.
Prices. Wholesale prices are rising at a faster pace again. Utility
rates are about 20 percent above last year, but are still deemed inadequate.
The CTA. might

raise transit fares in Chicago from 60 to 85 cents at year

end, and to $1 next June. Airline fares are sharply higher.
Labor costs. Labor organizations, which now include many municipal
workers, display an unswerving militancy in contract negotiations despite
widespread layoffs, especially toward attempts of management to change work
rules to improve productivity. The GM-UAW pact of September 1979 was valued

at

percent over three years, assuming an 8 percent annual. CPI rise, much

less than has occurred. TCie GW formula set the pattern for other major
industries. In several recent instances managements at various district
plants have told workers covered "by national labor contracts that labor costs
are about 25 percent less at competing plants in the South. Some or all of
the Jobs at these plants are in jeopardy. Higher energy costs in the North
are also an adverse factor.
Retail sales were somewhat improved in October, with seasonal merchandise aided by colder-than-normal weather. Retailers are said to have
ordered cautiously for the Christmas season, which will not begin in earnest
until the second half of November. Some retailers insist that last year's
federal "bankruptcy law must be revised because of growing abuse. "Slow pay"
problems on professional bills have increased demands for cash payments and
improved business for bill collectors. Many established fixed-price retailers
are said to be ready to "deal" with customers to meet competition. Manufacturers of riding mowers, RVs, outboard motors, and other luxury goods are
holding production at a very low level.
Autos and trucks. Sales of autos and trucks have been somewhat disappointing thus far in the model year. Various assembly plants are being
closed periodically for a week or more, including the plant where Chrysler
assembles its smallest compacts, which were in short supply in mid-1979*
Heavy truck demand appears to have stabilized and is expected to rebound in
1981. Indefinite layoffs in the auto industry have dropped from over 250,000
to 191,000, but little further improvement is expected.
Airline travel. Airline passenger miles in October were down about
11 percent from last year. Traffic was down 17 percent for the largest

airline, partly because of the stimulus of half-fare coupons last year. With
increases totaling 26 percent since June, standard air fares are now UO percent above last year, aa unprecedented development. Another 6 percent boost
is set for later this month. Higher fares are a major factor depressing both
business and pleasure travel.
Capital goods. Order backlogs for most producer equipment continue
to decline. New orders are weak. Some analysts expect the producer goods
downturn to persist past mid-1981. Some of the largest construction equipment plants are shut down temporarily. A revival in demand for construction
equipment depends on housing. Orders received by a producer of capital goods
components have increased for two months, reflecting needs for replacement
and maintenance.
Steel. Bookings of a leading steel company are running at 80 percent
of capacity, with sheet products leading. Shipments will continue at an improved level through year end, but will remain well below last year's peak.
Substantial price increases are being posted. A hot strip mill, closed last
May after demand suddenly dried up, has been reopened. Steel companies producing oil country goods are planning increases in capacity, because current
facilities are running at full capacity—a unique situation for the various
product groupings.
Housing. Residential construction and transactions are very weak
throughout the district. In the first nine months single-family permits in
the Chicago area were 66 percent below last year and 8U percent below 1978.
Multi-family permits were off somewhat less. Sales of existing homes were
down 33 percent from last year, and 1»1 percent from 1978. Mortgage rates
have risen further to the lU-15 percent range, but few loans are being

negotiated. (One large Chicago S&L stopped making loans on November 5.)
Some S&Ls are offering only variable rate mortgages. Many home builders,
and some mortgage bankers, have ceased operations, at least temporarily.
A leading producer of building materials is raising its forecast of housing
starts in 1981 to I.U5 million. This is based on (l) growing evidence that
the housing stock is inadequate, and (2) an expected decline in the basic
mortgage rate to the 12-13 percent range.
Agriculture. Rebounds in commodity prices and farm income prospects
in recent months are credited with sparking a rise in farmland values in the
district, up 5 percent in the third quarter, and enough to wipe out the
decline of the first half. Farm loan demand remains soft despite a marked
improvement in availability of loans. Deposits at rural banks have increased
and loan repayments have accelerated as farmers increased cash marketings.
Transportation problems are not nearly as significant as last year, because
of smaller crops and an increase in the number of hopper cars. Purchases of
farm implements have increased, but only moderately, and not for all types.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity improved moderately in recent weeks according to
Eighth District businessmen, several of whom expressed confidence that the
worst is over and that a slow recovery is likely in 1981.

Although consumer

spending in nominal terms is expanding, it does not appear to be increasing
as rapidly as inflation.
sales.

Inventories are generally lean and in line with

Sales gains have recently occurred in manufacturing industries such

as steel, automobiles, chemicals, and appliances.

Although demand for

capital equipment is still declining somewhat, there are indications that
this sector will bottom out soon.

On the negative side, home sales have

become severely depressed again and mortgage loans have fallen off with the
reoccurence of sharply higher mortgage interest rates in recent months.
Business and consumer loans at banks have continued to increase.
Overall, consumer spending continues to increase at a modest pace.
One retail representative noted that sales were larger than anticipated for
this time of year and that he was optimistic about Christmas sales.

On the

other hand, rural retailers in areas which were hit by severe drought
conditions during the summer months report that sales are quite weak and,
consequently, are cutting back on spring commitments.

While auto sales have

continued to improve since last spring, they remain well below levels of a
year ago.
Most businessmen report that inventories are in line with current
sales.

Appliance inventories may be even less than desired in some cases.

The steel inventory liquidation is reportedly completed, and some planned
buildup is underway.

A few smaller firms report that inventories are high

because they kept their work force intact during periods of weak product
demand.

Also, some rural retail stores in drought-stricken areas have

excessive inventories because of depressed sales.
Manufacturing industries including steel, automobile, chemical,
paper, and appliances registered some sales gains in recent week3.

A steel

industry representative noted that the industry is in the early stages of a
recovery based on modest increases in demand for steel from the consumer
product sector. . However, no sizable increase in steel output is anticipated
until capital spending gains momentum later in the decade.

Although some

automobile workers have been called back to work in the St. Louis area, the
industry remains relatively depressed.

For example, at the 1979 peak,

automobile manufacturing jobs in St. Louis totaled at nearly 30,000 compared
to about 12,000 at present.

A representative of a major appliance firm,

noting that sales have trended up since last summer, is optimistic about
continued gains.
Capital spending is still declining and manufacturers of some
equipment, such as machine tools, and lubrication and welding equipment,
report that previous backlogs have been depleted and that operations are now
on a hand-to-mouth basis.
worst is over.

A machine tool manufacturer reported that the

In contrast to the overall picture, expenditures on oil and

natural gas equipment and military hardware remain at a high level.
Arkansas, for example, reports considerable investment in the drilling of
shallow oil wells which are expected to pay off in about 12 months.

Construction activity, which gained momentum in the summer months,
has lost ground again.

Home sales represent the most affected area and the

decline here is largely blamed on the sharp rise in mortgage interest
rates.

Nonresidential construction, remains relatively strong.

Although

total volume is down, one contracting firm reported that bids are being made
on a considerable number of projects and that funds for the projects are
available.
Loan demand continues to increase with business and consumer
installment credit being responsible for most of the gain.

While mortgage

interest rates have remained around 14 percent in recent weeks, banks
lending rates have continued to increase and mortgage lenders generally
expect increases in mortgage interest rates in the near future.

One saving

and loan official noted that margins have again become depressed, and he
charged that competition for funds from the Federal government is
responsible for the continuing high interest rates.
In the agricultural sector, lower crop yields in many areas is
leading to severely depressed farm income.

Harvesting and fall plantings

are proceeding rapidly with generally favorable weather conditions
possible.

Chicken production in Arkansas is resuming normal levels after

last summer's losses.

Placements of broiler chickens are now running

somewhat ahead of a year ago.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

With interest rates continuing to rise, the district's recovery was
sluggish in October.

Although there were modest gains in merchandise and auto

sales and in manufacturing production, there was no change in mining or agricultural activity and there was a sharp decline in home sales.

Reflecting these

lackluster economic conditions, bank lending did not increase.

Consumer Spending

Consumer spending was frugal.

According to bank directors ana large

Minneapolis/St. Paul retailers, general merchandise sales increased modestly
between September and October.

Likewise, car sales accelerated modestly in

October, according

sales offices

facturers.

to regional

of

domestic

automobile

manu-

However, home sales, which are very sensitive to interest rates,

declined as the dollar value of mortgage loan applications at Minneapolis/St.
Paul area S&Ls dropped 36 percent between September and October.

Industrial Activity and Inventories

In October, industrial activity shifted to low gear.

After improving

adequately for three months, manufacturing production grew more slowly in October, directors reported.

This slower growth, one director believes, stems from

recent interest rate increases which pushed up inventory costs and caused businesses to curb their orders.
output remained below grade.

While manufacturing production slowed, mining
In northern Minnesota and the Upper Peninsula of

Michigan, iron ore shipment continued to be depressed in October, and in Montana
copper mines remained shut down by a labor dispute.

Agriculture

The favorable agricultural conditions that existed in the district in
September remained unblighted.

Favorable weather continued into October, so

crops properly matured and farmers had ideal conditions for harvesting corn,
soybeans, and sunflowers.
October.

Like the weather, favorable prices continued into

In Minneapolis, the average cash prices for corn and soybeans were

unchanged between September and October, and wheat prices rose 8 percent.

In St.

Paul, average cash prices for cattle and hogs were close to their September
levels.

Financial Developments

Because of the discrict'3 sluggish recovery, there was no advance in
bank lending.

Loans outstanding at Minneapolis/St. Paul area banks were essen-

tially unchanged between September and October.

Directors from outside the

Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area also reported no lending increases at
commercial banks in their areas.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.
sluggish.

Economic activity in the Kansas City District remains

Purchasing agents report excess plant capacity and workers still

on layoffs.

Auto dealers report new models to be selling moderately well, but

homebuilders report construction activity has slowed dramatically.

Retailers

report continued sluggishness in sales, although their expectations are for
improvements in coming months.

Corn and soybean yields are reported lower-

than-normal because of drought conditions earlier this summer.

Except for

those regions involved in energy-related industries, both loan demand and
deposit growth are reported by Tenth District banks to have been flat-toslightly improved over the past month.
Manufacturers' Inventories and Input Prices.

Purchasing agents

contacted report that the growth in input prices has slowed in recent months,
but that they expect renewed acceleration over the coming months.

Most

materials are in adequate supply and are expected to remain so throughout the
winter.

Most District firms are maintaining lean inventories and are ordering

smaller quantities of materials than last year.

Almost half the firms con-

tacted have excess plant capacity, and still have some workers on layoff.
Automobile Sales.

Automobile Dealers Associations report that the

new models are selling moderately well and are expected to continue to do so
in the coming months.

High interest rates are inducing dealers to hold lower

stocks which, along with tight manufacturer allocations, has caused some
bottlenecks in the supply of some popular new models.
Homebuilding and Home Finance.

Homebuilders Associations indicate

that housing starts have stagnated after a brief upturn last summer.

Prices

of new homes are rising only slightly and excess inventories of unsold homes
have not yet developed.

High interest rates are expected to curtail sales in

the near future, however.

Savings and Loan Associations report savings inflows

to have been quite strong recently.

Demand for mortgage funds has slackened

considerably since mortgage rates have again risen above 12 per cent.

It is

feared that mortgage rates, currently at 13 to 13 1/2 per cent, may rise further.
Retail Sales and Inventories.

The majority of Tenth District

retailers contacted indicate nominal retail sales since August to have been
only slightly better than during the same period a year ago.

Current dollar

sales have apparently weakened noticeably in automotive and apparel merchandise
while durable goods sales have shown slight improvement in the most recent
months of this year.
months.

Merchandise costs have reportedly slowed in recent

During the August-October period, most retailers have maintained the

same markup over costs as in the past, but have had difficulties maintaining
profit margins at past levels because of increased expenditures for promotional
advertising and promotional price cutting.

Most retailers report existing

merchandise inventories to be excessive, primarily because of the weakness in
sales.

However, inventory levels are not being significantly trimmed because

sales are expected to strengthen as the Christmas season approaches.
Agriculture.

Harvesting of corn and soybeans in the Tenth District

has been virtually completed.

Most states report lower yields on both crops,

due primarily to the drought conditions earlier this summer.

In many areas

of excellent cropland, yields fell 10 to 12 per cent below normal years.
The number of farmers not expected to be credit worthy during 1981 is about
twice what is usual.

However, as a result of drought and hail this summer,

many area farmers are eligible for low cost emergency loans from the Farmers

Home Administration which may allow many to regain some financial stability.
The winter wheat crop is in good condition throughout most of the District,
although planted acreage is reported as lower-than-normal.
Banking Developments.

Loan demand is reported flat-to-slightly

higher at most Tenth District banks contacted this month.

Exceptions are

some banks in Wyoming and Oklahoma where energy-related loans continued to
show significant strength.

Demand for real estate loans has been mixed

recently, with some bankers in Oklahoma, Wyoming, and New Mexico reporting
continued moderate lending for commercial properties.

Some of the banks con-

tacted report weakening in consumer loans primarily due to automobile credit.
Rural banks report slight declines in agricultural loans.

All of the banks

contacted have raised their prime or base lending rates within the past month.
Some of the metropolitan area bankers currently have prime rates of 14 1/2 to
15 per cent, following the lead of large money center banks.

Base fees at

some country banks have recently increased to 16 1/2 per cent.
Deposits at Tenth District banks contacted have been flat-to-significantly higher this past month.

Regions involved in energy-related industries

have recorded the greatest increases.

Demand deposits are particularly strong

in these areas, as are large CD's and money market certificates.

In other

regions of the Tenth District, the growth of deposits has been flat-to-slightly
higher reflecting the trends in local loan demand.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Business

conditions

proved from a month ago.

in the Eleventh District

are

somewhat ixa-

However, survey respondents agree that additional

increases in interest rates will curtail the current expansion.

The growth

of department store sales is stronger this month, and car and truck sales
are improving.

Inventories of unsold homes are accumulating, and housing

starts have slowed in response to declining sales.

Total loan demand is

expanding slowly, while repayments of agricultural loans remain difficult.
Factory output remains mixed.
All major

urban areas

growth in retail sales.

In

the Eleventh

District

show

renewed

Price discounting and sales promotions are active

as retailers strive to increase market share.

While retailers are optimis-

tic about the coming holiday sales season, they are cautious in expanding
inventories, preferring to risk a loss in sales rather than accumulate excessive stocks.
Auto dealers report improved sales.

The introduction of the 1981

models is said to be helping sales, although some buyers are deterred by
the high sticker prices.

Smaller models are selling best.

Most sales are

financed through auto manufacturers' credit divisions, including those of a
large Datsun dealer.

Inventories are adequate and closely controlled.

Housing starts continue to slide, and builders' inventories of
unsold homes are rising.

Still, demand remains strong as people continue

to move to the Southwest.
though prices are softening.

Sales of higher-priced homes remain stable al-

Commercial
strong, and
Texas.

construction

the outlook

is for

However, a decline

activity
continued

in

the District

growth

remains very

in Houston

and

South

in bidding on new construction contracts in

North Texas suggests building activity in that part of the state will slow
in

the

future.

Heavy

construction

and

highway

building

continues

to

decline as Federal funding is curtailed.
Total loans at District banks are growing slowly.

C&I loan de-

mand continues to be buoyed by the oil and gas industry, although some is
due to inventory accumulation at department stores and in auto-related industries.

Permanent

construction financing has been almost

unavailable

since life insurance companies left the commercial mortgage market.

How-

ever, a few projects are still being undertaken as some banks are willing
to make preferred customers interim construction loans that are unsecured
by permanent financing.
Consumer credit is softening.

Mortgage loan demand is strong,

yet commitments continue to decline as fewer potential buyers can qualify
for loans.

Mortgage companies report loan volume is half of the level six

weeks ago.

The number of defaults is beginning to grow.

sures in Houston are up 32 percent from last year.

FHA-VA foreclo-

Demand for home im-

provement loans is very strong, but credit card usage is flat.
Net inflows of deposits at banks and S&L's are even with last
month's levels.

Liabilities of S&L's continue to move toward shorter ma-

turity certificates, and liquidity levels are as high as 13 percent.
Conditions
trict.

in manufacturing

remain

mixed

throughout

the Dis-

Sales continue to rise for electronics and suppliers to the oil and

gas industry.

Drilling is at record levels, and order backlogs for new

rigs exceed 12 months of production.
strong.

Demand In other industries is less

Oil stocks and chemical inventories remain high on the Gulf Coast,

but chemical shipments are rising.

Lumber and wood shipments are declining

from September's peak, and prices remain below the level a year ago.

Manu-

facturers of construction equipment report a slowdown in orders in the last
30 days.
The rise in labor costs shows little sign of slowing.

Wage in-

creases throughout the District are averaging 8 to 9 percent annually.
biggest gains are In energy-related

industries.

A manufacturer

The

of oil

tools reports union workers negotiated a 17-percent increase in the first
year of their new contract.
Agricultural conditions remain substantially unchanged from last
month.

Loan repayments continue to slow as crop failures are still ad-

versely affecting farm incomes.

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District is still reporting signs of the continuing
recession.

Retail sales remain at depressed levels and no signs of growth

are being anticipated.

Interest rates continue to be a major source of

anxiety in the region.

It is feared that the rise in interest rates will

have a number of adverse effects on the district.

The brief recovery of

the housing industry is expected to be completely stopped with mortgage
rates at 14 1/2 percent and above.

The lumber industry is experiencing

a further reduction in demand and a number of firms are anticipating closures.
Concern is also being expressed over the condition of financial institutions.
With the higher interest rates and the approaching changes in the industry,
lower profits are anticipated.

Brighter notes are expressed over agricultural

prospects and activities in oil and mineral exploration.

Unemployment figures

remain stable.
The volume of RETAIL SALES continues to be low and most areas are
reporting little optimism for a quick recovery.
sales well below last year's levels.
has kept inventories at low levels.

Retailers are reporting

Conservatism in new-order policies
Automobile sales appear to be picking

up somewhat as the introduction of the 1981 line of cars has created some
consumer interest.

It is too early to tell if this interest is sufficient

to change the fortunes of the automobile industry.
OIL AND MINERAL exploration continues to create discussion in some
parts of the region.

A waterflood project, costing S3 billion, is expected

to increase oil recovery in Prudhoe Bay by more than 1 billion barrels

when completed.

It is reported that substantial petroleum deposits have

been discovered in Beaufort Sea, next to Prudhoe Bay.
in Utah and Nevada are booming.

The mining industries

Activity in the region has increased with

the increased interest in synthetic fuels created by recently passed Congressional
legislation.

Changes in economic conditions of parts of the region, especially

Alaska where oil revenues have allowed the State to cut and refund taxes,
are being anticipated.
The AGRICULTURAL outlook at harvest time appears to be very good.
Many areas are reporting large crops which will push down the prices faced
by consumers.
profit levels.

Despite the decline in prices, farmers are expecting good
Conditions for the lumber industry are reported to be bleak.

With the rise in interest rates, demand for homebuilding material has come
to a standstill and firms are anticipating a number of closures.
A general concern is being expressed about FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
An outflow of deposits has occurred with the rise in interest rates.
profits are being widely reported.
the upcoming changes in banking.

Declining

Concern has also been expressed about
One respondent feared that the relaxation

of rate requisitions and the enhancement of competition may increase unsound
banking practices as banks attempt to attract business.

Policies taken

concerning NOW accounts might be able to give a good indication of future
behavior.
MORTGAGE RATES in the Twelfth District are in the range of 14-1/2
percent.

A few lenders are offering loans at lower rates but they tend

to have stricter lending terms.

Restrictions are placed on the maximum

amount of the loan and loan fees are often higher at financial institutions

charging lower rates.

A number of savings and loan associations have stopped

offering mortgage loans.
The HOUSING market continues to be weak.

The rise in interest

rates has inhibited both buyers and new construction.

The housing market

was said to be holding up in the past months because of mortgage loan applications that were submitted in periods when the interest rate was lower.
A better indication of the effect of the rise in interest rates is the number
of new loan applications submitted.

This number has declined sharply and

a decline in housing activity is anticipated.

However, the decline is not

expected to be as severe as the one which occurred last March.
UNEMPLOYMENT figures remain stable.

The lumber and construction

industries remain well below last year's employment levels.

In some areas

employment in housing related industries is down by as much as 50 percent.
Some farm laborers have finished their seasonal jobs and an increase in
unemployment is expected.

There is some concern that there will not be

enough jobs in the immediate years ahead to provide employment to those
entering the job market.

