CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 11, 1980

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 25
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 28
Tenth District-Kansas City page 31
Eleventh District-Dallas page 34
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 37

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk:Prepared at Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.]

The REDBOOK reports this month indicate that business activity
is holding quite steady in most districts, with few widespread signs of
weakness.

High technology and defense-related industries are performing

particularly well.

The major exceptions to this pattern are the housing

and automobile industries, which are exhibiting considerable weakness.
Most districts report very strong volumes of retail sales —

a phenomenon

which several reports ascribed to a pervasive "spend it now" psychology
on the part of consumers.

Reports of continued inflation are also widespread.

With the exception of home mortgages, loan volumes were reported to be strong
in most districts prior to the recent runup in rates.
indicate a subsequent weakening of loan demand.

Spotty current reports

Financial institutions

are experiencing considerable conversion of savings deposits into moneymarket liabilities, and there is widespread concern about the consequent
effect on the cost of funds and institutional profitability.

The agricultural

sector is apparently in good shape in most districts.
Most districts report generally strong industrial activity.

New

York, for example, reports brisk new orders and generally steady activity.
Minneapolis finds industrial output and employment expanding; manufacturing
employment is up M percent from a year ago.
slowing, growth in manufacturing.

Dallas finds continued, but

Activity related to high-technology,

defense and energy-saving products is reported to be particularly vigorous
by Boston, New York and San Francisco.
in the petroleum industry.

Dallas finds high levels of activity

In contrast to these reports, Philadelphia describes weakening
manufacturing activity and the trimming of factory payrolls.

Kansas City

and Richmond also find some softening in the general level of business activity.
The automobile industry continues to be weak, evidenced by a pattern of
temporary furloughs of workers.

Chicago calls the industry "seriously depressed.

The housing industry has been hit hard by recent high interest
rates.

Starts sire reported down 20 percent or more by Kansas City, for

example, with prices weakening on new homes.

Chicago and San Francisco

report that homebuilding activity has been sensitive to interest-rate movements;
softening of rates earlier in the quarter caused some builders to develop
new tracts but the recent runup in rates has curtailed this development.
Dallas reports that non-residential construction is helping to offset the
impact of the housing decline on the construction industry.
Throughout the economy, retail sales have been holding steady or
growing relative to this time last year.

Boston reports "good" sales volumes.

Department store sales were 8 to 20 percent over last year according to
Philadelphia.

Some New York retailers report "staggeringly good" sales,

although this is partly ascirbed to the exceptionally mild weather in the
region.

The volume of sales in the Dallas district has held up well in

real terms.

Kansas City describes sales gains as "moderate," and Minneapolis

reports "spotty" or "steady" sales volumes.

Throughout the districts, sales

of large automobiles are weak, however, with 15 percent declines in overall
sales reported by Minneapolis and San Francisco despite vigorous small-car
sales.
Loan demand generally appears strong, except for mortgages.

Philadel-

phia, for example, finds commercial-loan volumes up 5 to 18 percent over

last year.

Richmond and St. Louis find that demand is particularly strong

on the part of corporations for interim financing rather than long-term
credit.

In locations where usury limits are not binding, consumer loan

flows appear to be strong.

Chicago reports an increase in consumer-credit

delinquencies, however, and Philadelphia notes that repayments are slowing.
The high interest rates have had a significant effect on the mortgage market.
Applications for mortgages are down 75 percent in Tennessee, for example,
and New York describes a "collapsed" mortgage market.
Many of the reports for the REDBOOK this month were received before
the recent runup in interest rates.

However, a few very current reports

suggest that high rates have sharply reduced credit demand.
recently withdrew a $125 million bond offering, for example.

New York City
Chicago reports

that the "bite" of high rates is particularly apparent from reports from
car dealers.

San Francisco indicates that frozen-food processors and other

industries for whom inventory is important are being hurt by high rates.
Financial institutions throughout the various districts are experiencing conversion of savings accounts to money-market forms of liabilities.
Deposit outflows are not widely reported, although Dallas and New York report
some disintermediation at district S&L's.

Kansas City reports that S&L's

are pessimistic about deposit inflows, and St. Louis finds that fears of
a "liquidity bind" are growing at financial institutions.
The agricultural sector appears to be relatively healthy in most
districts.

Strong Pacific Rim export demand is helping farmers in the San

Francisco district.

Also, grain prices have not been depressed by the embargo

of sales to the Soviets, according to San Francisco and Minneapolis.

Atlanta

reports that the Florida citrus crop escaped major damage from recent frosts,
but Richmond reports extensive damage to poultry operations in North Carolina.

Reports of continued inflation are widespread.

Boston reports

that a large food chain has experienced price increases from a greater number
of vendors than ever before.

Philadelphia's poll of manufacturers reveals

that three-quarters of the respondents report paying higher prices for raw
materials this month, and 70 percent plan price hikes for the goods they
sell.

Chicago notes that rumors of wage and price controls abound and that

this has triggered anticipatory price increases.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Respondents in the First District report that business is holding
steady at a high level.

The most notable change has been acceleration in

the rate of price increase.

Retailers are generally pleased; sales are

keeping pace with inflation.

Manufacturers report little change from the

production and order rates of the past several months; what was strong
before is still strong and the weak sectors have not deteriorated any
further.

Loan demand has levelled off, but the volume is still very high.

Bankers are looking at loan customers very closely for signs of cash flow
difficulties.
Retailers report that sales have held steady in real terms since
the beginning of the year.

This is considered a good performance and is

expected to continue through the spring.

The prices of sales merchandise

have gone up much less than the CPI; however, the head of a large food
store chain said that the number of vendors increasing prices in January
and February was greater than ever before.

An exception to the relatively

favorable retail situation is that sector of retailing which is associated
with the ski industry.

Losses due to a lack of snow have been severe and

many small firms are turning to the Small Business Administration for loans.
Manufacturing respondents have seen little change in their operations
during the past month.

No new weaknesses have been reported other than

recreational aircraft, sales of which are sagging sharply.

High technology

areas are doing very well, especially those related to the defense industry.
Sales of industrial safety equipment, which are tied to national production, have
come back strongly after a weak fourth quarter.

A manufacturer of capital

equipment used in the pulp and paper and chemical industries has record
backlogs.

High quality appliances are selling well although there has been

some slowdown at the lower end of the range.

Sales of housing materials

for new construction are weak, but sales for repair and remodelling are
fairly good.

All respondents continue to believe that inventories are

under control.
Loan demand is steady at a high level according to First District
banking directors.

However, one of the region's largest banks reports that

there has been a surge in the demand for commitments from corporations
which are concerned about the possibility of credit controls.
firn commitments for which fees have been paid.

These are

The competition for loans

is still very intense among the larger banks.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin
ware available for comment this month.
Eckstein applauds the recent sharp increases in interest rates.
He feels it is prudent to wait a month or two before tightening again,
however.

A3 businesses are turned away from the bond market and are

driven into bank loans, MIA may surge temporarily. Eckstein, nevertheless,
favors reducing money growth: "A reasonable target for MIA growth this
year may be less than 5 percent due to the recession."

And, if necessary,

interest rates should be increased until real aggregate demand declines
because "the recession should not be a worry, it is badly needed."
Solow believes we are on the verge of a two- or three-quarter
recession; however, he does not believe the recession will reduce the
inflation rate significantly.

To achieve 5 percent inflation, the

unemployment rate either would have to rise to 11 percent for two years

or would have to remain near 7 percent for 10 years.
opposed to properly prepared wage-price controls."

Solow is "not

A short-term

(6-month) freeze, for example, has a chance of reducing inflation
provided it is accompanied by oil import quotas as well as the appropriate
reductions in Federal spending and money growth consistent with lower
inflation.

He does not favor credit controls:

reduce inflation and nominal interest rates.

A successful freeze will
In any case, Solow strongly

emphasizes that the Fed should avoid being "stampeded" into precipitous
action by a few months of distressing data representing past oil price
and mortgage rate increases.
Tobin favors wage-price controls.

Rather than "muddle through"

with high inflation or bring about a recession severe enough to reduce
the inflation rate significantly, he advocates a policy that couples
wage-price controls with a gradual reduction in money growth and Federal
spending.

Unlike Solow, Tobin does not favor a freeze: inflation cannot

be reduced 6 percentage points "in one big blow."

A reasonable goal is

to reduce inflation by 1 or 2 percentage points per year by a succession
of guideposts.

Tobin does not favor credit controls because these

controls, unlike wage-price controls, "are an unneeded substitute for
tools the Fed already possesses."
Samuelson does not favor wage-price controls.

He believes

these controls can arrest the momentum of inflation only when they are
enacted during the first year of inflation and when inflation is driven
by irrational speculation or an ordinary cycle of wages pushing prices
and prices pushing wages.

Our current inflation is too mature and

too complex for wage-price controls to work.

Samuelson favors reducing

inflation by maintaining real growth near zero, because, in his opinion,
any attempt to restrain price increases must also restrain output growth,
and slow growth is the least disruptive means of lowering the inflation
rate.
Houthakker, like Samuelson, does not favor wage-price controls
because they are expensive, cumbersome, and ineffective.
Houthakker sees no sign that inflation has accelerated.

Moreover,
He does not believe

the CPI provides a meaningful measure of the inflation rate; the rate of
increase of the fixed-weight deflator, a superior index, has been virtually
constant in recent quarters.

His recent statistical work suggests that

"monetary policy is working" so "the Fed should stay on its present course."
Though the inflation rate will remain high during the first half of the year,
it should decline in the fall.

He also sees no sign of a serious recession,

although real growth during the year will be nearly zero.

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District appears to have been
steady in February, according to recent comments of directors and other
business leaders.

Retail sales appear to be holding up overall, although

there are scattered signs of incipient weakness.
business activity continues to advance.

Outside of retailing,

New orders were generally brisk,

and firms show no signs of easing their tight rein on inventories.

At this

point, there is little evidence that companies are revising their investment
plans in light of the recent marked tightening in financial conditions.
Activity in the mortgage market, however, appears to have virtually collapsed.
Consumer spending has been somewhat erratic in February and early
March.

Most of the major department stores reported strong sales in February

which were running well ahead of plans.

A spokesman for one large national

chain store described sales as "staggeringly good."
thought to be an important factor, however.

Improved weather was

The weather this February was

so much milder than last year at least one merchant raised the possibility
that some of the strong advance in February may have been "borrowed" from
coming months.

Indeed, the bulk of responses point to a distinct slowdown

in sales beginning at the end of February that carried over into early
March.

In any event, several sources in the fashion industry noted that the

high prices for this year's new spring line of women's apparel had run into
stiff consumer resistance.

In upstate New York, total retail sales were

reportedly strong although auto sales had weakened.

Throughout the District,

retail inventories appear to be in balance with sales and merchants'
stocking plans reflect a keen concern over an impending recession.

Outside of retailing, the business situation appears to be fairlyresilient.

In general, companies expect a near-term slowdown, especially

in view of the recent runup in financing costs.

Still, individual companies

report that they have not themselves been touched by the projected downturn.
Indeed, in recent weeks, new orders have been brisk, especially for heavy
machinery.

One upstate forge reported that business was "booming."

Also,

high technology defense industries show signs of robust activity in both the
Buffalo and Rochester areas.
The recent turbulence in the financial markets has had a diverse
impact on business firms.

Evidently as a result of the high cost of finance,

companies appear to be tightening the rein on their inventories to the
bare-bones minimum.

They report that their inventory positions are "well

managed" and in line with the anticipated slowdown in their sales levels.
Companies also generally report no change in their capital spending plans,
despite the current tight financial market conditions.

Money was said to be

amply available, but at extraordinarily high interest rates.

As of now, the

high financing charges apparently have not proved to be much of a deterrent
for firms' planned capital spending.

Capital spending appears to be

strongly affected by the inflation psychology of spend now since it will
cost more later.
Elsewhere on the financial scene, however, mortgage lending appears
to have come to a screeching halt.

Whereas mortgage interest rates in New

York and New Jersey had been subject to usury ceilings which were among the
lowest in the nation, the Federal override has freed them at least temporarily.
In recent weeks, then, mortgage rates have skyrocketed to levels of 15
percent or more.

Indeed, at least one large commercial bank is charging

17 percent plus two points for co-op loans in New York City.

At those

rates, prospective homebuyers are reportedly postponing their plans —
hoping that rates will decline soon.

At the same time, the high cost of

funds has led to a worsening in the outflows of deposits at thrift institutions and sharply reduced their profitability.
Within the Second District, state and local governments are encountering financial problems unanticipated at the time of their budget preparations.

New York State, which in January proposed an austere budget for

the fiscal year beginning April 1, will face sharply higher credit costs
next month.

At that time, it must sell about $3 billion in short-term notes.

Presently prevailing credit market conditions are expected to cost the state
as much as $80 million more than it had expected.

In the case of New York

City, adverse market conditions have caused the city to postpone a scheduled
sale of $125 million in bonds.

Although some of this borrowing was to be

used to finance current expenses, an unforeseen $275 million cash surplus
will be used instead.

THIRD DISTRICT —

PHILADELPHIA

Reports from the Third District indicate that business activity
is mixed this month.

The recent decline in manufacturing has continued,

with businessmen expecting little or no change over the next six months.
Retailers, on the other hand, have had an extremely good month with sales
even stronger than predicted.

Area bankers are experiencing fairly strong

loan volume with little change anticipated through the second quarter.
Interest rates are expected to increase in the next month, absent strict
credit controls.
Area department stores report surprisingly strong sales this
February.

Current dollar sales are 8 to 20 percent over February '79

volume, which is much better than most retailers expected.

Part of the

strength stems from the weather which has been relatively mild this past
month compared to the heavy snow storms of last year that kept many people
away from the stores.

Merchants also say that consumers are not curtailing

their spending or their use of credit, but repayments have slowed a bit.
Inventories are said to be in good shape.

Merchants went into the month

bearish so stocks are trim.
Retailers anticipate a slight slowdown in the next few months,
but are less worried about the recession than they were at the end of the
year.

They estimate moderate year-over-year increases of 6 to 7 percent

in the next two quarters.
In the financial sector loan volume at area banks is up over
year-ago levels, with most of the increase being attributed to commercial

loans.

Reports of C&I loan volume range from 5 to 18 percent over levels

of last March.

Consumer laons are also up, but by less.

Looking ahead

to the next six months, loan volume projections indicate little change
between now and September.
Banks in the Third District are currently quoting a prime rate
of 17 3/4 percent.

Projections of the prime call for an increase in the

next month of about 100 basis points, provided that strict credit controls,
which all bankers contacted anticipate, are not enacted, followed by large
cuts leaving the rate 300 to 400 basis points below its current level by
the end of the year.
Area manufacturing activity appears to have dropped another notch
this month according to the most recent Business Outlook Survey, pushing
the industrial sector further into the slump that began eight months ago.
Recent trends in specific indicators of business acitivity have continued,
with new orders down again substantially and shipments off to a lesser
degree.

Inventory liquidation seems to have slowed, at least temporarily.

On the employment front, factory payrolls have been trimmed again (for only
the second time since the downturn started) and working hours- have been cut
as well.
For the longer term, survey respondents are expecting a holding
pattern for business over the next six months.

Virtually no change in

the overall business climate is forecast between now and late summer, nor
is any change in new orders or inventory levels predicted.
pickup in shipments is anticipated.

Only a marginal

Such a mediocre outlook doesn't mean

bad news for local labor; no further net payroll cuts are planned by

respondents.

Any necessary cutback in manpower will apparently be effected

through a shorter workweek.
Prices are up again in the industrial sector, according to this
month's survey.

About three-quarters of the manufacturers polled this

month report paying higher prices for raw materials than they did last
month, and better than half are charging more for their finished products.
Looking ahead to August, 87 percent of the respondents expect input costs
to go up by late summer, while 70 percent plan price hikes for the goods
they sell.

FOURTH DISTRICT —

CLEVELAND

Business activity in the Fourth District continues to show strength,
although accelerated inflation and higher interest rates have caused some
respondents to lower their forecasts of GNP for 1980.

Consumer spending

continues to expand, and most respondents expect only a gradual rise in the
savings rate.

The steel industry is experiencing a rebound in orders because

customer attitudes about inventories have apparently been revised upward.
Consumer loans are showing signs of slowing because of higher interest rates,
C and I loans remain strong, especially among larger banks.

Several S&Ls

report a sharp decline in mortgage lending and few expect any improvement in
the near future.
Economists who attended a Fourth District Economists Roundtable
held at this bank on March 7 still expect a recession in 1980, but one that
is more mild than they expected at a similar meeting last November.

Of

sixteen economists who attended the meeting, fifteen forecast a slight decline
in real GNP this quarter and expected that the balance of the recession would
get underway in the second quarter.

The meeting forecast of this group shows

a 0.2 percent annual rate of decline in real GNP in the first quarter, 2.8
percent decline in the second, 1.6 percent decline in the third, and a recovery of 0.5 percent and 2.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 1980 and first
quarter of 1981, respectively.

Next quarter reduction in GNP is associated

largely with a substantial reduction in the rate of growth in nominal consumer
spending and another decline in residential construction.

Skepticism over

a mild recession scenario was expressed by some of the group who felt that
high inflation and high interest rates may result in a more serious recession

than indicated in immediate forecasts.
Some of the upward shift in expectations about the economy was
associated with continued, though mixed* strength in consumer spending.

Con-

sumers have been cutting back usage of some goods in order to have money
available for goods that are perceived to be a hedge against inflation or that
are perceived as a bargain.

A major producer of appliances reports a better

than expected order pattern in recent weeks, after weakening in December.

A

producer of non durables, however, has not experienced the increase in his
business that was expected because of high inflation.

An economist for a

major department store chain expects a 10 percent increase in total goods
sales (current dollars) in 1980, which is still below his expected inflation
rate.

An automotive economist reports that consumers are taking advantage of

price discounting on 1979 models, but sales of 1980 models have been adversely
affected.

Although most respondents expect the personal savings rate to

remain low in the near term, they also expect a gradual pickup to about a
4.5 percent rate by year-end.

Demographic changes and inflation psychology

are the most often given explanation for the low rate.
Reflecting the changes in expectations, new orders and shipments
in the steel industry have shown unexpected strength since the beginning of
the year.

As a result, some recalls of workers have taken place.

According

to one steel economist, many customers had cut orders more than necessary at
the end of 1979.

Most of the cuts came from steel service centers in

attempts to liquidate inventory.

Now, however, steel inventories are judged

low and some customers have begun to rebuild stock.

A steel official reports

a 50 percent increase in bookings during January and February, but attributes

some of that strength to hedging against an April price increase for flatlong steel.

The capacity utilization rate in the industry is currently about

83 percent of capacity, but new orders, according to a steel economist, are
equivalent to a 90 percent rate.

However, some steel officials expect customers

to be under pressure to cut inventories because of the high cost of financing
inventories and because the availability of steel is no longer a serious
concern.
Consumer loans have softened.

One District banker reports installment

loans have been reduced because credit terms have tightened.

Although

demand remains strong, loans are only being made to better customers who meet
stringent requirements, including higher down payments.

One bank official

reports that interest rates on auto loans have been boosted to 17 percent,
which is expected to dry up consumer loans and to affect auto dealers who
cannot sell to commercial buyers.
Larger banks generally expect increased demand for C and I loans,
while smaller banks report C and I loans to be relatively slack.

One bank

official reports that firms are cutting back on equiment spending and some
firms postponed debt offerings.

Some banks exposit nervousness

among borrowers about credit availability, but they've discouraged requests
for increased lines of credit.

One bank economist reports increased in-

quiries by utilities and expects higher loan volumes in the near future.
Large firms can still pay higher interest rates and strong loan demand is
expected for several months, partly because of inventory demand, hedging against
further increases, and a surge in acquisition loans.

On the other hand,

some small businesses are cutting back because of higher interest rates.

Mortgage lending weakened substantially in February and several
S&Ls are reported to have withdrawn from the market in recent weeks.

Mortgage

rates vary from 14 1/2 percent to 16 percent, plus two points or so.

One

S&L official states that current mortgage rates and credit conditions disqualify many potential buyers.

A respondent reported a 50 percent decline

in loans and a 60 percent decline in commitments in February from a year
earlier, and expects March to be even worse.

A supplier to the residential

construction industry confirms that a collapse in orders has occurred.

Housing,

according to an S&L economist, will continue to weaken in 1980 until interest
rates decline.

Although prolonged high interest rates are encouraged through

S&Ls, several official expressed concern that credit controls could accelerate
disintermediation.

Since 35 percent of all certificates mature in July,

interest rates must decline by then to prevent a total collapse of the
mortgage market, according to one S&L official.

FIFTH DISTRICT —

RICHMOND

Business activity in the Fifth District remains spotty but does
not show any clearly defined trends, either generally or within industries.
Manufacturers' new orders continued to weaken slightly over the past month
and order backlogs were further reduced, but shipments were somewhat higher
and inventories were generally larger than in January.

Still, fewer than

a third of our respondents find current stocks: excessive.

Retail sales seem

to have advanced in the past month despite some softening in big ticket
lines.

Inventories at the retail level are essentially unchanged and are

generally in line with desired levels.

It appears that aggregate credit

demand in the District is holding steady, but its composition is changing.
Business loan demand is now the primary source of overall strength.

Instal-

ment loan demand is sagging while mortgage lending practices have tightened
considerably.

Recent snowstorms inflicted substantial and lasting damage on

poultry producing operations in parts of the District.
In the manufacturing sector new orders remain soft and order backlogs
continue to be worked down; on the other hand, both shipments and inventories
were up somewhat in the past month.

Despite the rise in stocks on hand,

particularly in finished goods, there was virtually no change in inventories
relative to desired levels.

Employment and the length of the workweek held

essentially stable over the month.

An overwhelming majority of manufacturers

remain satisfied with current plant and equipment capacity and with current
expansion plans.
The recent softness in new orders does not appear to be concentrated
in any particular area or industry.

Industries such as building materials,

paper products, and electrical equipment have shown perhaps the least strength
in recent weeks.

Textile firms report basically stable orders, while some

strength has appeared in the furniture group.
Retail sales continue firm across the District.
sales are providing much of this overall strength.
weakened, at least in relative terms.

General merchandise

Big ticket items have

Inventories held by retailers were

level, on balance, over the month, but apparently declined relative to desired levels.

Most retail respondents are comfortable with current stocks.

Price increases remain pervasive and there is little evidence in our
survey responses of any easing in this area.

A large majority of our directors

anticipate price increases, as measured by the CPI, to be at least as great
in 1980 as in 1979.
months.

Expectations generally are less uniform than in recent

District manufacturers, on balance, remain deeply pessimistic, al-

though less so than in recent months.

Most continue to expect a decline

in national business activity over the next six months, but the number expecting declines in their respective firms and market areas is somewhat lower
than a month ago.

Retailers, on balance, expect little change in the level

of activity over the next six months.

Although our survey responses suggest

that most firms are comfortable with current expansion plans, most of our
directors foresee many firms cancelling or delaying previously approved
investment projects.
Despite sharp increases in the prime lending rate, business loan
growth at large Fifth District banks has been strong recently.

Factors

contributing to this strength in commercial and industrial loans have been
a demand for short-term bank loans for interim financing until long-term
bond rates drop and demand for tax-free industrial revenue financing.

Business

loan growth would be even stronger if it were not for some prime rate loans
having been paid early as borrowers shift to the commercial paper market as
a source of funds.

Area banks have become much less willing to make fixed~

rate loans of any maturity, and loans for speculative purposes are being discouraged.

The demand for and use of loan commitments has not changed to any

great degree.

Moreover, the consensus among District bankers seems to be that

over the near-term business loan demand will continue about as is or possibly
weaken moderately.
In the past few weeks personal loans made by large banks have shown
almost no growth.
limited supply.
credit area.

This appears to be due to slackening demand rather than

By and large, District banks remain active in the retail

A number of reports have indicated that credit unions, however,

are short of loanable funds.

Instalment loan rates are up sharply since the

most recent discount rate increases and indications are that the increased
cost of credit is discouraging consumer borrowing.

The rate on home mortgages

is also up sharply for those potential borrowers who can find funds.

Our

recent survey of lending practices at large banks shows half of the respondents
less willing to make single-family mortgage loans.

Two-thirds are now less

willing to lend funds for multi-family properties.

Thrift institutions are

much less active in the mortgage market, and our directors report that funds
availability is tight around the District.
Recent winter storms resulted in severe losses to poultry producers
in parts of the District, particularly eastern North Carolina.
more than 100 poultry raising operations were destroyed.

In one county

Stock losses in

that area may amount to one-half million broilers and 200,000 turkeys.

SIXTH DISTRICT —

ATLANTA

Retail sales continued to expand, especially for energy-saving
items.

Small car purchases led the advance in automobile sales.

mortgage interest rates hampered home sales.

Soaring

The recent surge in interest

rates further crimped consumer and commercial loan demand.

An increasingly

comprehensive ban on exports to Russia will have significant repercussions
on Florida's phosphate industry.

Overall, the freeze damage to fruit and

vegetable crops appeared to be moderate.
Retail sales persisted at high levels on the strength of both
durables and nondurables.
observed brisk sales.

Executives of two Atlanta area department stores

And an official of a retailing chain said that, since

the beginning of the year, business has been good throughout the District.
Large department stores appear to be doing well, while smaller stores and
specialty shops are holding their own.

Several contacts noted a drop in

impulse buying as evidence by a sizable reduction in returned items.
An Atlanta-based conglomerate involved in the manufacture and sale
of various consumer goods noticed abrupt gains for some energy-saving
items.

Bicycle and motorcycle sales jumped dramatically.

Also, sales of

billiard tables and bowling balls were up sharply as people looked closer to
home for entertainment.
Automobile sales turned up, largely on the strength of small car
purchases.

Foreign car dealers experienced excellent sales; however, slow

deliveries held these sales below potential.
and Ford dealers contacted in Knoxville.

Sales advanced for the Chevrolet

In the Atlanta area, an AMC

dealer reported very good volume and a Chevrolet dealer reported steady

sales, while Ford dealers said business improved due to rebates.

Inventories

of domestic automobiles were considered adequate, but some dealers expressed
concern about the availability of enough compact cars to compete with foreign
imports.

Most dealers do not view high interest rates as significantly

hampering automobile sales.
The outlook for production at Atlanta's two GM assembly plants is
mixed.

After a three-month layoff, about 2,200 second shift employees at

the Doraville plant returned to work in late February.

The recall was

primarily attributable to brisk sales of the Oldsmobile Cutlass, one of
several intermediate models assembled there.

On the other hand, 900 truck

assembly workers at the Lakewood plant will be furloughed during the middle
of March, ending that plant's production of pickup trucks for the remainder
of the 1980 model year.

The second shift of truck assembly workers was

placed on indefinite layoff in early December.
Despite high interest rates, demand for homes remained relatively
steady, supported in some areas by employment transfers.
overall sales of new and existing homes were soft.

Nonetheless,

Soaring interest costs

are expected to preclude all but upper income families from qualifying for
even moderate mortgage loans.

A survey of eight building supply firms in

eastern Tennessee found inventories about the same as year-ago levels,
with cutbacks in residential sales balanced by advances in nonresidential
sales and home improvements.

Mortgage loan applications in the same area

were down 75 percent from a year ago.

An FHLB official in Atlanta observed

that commitments fell markedly, savings inflows contracted, and S&Ls borrowed
heavily from the FHLB.

Accelerating interest rates dampened consumer and business loan
demand.

An economist for one large Georgia bank reported that loan demand

was slack.

Also, banking contacts in several parts of the District ob-

served a recent downturn in loan requests.

One reported nearly all loan

requests coming before the committee were for smaller size credit renewals up
to $50,000.

Many customers incurred penalties on long-term certificates to

purchase money market instruments.

More emphasis is being placed on variable

rate loans by bankers at numerous institutions.
The U.S. Government's recent ban, for an indefinite period, on
phosphate exports to the Soviet Union is expected to significantly disrupt
Florida's phosphate industry.

A $1 billion per year contract between

Occidental Petroleum and the Soviet Union was canceled.

This agreement

involved the shipment of phosphate, mostly from Florida, to Russia in exchange
for other fertilizer products.

A temporary glut is anticipated, but even-

tually the surplus will be eliminated because world phosphate demand exceeds
available supply.
Florida's citrus crop escaped major damage from freezing temperatures
during the first days of March.

However, a reduction in next year's crop

is likely due to the blackening of blooms that had already emerged.

Damage

to the peach crop was estimated as high as 30 percent of this season's crop.
The frozen blooms on earlier varieties cannot bear fruit.

Cold weather ex-

tended into Southern Florida and, therefore, affected vegetable growers
throughout the state.

Although some individual growers incurred sizeable

losses, the overall impact was not considerable.

SEVENTH DISTRICT —

CHICAGO

Although the long awaited general recession still has not developed
in the Seventh District, the automotive and housing industries remain
seriously depressed with no promise of an early revival.
types of capital goods is holding at high rates.

Output of most

Inventories are at very

conservative levels, and a high level of new orders is necessary to maintain
output and deliveries.

Demand for workers has eased in most areas.

have not reduced purchases of most types of goods and services.

Consumers

Price

inflation has not moderated, and businesses have taken steps to protect
their profit margins in anticipation of price controls.

Credit markets

are very tight with many smaller businesses complaining of the heavy burden
of interest rates.
A sharp contrast exists among the industries of the Seventh District.
Autos, trucks, recreational equipment, the airlines, and housing all suffer
from severely depressed demand.
will improve in the near future.

And there is no sign that the situation
Most other types of capital equipment and

consumer goods and services, however, remain relatively prosperous.
The Chicago Purchasing Managers Survey for February, which covers
200 companies, shows 45 percent reporting higher output in February, compared to 15 percent reporting a decline.
reported in recent months.

This reverses the downward drift

Overall, the report suggests stability in em-

ployment, output, and inventories.

The Milwaukee report is similar.

Throughout the past year our contacts in manufacturing and retailing
were telling us that their inventories were generally lean.
ations have been borne out by events.

These evalu-

With final demand holding up for

most items, there has been no room for substantial cutbacks in orders.

Household appliances provide a dramatic example.

Shipments had slowed in

late 1979, but January showed a rebound with total unit shipments 11 percent
above last year and close to an all time record.

Washers, refrigerators,

freezers, and microwave ovens were especially strong.
Steel orders had declined in late 1979 and early 1980, but recent
months brought a revival.

A major Chicago producer will be operating at

capacity again in March and April.

Demand for steel is vigorous from

virtually all customer groups, except for autos and trucks.

Strength in

steel orders is not believed to be related to scheduled price increases.
Customers are buying steel on a hand-to-mouth basis, and they :'admit" their
inventories are low —

an unusual situation.

Rebates are helping sales of less economical cars and light trucks
somewhat, a temporary expedient that cannot be continued indefinitely.
so, many 1979 models remain unsold.

Even

The market is extremely depressed for

large cars, vans, pick-ups, four-wheel drives, and self-propelled recreational
vehicles.

Major parts' manufacturers have been notified of shifts in plans

that will permanently reduce the use of frames, high horsepower engines,
and related components.

Sharply rising gasoline prices are influencing the

pattern of demand for motor vehicles to a degree unforeseen only a few months
ago.

Because of a better product mix, General Motors has achieved a dominant

position unparalleled in the past.
The capital goods picture is mixed.

Demand for heavy trucks and

trailers and most types of construction equipment is weak, while orders for
machine tools, electronics, and energy-related items are very strong.

Orders

for castings are "erratic," but one analyst believes that the pattern suggests
that capital goods, in general, have passed a cyclical peak.

Freight car

order backlogs are large, but a wave of cancellations may have started.
Nonresidential construction is threatened by a virtual drying up
of new loan commitments. The office building boom is in high gear, and
there is optimism that the new space will be absorbed rapidly.

Important

nuclear power projects in the district are moving ahead, but at a reduced
pace.

New regulations have drastically increased construction costs.
Home mortgage lending had begun to revive in February, but the recent

jump in rates dealt a severe blow.

With quoted rates now passing 15 percent

major lenders report that loan applications, both for new and used homes,
have slowed to a trickle.

Some home builders and mortgage bankers have

decided to cease operations in the Chicago area.
are planned.

Very few new rental units

Given current construction costs and interest rates, a one-

room apartment would require a monthly rent in excess of $600.
Consumer spending has held up well except for autos and tourism.
Consumers respond well to sales and promotions.

Credit delinquencies have

increased significantly, but not, as yet, to an alarming degree.
The International Harvester strike that started November 1 is still
unresolved.

Allis-Ghalmers was struck last week.

Chicago firemen returned

to work after a three-week strike, in which the issues were the right to
strike and inclusion of chiefs in the union.

Building trades workers in the

Chicago area plan to demand wage costs of at least 15 percent to "catch up."
Employers are increasingly concerned about the effect of COLAs,
both for union and non-union workers.

COLAs often use local CPIs.

While the

national CPI was 13.9 percent above last year in January, the index was up
15.3 percent for Chicago, 15.7 percent for Detroit, and 17.8 percent for
Milwaukee —

19.4 percent on the CPI-W!

Rumors abound that price/wage controls, and/or selective credit
controls, will be imposed, perhaps without advance notice.
price increases are reported.

Anticipatory

Various steps are being taken to adjust pricing

policies to protect profit margins if and when price controls are imposed.
List prices may be raised and then discounted for the time being.
may be raised with temporary rebates.

Prices

Coupons may be offered on food items,

and then withdrawn at a later time.
High interest rates and reduced availability of credit are beginning
to "bite" to a degree unprecedented in this cycle.

Usury is no longer a

major factor in mortgage loans, because high rates eliminated many potential
borrowers.

Auto loan ceilings are cited as a factor reducing the availability

of loans in some states.

In Michigan, hearings are being held on a bill to raise

the 12 percent ceiling on indirect auto loans, which has virtually cut off
this type of lending.

The UAQ is actively opposing the legislation.

We

are receiving numerous complaints from smaller businesses that loan rates
of 18 percent or more are driving them to the wall.
among the most vociferous.

Vehicle dealers are

EIGHTH DISTRICT ~

ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District remains at about the same
level as in January.

Retail spending has remained about constant in real

terms, and sales have been somewhat better than expected.

Automobile

manufacturing, which declined substantially in the District during 1979, has
apparently stabilized in recent weeks.

Nonresidential construction remains

at a high level and aerospace manufacturing is reported to be gaining strength
due to increased defense spending.

Homebuilding, however, remains at a very

low level as sharp increases in mortgage rates have discouraged home buying.
Savings and loan association officials report a sharp decline in small
savings deposits and time certificates, although total net inflows of savings
are still positive.
Consumer spending has been mixed recently.

On the whole, retail

sales have apparently increased at about the rate of inflation.

One depart-

ment store representative noted that sales of nondurable goods have offset
losses from the sales decline in durable goods to the housing industry.
Automobile sales have been surprisingly strong at some dealers in recent
weeks, especially for energy-efficient intermediate and small-sized cars.
Total car sales, however, have remained substantially below year-ago levels.
In general, inventories were reported to be at desired levels both
in the retail and manufacturing sectors.

Retailers report that they are

keeping inventories to a minimum, and complained that high interest costs
have substantially reduced profit margins.
Manufacturing activity in the District continues at about the same
level as in recent months.

During 1979 the District fared somewhat worse

than the nation as a whole, partly because of a sharp decline in the manufacture of transportation equipment.

In addition, a slowing occurred in

chemicals, furniture, lumber, and apparel production.

Production in most

of these industries has apparently continued at about the same level as late
last year.

On the positive side, the aerospace industry has experienced

increasing demand for its products, reflecting increased defense spending
and continued strong demand from commercial airlines.
Homebuilding has been very sluggish in the District in recent months
and is now expected to decline further.

As a result of significantly

higher mortgage interest rates, monthly payments for new homes have risen
beyond the reach of many prospective home buyers, and lenders report that
a sizable proportion of mortgage loan applicants are being turned down.
Nonresidential construction remains at a high level in the District.
Construction representatives still report backlogs of projects and most
expect to be busy throughout the year.

Many projects underway, however, are

reported to be financed through municipal, state, and federal funding.
Credit demands in the District remain strong, particularly demand
for business loans.

Banks report strong demand from their business

customers for credit line extensions as businessmen are apparently shying
away from long-term credit.

Requests for mortgage loans have fallen off

with the higher rates, and some savings and loan officials report that they
have quit

taking applications.

most financial institutions.

Net money inflows continue positive at

Savings and loans are offering the maximum

rates on money market certificates, but recent sharp increases in rates
are causing some associations to review their policies with respect to rates
that can be offered.

Withdrawals from passbooks and other time deposits

continue at a rapid pace, as conversions into higher yielding money market
certificates become more attractive.

Consequently, some savings and loan

associations are reported to be in a liquidity bind, and in a few cases
mergers may be required to save some weaker associations.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District is not in a recession yet, but district business
activity seems to be softening further. Manufacturing shipments and employment
continue to expand, and agricultural conditions remain quite good.

However,

interest rates have been increasing lately and cutting back loan requests.
Lending has also been restricted where interest rates have not been allowed to
rise.

The district is not yet in a recession . . .
Industrial output and employment are still expanding in the district.
Manufacturers responding to our latest survey expect their first-quarter shipments to be up 15 percent from a year earlier.

Rising prices undoubtedly

account for much of this gain. But manufacturers do still seem to be adding to
their work forces:

Minnesota manufacturing employment is up about 4 percent

from a year ago. And directors say hiring and industrial activity generally are
growing in their areas.
Agricultural conditions also continue to help keep the district out of
a recession.

Our last Redbook report indicated that despite the embargo on

grain sales to the Soviet Union, crops and prices were quite high in the
district, so farm income prospects were pretty good.
changed, as recent grain prices

This assessment hasn't

continue to approximate their preembargo

levels.

. . . but higher interest rates have further softened business activity
Real interest rates have risen further since the last Redbook, though.
After being adjusted for inflation,' interest rates rose in late 1979. They have

risen even higher lately, as nominal rates have been accelerating much faster
than inflation.
This rise in real interest rates appears to be causing further cutbacks
in lending. Our last Redbook report said that lending was softening. According
to Minneapolis/St. Paul banks, the recent rise in real interest rates has
resulted in another drop in loan requests from all types of small businesses.
Bank directors also report a further letup in mortgage loan requests in their
areas.
Where some nominal interest rates haven't been allowed to rise, lending activity has been further reduced too.
been curtailing private
borrowing.

Usury ceilings have for some time

borrowing and now are also curtailing government

Municipal bond yields recently have exceeded the 7 percent limit

that Minnesota has imposed on local government borrowing costs, and in late
February the Minneapolis School District and the city of St. Paul cancelled two
bond offerings.
This recent letup in lending is another blow to home sales.
Redbook report indicated that district home sales were down.

Our last

A large Minne-

apolis/St. Paul homebuilding supplier reports that less mortgage lending is
further depressing home sales.
Not only are district consumers now more reluctant to buy homes, but
they continue to be hesitant to buy other goods.

Last month directors used

words like "spotty," "steady," or "down" to characterize their areas' general
merchandise sales, and they haven't changed that assessment.

District con-

sumers also remain reluctant to purchase autos; in January and February new
domestic auto sales in the district were down 15 percent from a year ago.

With consumers still hesitant to spend and higher interest costs discouraging borrowing, businesses continue to be reluctant to order merchandise.
Directors report, as they did last month, that district businesses are striving
to hold down their inventories.

And new manufacturers orders continue to

slacken. For example, one large Minneapolis/St. Paul manufacturer reports that
its new orders are now just even with those a year earlier, whereas several
months ago they were substantially above last year's level.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Some softening in economic activity is reported by businessmen in the
Tenth District, along with continuing increases in both costs and prices.
Housing starts are down substantially, and savings and loan associations are
pessimistic about savings inflows for the rest of the year.

Cattle feeders

in the District have been experiencing some losses, and many farmers are
having difficulty repaying loans.

Loan demand is variable across the

District, and total deposit growth appears to be stable.
The majority of Tenth District retailers questioned this month report
mostly moderate gains in current dollar sales through February 1980 compared
to February 1979, but sales have apparently softened since the last quarter
of 1979.

Most retailers remain optimistic about total dollar sales for the

remainder of 1980, with expected gains ranging from 5 per cent to 20 per cent.
Most retailers report moderate price increases.

Most increases have

resulted from increased cost of petroleum-based products and increased cost
for metal products such as jewelry and tableware, with costs of merchandise
and transportation slowing somewhat.

All retailers report that they are

trying to maintain inventory markups and profit margins.
control has become standard policy for all retailers.

Tight inventory

While some retailers

report higher levels than desirable, no serious problems were noted.
Nearly all the purchasing agents contacted report substantial input
price increases over the past year.

Major suppliers have raised prices during

the past three months, and further increases are expected before summer.
Input availability is not a current problem in the District.

Continued high

interest rates and pessimistic outlooks for the economy lead most purchasing

agents to desire low materials inventory levels.

While over half of the

purchasing agents still plan to trim their inventories further, a few report
plans of inventory expansions to prepare for future delivery problems, as
well as to compensate for earlier reductions that were too drastic.
Tenth District home builders' associations indicate that housing
starts in the area are down at least 20 per cent compared to last year, with
single-family housing starts doing considerably worse than that.

There is

some hope for a rebound later in the year if more prospective buyers are able
to qualify for loans.

Association spokesmen report that sales of new homes

are mixed, and many new home prices are easing off.
Savings and loan associations in the Tenth District are decidedly
pessimistic about the future of their savings inflows as the year progresses.
There seems to be considerably less demand for mortgage funds so far this
year, and commitments are being held down.

Mortgage rates have been steadily

rising and are currently around 14 per cent, but some savings and loan
association spokesmen feel that mortgage rates will not rise much further.
Grain prices throughout most of the Tenth District have stabilized
after the fluctuations caused by the grain embargo to the Soviet Union.
Despite lower than desired prices, farmers in many areas are selling grain to
meet current financial obligations or because the cost of carrying the grain
for any longer period offsets any expected gain in price.

Farmers in many

areas are having difficulties repaying loans as they come due, especially
farmers attempting to service large real estate debts.
are expected to cut loan demand somewhat.

Higher interest rates

Continuing higher costs associated

with irrigation of corn are forcing some farmers to reconsider spring
planting options.

Cattle feeders within the District have experienced some losses in
recent months due to the high price of feeder cattle and the increased interest
costs associated with their purchase.

Many smaller feedlot operators are not

refilling the lots as the fed cattle are sold.

While large feeding operations

have also experienced losses, excellent rates of gain due to the mild winter
weather in many areas have helped to limit those losses.
A survey of bankers in the Tenth District shows decidedly mixed
results for loan demand.

Total loan demand appears to be strongest at

Colorado banks, with areas of weakness reported in Nebraska, Oklahoma, and
Kansas City.

Consumer loans, except autos, and energy-related loans show

the greatest strength.

Some banks report unexpectedly weak demand for agri-

cultural loans, particularly in the livestock area.
to make few, if any, real estate loans.

District banks continue

Several banks feel that strength

in commercial and industrial loans may be coming from short-term financing
of inventories and slower collection activity.

Larger banks continue to

raise their prime rate in line with increases at money center banks.

Most

banks surveyed report tightening their nonprice terms of lending.
Total deposit growth is reported to be stable by most banks.

Some

banks report a decline in demand deposits as customers continue to shift
into interest-bearing accounts.

While passbook savings deposits are down

substantially, growth in money market certificates is quite strong.
banks surveyed offer 30-month certificates, with mixed success.

All

In those

cases where the certificates have proved popular, most of the funds shifted
appeared to come from existing deposits at the bank rather than from new
deposits.

Recent ceilings on these certificates have not yet had an impact.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT —

DALLAS

Economic activity in the Eleventh District continues to expand
moderately, although the full impact of the recent increase in interest
rates is yet to be felt.

Labor markets remain tight.

The only areas of

significant weakness are related to residential construction and sales of
large cars.

High interest rates have virtually shut down conventional

mortgage lending and interim construction financing.

Sales of large cars

remain lackluster and department store sales show no improvement after
adjusting for inflation.

Bank loan demand remains strong, but higher in-

terest rates are expected to squeeze more marginal customers out of credit
markets.

Manufacturing output continues to trend upward, and oil field

activity is especially strong for this time of year.

Early spring plant-

ing is underway over most of the District.
The impact of the recent hike in interest rates is not yet reflected in the weekly banking statistics, but most survey respondents expect a significant slowdown in borrowing as marginal customers are
squeezed out of the market.

On balance, commercial loan demand has been

strong at District banks, particularly for energy and real estate financing.

The strength of the latter is due to prior commitments, and is

expected to decline in light of higher interest rates.

Although interest

rates on most variable rate loans have hit the 18 percent Texas usury
ceiling on loans to corporations, most bankers expect to continue to
supply working capital to financially sound customers.

Total consumer

loan demand remains high in spite of decreased availability of funds.

Mortgage loan demand is off sharply due to the prevailing 15 percent conventional mortgage rate and the declining availability of funds.
Savings and loan associations are experiencing both disintermediation and
transmediation (outflow of passbook savings funds for reinvestment in
money market instruments within the same association).

Savings balances

at credit unions and other financial institutions are declining steadily.
Bank customers are foregoing accumulated interest and actively cashing in
6-nonth CD's prior to maturity and reinvesting in new 6-month CD's at
higher rates.
Nonresidential construction continues to be a major source of
strength in the Southwest economy, although a few proposed projects have
been canceled because of interest costs.
main tight due to heavy demand.

Labor and material supplies re-

Residential construction activity has

slowed as many small custom builders are unable to secure interim financing, but high-volume builders in Dallas report sales exceeding their expectations.
Current dollar sales at District department stores continue to
exceed last year's levels, but show no real increase after adjustment for
inflation.

Sales are expected to decline through the stammer, and depart-

ment store executives plan to continue their trim inventory levels.
New auto sales are mixed.

Demand for foreign and small domestic

cars continues strong, while larger car sales drag.

Tighter credit poli-

cies, such as lower loan limits and shorter repayment periods, continue
to eliminate potential customers.

Dealers' attempts to hold down inven-

tory costs by limiting the selection of models are reported to be con^
tributing to some loss in sales.

Factory output in the District continues to trend upward, although at a reduced rate.

Production in many building-related industries

has begpn to decline, but output in other industries continues to expand.
The District's only auto assembly plant will resume a double shift at the
end of March.

The second shift was laid off after last Christmas because

of the slump in sales.

Profit margins for all manufacturers are being

squeezed by rising costs and declining productivity.
Favorable weather conditions continue to boost drilling activity,
and the demand for inputs remains strong.

Refinery shipments continue de-

spite the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers strike, which by all indications will be lengthy.

Some settlements have been made with small refin-

ers, but gaining new agreements with major refiners is proving to be much
more difficult.

The mild winter has left fuel oil suppliers with high

inventory levels of heating oil.

As a result, heating oil prices are

expected to drop as inventory levels are reduced to make room for the increase in production of summer gasoline stocks.
Warm weather has encouraged early spring planting.

Export demand

for cotton is greater than previously anticipated since China expects to
purchase up to 3 million bales this season.
1980 cotton is well advanced.

Contracting with growers for

TWELFTH DISTRICT —

SAN FRANCISCO

The economy of the Twelfth District exhibits few signs of a
recession, but the influence of high interest rates has been widely felt
in the housing industry and rapidly rising prices are a universal phenomenon.
Consumer spending is continuing at a strong pace despite high prices;
this behavior is believed by many to reflect a pessimistic inflation
psychology.

Labor demand in defense-related industries and in high-

technology industries is contributing continued strength to employment
figures.

Loan demand remained strong at most banks and S&L's last month,

but there is widespread concern about the conversion of savings deposits
into money market accounts and the consequent effects on the cost of funds.
With the exception of activities affected by the recent flooding in California, the agricultural sector is reported to be in good shape.
The housing sector in the District has been affected significantly
by the recent runup in market interest rates.

With the exception of

Southern California, most residential real estate markets are reported to
be very slow, with considerably reduced resale and construction activity.
The level of activity is very sensitive to the prevailing mortgage rate;
several builders in California were reported to have started up again in
early January as mortgage rates began to moderate.

As rates resumed their

rise, however, housing starts were depressed once again.

Resales and

construction in Southern California (particularly the San Fernando Valley
and Orange County areas) appear to have suffered somewhat less than the
district as a whole.

In Salt Lake City, where the inventory of unsold

homes has fallen about 25 percent, some anticipate a housing shortage in
the spring.

Consumer spending continues to buoy the economy of the western
region.

Although sales of American cars in January were down about 15

percent over last year, there are waiting lists in many areas for the
smaller domestic and foreign models.

In Southern California, the aggregate

volume of retail sales is up about 20 percent with certain submarkets
posting even larger gains.

The demand for durable goods is mixed, with

strong demand reported in Central California, but weak demand in Oregon
and Idaho, for example.

There is widespread agreement that a "spend it

now" attitude is responsible for the pattern of high levels of consumption
spending and low savings rates.
The special mix of industry in the District is largely insulating
the region's economy from the deleterious impact of the weak residential
construction sector.

Portland's economy, for example, has experienced

a 900 percent increase in personal income attributed to electronics and
light manufacturing firms since 1973 and these sectors remain strong today.
The demand for the region's products in the Pacific Rim markets is also quite
strong.

Strength in the foreign demand for lumber, for example, has helped

to offset weakened demand from the residential construction sector.
Predictions of increased demand for defense-related products have made the
markets for skilled labor (such as sheet-metal workers and computer processing
personnel) very tight.

In fact, there is some concern that the West Coast

aerospace industry may have too little excess capacity to be utilized for
additional production.

A major aircraft manufacturer, however, argues

that it has the ability to considerably expand defense-related production.
Moreover, weak profits in the commercial airline industry have caused
some carriers to not exercise their option to buy new aircraft and this

may create some spare capacity in the aerospace industry.
High interest rates are causing concern in several sectors of the
economy.

Financial institutions continue to experience conversion of

traditional consumer accounts into money market certificates, raising
concerns over the cost of funds.

Loan demand generally remains strong,

however, in most categories including consumer credit except where loan
qualification is a problem and in those areas where usury limits have
curtailed the flow of credit.

A bank in Washington, for example, reports

that credit card lending is only about 25 percent of its normal level
because of institutions' reaction to the 12 percent usury limit that prevails
in that state.

The severe price declines in the bond market may have

encouraged the increased use of banks as a source of corporate credit.
Commercial and industrial loan quality is reported to be deteriorating,
however.

High interest rates are causing particular problems for frozen

food processors, automobile dealers, and others for whom inventories are
an important factor in their marketing.

Bankruptcies in the frozen fish

industry, for example, are reported to be increasing at a rapid rate.
The agricultural sector is reported to be in a relatively healthy
position.

The prices and production of most crops appear to be sufficient

to maintain farm incomes and carry the farmers to the next planting season:
beet farmers are benefitting from the recent runup in sugar prices; the
citrus crops appear to be in good shape due to milder winter conditions;
and the type of wheat grown in the Northwest has not been adversely affected
by the recent developments in the Russian and Iranian markets.

February

wheat prices of $4.24 per bushel, for example, are near the October highs
of $4.35 per bushel.

Vegetable markets have been weak (particularly

onions and potatoes), however, and several planting areas in the San Joaquin
and Sacramento deltas were lost to flooding.
Evidence of a rapid inflation rate is apparent throughout the
District.

A dairy firm involved in labor negotiations anticipates that

the Teamster's national Master Freight Agreement will be the reference
point for many industries.

That settlement is tantamount to a 35.5 percent

increase in wages over a three-year period.

Seattle University expects

a 12 to 14 percent increase in compensation costs this year.
prices have risen 35 to 70 percent in the last year.

Natural gas

Newsprint prices

are at an all-time high of $375 per ton, causing severe cost pressures
for publishers.

A regional producer of aluminum reports that aluminum

ingots, which normally trade for 66c per pound, recently traded on the
London metal exchange for $1.01 per pound.

