CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 10, 1980

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 4
Third District-Philadelphia page 8
Fourth District-Cleveland page 11
Fifth District-Richmond page 15
Sixth District-Atlanta page 18
Seventh District-Chicago page 21
Eighth District-St. Louis page 24
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 27
Tenth District-Kansas City page 29
Eleventh District-Dallas page 32
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 35

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]
Overview.

Reports from Reserve Banks this month indicate, on balance,

a definite weakening in the economy, with widespread prospects for a W-shaped
recession resulting from sharply rising interest rates.

While manufacturing

is generally slowing, modest gains in orders are still prevalent.

Inventories

at the manufacturing and retailing levels are considered to be satisfactory,
but in some cases are described as lean.

Consumer spending in the early part

of the Christmas season has been disappointing, but retailers expect heavy
discounting to provide a strong finish.

Bank loan demand is weak, with business

loans generally holding up better than consumer loans.

Mortgage lending is

depressed, as rates reach as high as 16% in some districts.

Farm price increases

have strengthened the agricultural sector.
Outlook.

The effect of rising interest rates on housing, autos, and

business investment is blamed for a weakening economic outlook.

Economic

activity in the past month has been relatively unchanged in Boston and St. Louis,
but is becoming sluggish in most other Reserve Banks.
strengthening, except for housing and auto sectors.

Only Atlanta reports
Expectations of a resumption

of recession are mentioned by Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco.
Several bank economists in Cleveland now view the recent recovery as a temporary
lull from the recession.

Respondents in New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and

Richmond expect conditions to improve by the second half of 1981.
Manufacturing Activity.

Sluggish or slowing manufacturing activity is

indicated in Boston, Chicago, Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Kansas City.

However,

high interest rates have not prevented widespread gains in manufacturing
employment in Atlanta, or increases in new orders in Boston and Chicago.
Manufacturing has improved somewhat in Dallas, based on strength in chemical
and energy industries.

Richmond reports mild declines that cut across most

industry groups, while Philadelphia reports a sharp downturn in early December.
Cleveland and Chicago are experiencing sustained strength in steel orders,
partly related to a turnaround of inventories, but both report that no revival
in capital goods orders has occurred yet.

Some machine toolmakers in New York

report weakening sales.
Inventories.

Inventories are generally reported to be under tight

control at both manufacturing and retailing levels, mostly because of the high
cost of financing.

Several Reserve Banks note that inventories of some items

are quite lean at the retail level.

However, inventory problems with autos

and housing are cited by Boston and Richmond.

St. Louis and Cleveland expects

quick adjustments to inventories, notably in steel and autos, following an
economic slowdown.

Chicago reports that retailers may still find January

liquidation sales necessary despite clamps on stocks.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales have shown mild strength in Kansas

City, Dallas, Richmond, and Atlanta, but are flat or sluggish in most other
Reserve Banks.

Heavy traffic is reported by Chicago, but buying is said to be

restrained, especially for big-ticket items. Consumer durable sales fell
substantially in San Francisco, and Richmond reports durable goods sales
remain weak.

Heavy promotions are reported in most districts and are the basis

for relative optimism among retailers for a healthy Christmas season.
Auto Sales.

Auto sales are generally described as weak or declining,

according to most Reserve Banks, because of rising interest rates and high

prices on new models.
and San Francisco.

Sales are off in Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas,

Some gains are noted in Boston over year-ago levels and

in St. Louis over summer levels, but dealers view such gains as unsatisfactory.
While domestic sales are stagnant in New York, foreign car sales picked up.
Dallas sales are hampered by a usury ceiling that makes auto loans unprofitable.
Some banks in Cleveland and Chicago are reluctant to finance dealer floor plans.
Housing.

Mortgage lending activity continues to weaken, with Boston,

Chicago, Atlanta, and San Francisco experiencing a virtual halt in mortgage loans.
Mortgage rates at or near 16% in Chicago and San Francisco are apparently the
highest in the nation.

Philadelphia reports that seasonal declines and tight

mortgage money have contributed to curtailed sales at a level 40 to 65% below
last June.

The difficulty over qualifying for financing is particularly noted by

San Francisco, while St. Louis reports that three-fourths of loan applications
are rejected.

Some banks in Cleveland are providing preferential rates to

builders who they financed, and St. Louis reports that builders are subsidizing
home buyers by offering below market rates.
Banking.

Although loan demand is generally soft, some improvements in

business loan demand are cited by Dallas, Kansas City, and St. Louis.

Sources

of the loan strength are restricted to energy and agricultural industries,
although business loans in St. Louis appear to be supporting Christmas inventories.
Richmond reports a mild increase in instalment credit.

Bankers in Minneapolis

state that funds are available, and several districts report that deposit growth
is supported by large CDs.

Both St. Louis and San Francisco stress that much

of the business borrowing is short-term.

Strong business loan demand, centered

in inventory financing and in substitution of business loans for commercial
paper, is also reported by New York.

Agriculture.

Agricultural production and farm income are relatively

strong as a result of rising farm prices.

St. Louis reports a sharp increase

in wheat acreage and expects a substantial increase in double cropping of
wheat acreage in 1981, if prices hold.

Kansas City states that credit conditions

have shown sustained improvement and Dallas notes an increase in the usage of
Government agencies for loans at lower interest rates than banks.

However,

farm income prospects have dimmed in Atlanta, as prices for meat, citrus crops,
and cotton decline.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

There has been no major change in the level of economic activity
during the past month.

Retailers are generally optimistic about the

Christmas season, although recent experience has been mixed.

Surveys of

manufacturing activity show that increases in production and new orders are
more prevalent than decreases.

In the banking sector, loan demand is

sluggish and mortgage business is minimal.
Retail sales performance during the past several weeks has been
quite varied and does not provide a clear indication of what the Christmas
season will be like.

In Connecticut early Christmas sales were somewhat

disappointing; this has led to more discount sales than usual for this time
of year.

On the other hand, post-Thanksgiving sales in northern New England

were encouraging.

The heads of two major chains of general merchandise

stores report that recent sales figures have been strong; however, there
appears to have been some weakening in the first days of December.

Whatever

their recent experience, retailers are fairly optimistic about Christmas.
If these expectations are realized, there will be real gains relative to
year ago totals.

Inventories are in the lean to normal range.

are an important exception to these general comments.

Auto dealers

Sales have been

disappointing, although dealers in Connecticut have seen a modest increase
over last year.
In the latest survey of New England purchasing managers a small
majority of firms reported that production was unchanged from a month ago,
with most of the rest reporting higher production levels.
firms has also seen an increase in new orders.

A majority of

The number of firms

experiencing lower orders has declined steadily for the past three months.
Firms are holding down inventory levels, in part because of the high cost of
financing these inventories.

These efforts to conserve inventories are

leading to a "hand to mouth" style of managing inventories which in turn is
causing longer delivery lead times and shortages.

Firms are also taking a

cautious attitude towards capital purchases.
Despite the generally favorable business picture, several
respondents have reported an increasing number of bankruptcies among small
manufacturers.

This development is attributed to high interest rates.

Also, in Massachusetts, which has fared very well to date, there have been
some major layoffs in the western part of the state and the number of firms
announcing Christmas vacations is noticeably above the levels of the past
two years.
Banking respondents report that loan demand has been fairly flat.
Mortgage demand has dried up and there is little demand for automobile credit.
Bank profits vary considerably depending on the extent to which a bank's
assets are sensitive to interest rate fluctuations.
Professor Houthakker was the only academic correspondent available
this month.

He is concerned about the inflation outlook for next year.

The price of imported oil will soon start to rise, because oil stocks—
which may be needed—are still running down.

The Fed should not try to

compensate for foreign price inflation, however.

The enactment of a Kemp-

Roth tax cut will also worsen the inflation outlook.

His main concern

is that the aggregates are exceeding the upper limits of the target range.
It is absolutely necessary, in his view, to try to return to the ranges and
to follow through in lowering the ranges for 1981.

He feels "something

spectacular" needs to be done in the monetary area since traditional policies
have not been sufficient.

Houthakker proposes auctioning 5 million ounces of

gold to supplement domestic open market policy.

He is skeptical that 1980

was a "real" recession but expects a "short dip" in economic activity in 1981.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Business activity in the Second District was mixed in November.
Retail sales were generally flat on a constant-dollar basis during the month.
Foreign car sales picked up, but domestic car sales continued to stagnate.
Outside the consumer sector, signs of weakness were spreading among machine
toolmakers and in the steel industry.

The respondents, for the most part, do

not anticipate any major economic recovery before mid-1981.

On the financial

side, the suspension of usury ceilings in New York State is expected to raise
rates sharply on personal borrowing and weaken demand for such loans.
demand for business loans was reported.

Strong

In the mortgage market, financing has

generally been available, but the demand weak because of the high rates.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales in the Second District advanced

during November only because of price increases.

After adjusting for

inflation, retail sales were either flat or showed slight declines except for
a few isolated areas of strength.

There were reports of higher retail inven-

tories, but these are not a source of concern at this time of year.

Christmas

sales are generally expected to show a moderate increase in nominal terms,
but to be flat on a real basis.

The recent removal of usury ceilings on

most types of consumer borrowing in New York State is expected to be of
little consequence for Christmas sales.

Evaluations of the longer-term

impact were uncertain, but retailers anticipate at least some negative
effects, especially in cases where customers have maintained fairly high
average balances.
Automobile sales in the Second District followed the pattern of the
last few months.

Imports have shown consistent strength, while domestic car

sales have been generally stagnant, as consumers continue to show resistance
to the high prices for the newly introduced small cars.
still sluggish.

Used car sales are

Reactions to the lifting of state usury ceilings varied.

Although some negative impact on car sales is anticipated, most dealers feel
that the high auto prices will be the primary factor limiting sales.
The Manufacturing Sector.
variable.

Outside the consumer sector, results were

In contrast to most other sectors, sales of paper products and

chemicals were reported strong.

The recent strength in chemicals, however,

was credited to the respondent's aggressive new management and not to
increased demand throughout the industry.

Sales in the petroleum industry

were down in November, continuing a year-long trend which has been attributed
primarily to price increases.

Demand for such items as digital watches and

small calculators have been strong, but this was viewed in part as an indirect
result of consumer reluctance to purchase large-ticket items.

Inventories

of durables were reported to be too high, and some cutback in production is
anticipated early next year.

Some machine toolmakers were reporting weakening

sales, particularly for lower-priced items.
Economic Outlook.
bearish.

The outlook of most District respondents remains

Most expect no improvement in general economic conditions before

the middle of 1981.

Higher interest rates were cited as a principal cuase

of the sudden slowdown in the economy.

Indeed, recent developments in

interest rates have altered the outlook for the steel industry significantly
because of its heavy dependence on plant and equipment spending and on the
production of durable consumer goods.

All of these are expected to be

adversely affected by rising interest rates.

Respondents also believe that

the housing market will decline significantly because purchasers will be

reluctant to make commitments at such high rates, although mortgage money
will be available.

In the business sector, borrowings by large firms from

commercial banks at below prime rates are expected to increase.

Respondents

also observed that because industrial production is too high for the level
of retail sales, inventories will begin to accumulate and this will add to
the demand for business loans.
Financial Developments.

With the suspension of usury ceilings on

personal loans effective December 1, consumers in New York State will pay
sharply higher rates on personal borrowing.

With rates of 19 percent for

unsecured loans and 18 percent for secured loans, demand for personal loans
is expected to be weak.

In the mortgage market, the December 4 rise in the

discount rate has heightened concern over the availability of mortgage money.
New commitment activity is down, though this is partially seasonal.

Demand

is weak throughout the region but is least sluggish in New Jersey.

Although

there was a net inflow of deposits at S&Ls during November, following outflows
the previous two months, mortgage lending is not expected to increase as a
result.

In the corporate sector, even though demand for business loans is

strong, banks are still aggressively competing for loan customers.

There

seems to be little demand for capital improvement loans, strong demand for
inventory financing, and some substitution of business loans for commercial
paper.
Financial Panel.

This month we have comments from Donald Riefler

(Morgan Guaranty Trust Company), Francis Schott (Equitable Life Assurance
Society), Albert Wojnilower (First Boston Company).
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]

Riefler:

The Fed's policy is beginning to work.

Inflationary

expectations as reflected in the commodity markets (and to some degree the
stock market) are being adjusted downward.
numbers will also weaken.

Before too long money supply

The long-term financial markets have shown

remarkably good stability, given what has happened to short-term rates.
is important to remember two things:
levels are reversible.

It

Markets do overshoot and interest rate

Because rates can come down, there is less reason to

be fearful about the longer-term impact of today's interest rates on the
economy.

Prospects for autos and housing are not great, but otherwise

spending should not fall precipitously in the months to come.
Schott:

A renewed slowdown in the economy—again led by housing and

automobiles—is now in the making, provided the Federal Reserve sticks to the
objective of curbing the growth of the aggregates.

Interest rates in excess

of previous peaks may be required to accomplish the objective, partly because
there are no direct credit restraints and partly because some sectors of the
financial market are still in a relatively liquid position.

The alternative

to restraint now is even more restraint later since underlying inflationary
forces are very strong.
Wojnilower:

Economic activity is still expanding rapidly, though

less so than a few weeks ago.

Except for usury-related kinks in bank credit

for autos, credit is freely available.

There is virtually no institutional

interest in long-term fixed-rate bonds, nor is such likely to revive in view
of the impending conflict between fiscal and monetary policy.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District point to a slowdown in business activity
for the month of December. This could mark the beginning of the second part of the
"double-dip" recession many economists have been forecasting. Area manufacturers say
industrial activity has taken a sharp downturn this month, but remain optimistic,
anticipating a widespread upswing in general industrial activity by next June. Local
retail merchants report real dollar sales to be even to slightly ahead of last year's levels,
and look forward to moderately strong sales in 1981. In the financial sector, District
bankers indicate sluggish loan activity. Business loan volume is generally flat, while
consumer loans are down again in December.

Area bankers forecast no change in

consumer loans, but predict slight gains in business borrowing.

On the residential

construction side, sales have dropped off sharply owing to seasonal factors and tight
mortgage money, according to area real estate contacts. Contractors and developers are
holding off on new ground breakings until they are less uncertain about future mortgage
rates.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Third District manufacturers responding to the December Business Outlook
Survey report a sharp downturn in general business activity relative to November. This
follows a three month respite from the downward trend area industry has been in since
mid-1979, and could signal the start of the second part of the "double-dip" recession
many economists have been predicting. Supporting the reports of decreased activity,
both new orders and shipments are down substantially. The employment situation looks
dimmer as well as payrolls have been cut fractionally and the average workweek has been
shortened again. Inventories, on the other hand, have remained stable for the second
month in a row.

As for the future, area manufacturers remain optimistic projecting a
widespread upswing in overall industrial activity within the next six months. New orders
and shipments are expected to increase and area manufacturers plan to make fractional
additions to inventories. Labor, too, may get a boost as local manufacturers plan to
increase their work forces and lengthen working hours by next June. Increased capital
outlays are also projected as demand begins to grow.
On the inflation front, industrial prices are up again in December, as 52
percent of the respondents report paying more for raw materials than they did last
month, and about one-fifth indicate charging higher prices for their finished goods. No
relief from inflation is expected as better than 9 out of 10 of the managers surveyed
anticipate input costs to rise by next June, and 8 out of 10 plan price hikes for the goods
they sell.
RETAIL ACTIVITY
According to area retailers, December sales are mixed compared to year-ago
figures but pretty much as merchants had expected. Reports of current dollar sales
volume range from 0 to 9 percent above December '79 levels, but after adjusting for
inflation, these are only small gains at best. However, the picture may not be as bleak as
it looks. For one thing, this year's sales are being compared to the record volume of last
December, when the economy was in a healthier state. Also, inclement weather on
"Black Friday," the day after Thanksgiving and traditionally one of the biggest shopping
days of the year, kept many holiday shoppers at home, thus keeping the lid on recent
sales.

Finally, most merchants started Christmas promotions in mid-November; so,

instead of posting large gains in early December, many retailers have been experiencing
small gains for several weeks now, which may amount to the same thing.
The retail community is optimistic about holiday business in general,
projecting Christmas sales to run 3 to 6 percent ahead of last year's levels. Looking

ahead to 1981, retailers expect another moderately strong year and are hoping for sales
gains of about 8 1/2 percent.
FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
Area bankers report sluggish loan activity in December. Reports of C&I loan
volume range from 1 percent below to 1 percent above year-ago figures. Business
borrowing is generally below budget. Consumer loans are down this month also, by 3 to 5
percent. For the longer term, local bankers project commercial loans to increase by 3 to
4 percent within the next six months, while consumer loans are expected to remain flat.
Third District bankers are currently quoting a prime rate of 19 percent.
Projections of the prime indicate an expected turnabout from the recent trend of
climbing rates. Cuts in the prime are expected to come soon, leaving the rate about 250
to 350 basis points below its current level by mid-1981.
Reports of deposit flows in the Third District indicate demand deposit levels
to be down as much as 7 percent from year-ago figures, and savings deposits down 2
percent over the same period.
HOUSING
December seasonal factors have combined with tight mortgage money to
produce a further drop in housing sales this month, leaving current sales volume 40 to 65
percent below June levels, according to area brokers. As mortgage rates continue to
climb, running 15 1/4 to 15 1/2 percent at the present time, more and more buyers are
pulling out of the market causing a slowdown in the upward spiral of residential prices.
At the same time, contractors and developers, uncertain about the direction of future
mortgage rates, are holding off on new starts.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Sharply rising interest rates have caused most respondents

in the Fourth District to adjust their 1981 forecasts downward, with several
now expecting at least one quarterly decline in real GNP in the first quarter.
Capital goods producers continue to experience weakening orders, especially
in machine tools.

Orders in the primary metals industry continue to hold up

surprisingly well, but industry spokesmen expect a decline next quarter in
response to a weakening economy.

Post-Thanksgiving day department store sales

have been better than expected, but several area retailers are concerned about
softening Christmas season sales because of rising interest rates.
report continued weak loan demand.

Bankers

S&Ls expect an intensified profit squeeze

as costs rise and loan demand slackens because of rising mortgage rates.
Outlook.

Although a sluggish recovery was generally anticipated at

the Fourth District Economists' Roundtable meeting on November 7, most
participants now expect a decline in real GNP in the first and possibly
second quarters of 1981.

Several bank economists envision the negative

quarters as part of a continuation of the 1980 recession.

The release of

pent-up demand following credit restraints provided a brief third quarter
recovery in consumer spending and economic activity.

Positive quarters

during a recession are not uncommon, such as occurred during the 1973-75
recession.

However, interest rates never went to double-digit levels, notes

a bank economist, because inflation was viewed as a short-term problem.
inflation is viewed as a serious long-term problem.

Now,

Several business economists

anticipate at best a flat first half and a strong recovery in the second half
of 1981 based on tax cuts, pent-up demand, and falling interest rates.

A

business economist notes that, despite rising industrial production, inventories
are still generally tight and inventory liquidation is unlikely to sustain a
recession.
Capital Goods.

Although capital spending remains weak, industry officials

state that the decline in orders has not been as sharp as in some past recessions
and the worst is probably over.

While their overall order pattern was late in

turning down (i.e., orders were strong until July), a machine tool producer
notes that orders remain strong from energy and aerospace industries.

Cancella-

tions from the auto industry have not occurred, but softening of machine tool
orders in the first quarter of 1981 is expected as major programs reach completion.
A producer of trucks and heavy equipment reports that orders are not showing
strength from recent very low levels.
except for replacement.

Investment in trucks is not taking place,

Despite the unlikeliness of a strong recovery, a

capital goods producer expects such positive factors as defense spending and
an underlying need to modernize to provide a good recovery in capital spending,
especially in the second half of 1981.
Primary Metals.

November orders in the steel and aluminum industries

have held up surprisingly well, according to industry economists.

November's

volume of steel orders was slightly above October's rate, although a steel
economist reports signs of a tapering off toward the end of the month.

Bookings

in January remain solid, including flat-roll products, and even February has
shown no letup.

Nevertheless, orders in February and March are expected to

slacken as effects of rising interest rates and tax increases dampen consumer
durable goods, housing and producers' goods.

The turnaround in steel this

quarter to about 80% of capacity from a low of about 50% last summer, largely
represents a swing in inventories from substantial liquidation last quarter

to a mild buildup in December.

Aluminum orders, reports an industry economist,

have been supported by the relative strength in defense, aerospace and auto
sectors.

Although normally a net importer, the country has been a net exporter

for 14 months.

However, with a worldwide slump underway, orders are expected

to drop.
Retail Sales.

Several retailers report stronger-than-expected sales

the day after Thanksgiving.

A department store official states that sales are

currently doing well, compared to last year, with the heaviest volume days yet
to come.

Inventories appear to be adequate, but in some cases are lean.

How-

ever, pre-Christmas discounting may still be necessary to avoid an unwanted
overhang.

An economist with a major retail chain in the District expects an 8%

year-over-year increase in December's GAF sales, and a slight increase in real
PCE in the fourth quarter from the third quarter level.

However, an apparel

producer estimates a 5 to 6% decrease in company sales over the next six months.
While several area automotive dealers are concerned about sales, an
industry economist reports that small cars continue to sell relatively well
despite rising interest rates.

An area auto dealer states that rebates are

essential to sales and notes that domestic producers are beginning to provide
credit support for dealers.

An auto industry economist states that production

schedules are already being adjusted downward to minimize inventory overhang.
Banking.

Consumer and business loans are still relatively weak,

according to several area bankers, partly because many consumer loan applications
are being rejected.

A bank economist notes that the volume of outstanding

consumer loans declined in recent weeks, which is unusual for this time of
year.

Auto loans have been the most interest-sensitive consumer loans in

recent weeks and declines in loan applications have been more than seasonal.

A bank official notes that a disproportionate share of auto loans is for 1980
models at the expense of 1981 models, reflecting higher cost of new models.
Loans for dealer floor plans are off because some dealers still have sizable
1980 inventories, which must be reduced before banks will risk financing higher
inventories.

Some pickup in business loans has occurred in the last month,

according to a bank economist, as corporations avoid long-term markets.
Mortgage Lending.

Weak mortgage loan demand and the rising cost of funds

are causing serious earnings pressure on area S&Ls.

However, an economist with

a regional FHLB in the District notes that the improvement in earnings that
began in August has continued through October, and probably in November, although
profit declines are expected by January 1981.

Earnings next quarter could be

worse than in early 1980, but the net worth condition of S&Ls is strong enough
to sustain profit declines.

While conventional mortgage rates on 80% loans

range between 14 and 1 5 % an S&L official states that preferential rates are
being offered by some banks to move unsold new homes.

While savings flows have

been good in November, mainly because of money market certificates, several S&L
officials state the funds are used either to repay advances or to invest in
money markets.

Fifth District - Richmond

Fifth District business was characterized by change in November.
In most sectors and in most areas that change was toward somewhat weaker
performance.

Some areas of strength seem to have emerged, however.

Re-

tail sales, in particular, picked up over the past month according to our
survey.

Sales of consumer durables have kept pace recently but have not

reversed earlier declines.

Manufacturers surveyed report declines in new

orders, order backlogs, inventories, and employment over the latest survey
period.

Inventories, of other than automobiles, have not become a problem

for most businesses.

Housing sales and construction showed renewed weakness

in recent weeks after having recovered somewhat in most areas.
creases continue widespread.

Price in-

The outlook for business activity over the

next six months remains generally positive.

Consumer Spending
Sales at department stores showed some improvement over the past
month.

One respondent terms the improvement over the past two weeks dramatic.

Pervasive strength is not evident, however.

Sales of big items and such

lines as building materials continue to languish.
a month ago and are somewhat above desired levels.

Inventories are up from
Inventories will not

present a problem to most retailers unless Christmas sales come in substantially
below expectations.

Current expectations are apparently for healthy, though

unspectacular, Christmas sales.

Sales in the automobile sector remain soft

and inventories are of some concern there.

The Manufacturing Sector
Manufacturers surveyed recently report shipments holding steady
but new orders, order backlogs, and inventories all declined over the past

month.

Employment and the length of the average workweek were also down from

a month earlier.

These declines, while not deep, eaem to have cut across

most industry groups.

The effects appear to have been greatest in the electrical

machinery and equipment group and least in the furniture industry.

Inventories,

while declining in absolute terns, also fell relative to desired levels.

There

remains some concern over current stocks, but this concern seems to have
diminished over the last month.

There appears to have been some effort among

manufacturers to draw down inventories slightly.
so without significantly reducing production.

Many have been able to do

Monitoring inventories care-

fully, many manufacturers have allowed minor gains in shipments in recent
months to reduce inventories while production was held stable.

Current

plant and equipment capacity remains above desired levels, but there is
some scattered sentiment for enlarging expansion plans.

Increases in prices,

other than employee compensation, were more widespread last month than in other
recent survey periods.

Housing
Almost all of our directors questioned perceive a weakening of housing
activity over the last month or so.
described as nearly nonexistent.

In several areas housing starts are

Single-family starts, and particularly

speculative building, are severely depressed almost across the district.
multi-family construction is being supported by subsidy programs.
of new and resale housing units are substantial.
down in recent weeks.
has been lost.

Some

Inventories

Sales activity is also

In many areas the improvement registered in late summer

In some areas no improvement developed and housing activity

is continuing to trend downward.
improvement before spring.

Expectations are that there will be little

The Economic Outlook
Despite recent reverses in business activity, survey respondents
remain generally optimistic.

Manufacturers expecting activity to improve

over the next six months out number those who expect a worsening by about
two to one.

Nearly half of those surveyed expect the level of business

activity nationally to improve, while nearly as many expect improvement
in their respective firms and market areas.

Half the retailers surveyed

expect similar improvement.

The Financial Sector
Commercial and industrial lending has been very nearly level recently.

Lenders expect little change in business loan demand in coming

months.

For the most part lenders left have standards of credit worthiness un-

changed.

Their response to market conditions has been almost entirely in

the form of interest rate increases.

There have been only moderate increases

in consumer installment debt in recent weeks.

Richmond directors expect

little change in the near future although some feel that consumer installment
debt may rise slightly in the near term.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Weakness in housing and auto sales has darkened an otherwise
strengthening economic picture in the District.

Retail sales were up in

real terms, factory payrolls advanced notably, and nonfarm employment accelerated.

Rapidly rising interest rates, however, have about shut down

housing starts, and auto dealers express concern over slumping sales.
Consumer Spending and Inventories.

Stores were crowded with cus-

tomers, and parking lots were overflowing in retail shopping malls and
stores after Thanksgiving.

Business volume exceeded expectations of many

merchants in the District as gross sales were up over the previous year,
even allowing for inflation.

The customer is not giving much consideration

to prime rate advances or other financial news, although one report indicates reduced credit sales.

Retailers in central Florida and eastern

Tennessee attribute the strong sales to heavy promotions.

Special buys are

also helping to lure potential customers.
This year's Christmas buying season is a full week shorter than
last year, although many merchants began Christmas advertising before
Thanksgiving.

The shortened period may hurt impulse buying.

A southern

Mississippi merchant notes selective buying of practical items.

High-

priced quality merchandise, such as televisions and stereos, is selling
well.

A major department store's strongest sales were in furs, jewelry,

high-quality apparel, and items with a western touch.

Specialty store

proprietors report good sales of investment-priced items.
something that will last.

People want

Retailers catering to the luxury market and

discounters selling top-quality goods seem to be doing better than mass

merchandisers and low-end discounters, whose customers are the hardest hit
by inflation.

Retailers report inventory stockpiles up as much as 10 percent

over the same period last year in anticipation of a heavier-than-usual
post-Thanksgiving Christmas crunch.
Auto dealers are encountering difficulties as high interest rates
and buyer resistance to price increases draw down sales.

One dealer reports

that the only small cars available from the manufacturer are loaded with
expensive options.

Many prospective buyers are failing to qualify for

loans under current interest rates.

Dealers expect conditions to persist

through December but are optimistic about 1981.
Financial and Construction.
are putting home builders in a bind.
throughout the District.
and lots are smaller.

High construction and financing costs
New housing starts are down notably

The homes that are being built are scaled down

Interest rates on home loans are pushing 15 percent.

The current slowdown is affecting not only detached homes but also condominiums.

Condominium conversions have slowed in Florida where many con-

struction projects have been deferred or cancelled because of high interest
rates.

Pre-existing home sales have also slowed there.

There are very few

large projects on the drawing boards of commercial contractors due to the
high cost and limited availability of funds; plus, most lenders are now
requiring an equity position.

Corporate long-term borrowing in the form of

tax-free industrial revenue bonds indexed to the prime rate is becoming
more prevalent.
Employment and Industry.

At least through October, the high inter-

est rates have not adversely affected employment.

Gains in manufacturing

employment were widespread, but levels were still well below those of last

year.

Worker recalls lifted primary metals employment, and the machinery

and paper industries registered strong increases.
showed solid employment advances.

Services and trade also

Rising factory employment and a boost in

hourly earnings have caused considerable increases in manufacturing payrolls.
We have received mixed reports about the tourist industry at this
time.

The recession in other parts of the country is being reflected in

central Florida as attendance at major attractions there was off 25 percent
from last November.

In south Florida, however, bookings at a luxury hotel

are 30 percent ahead of last year, perhaps indicating the affluence of the
international visitors in that area.

October was characterized as the

biggest month ever for tourists in New Orleans.
Agriculture.

Farm income prospects dimmed further.

Prices re-

ceived by farmers declined in mid-November for the second consecutive month.
A downturn in prices for meat, citrus crops, and cotton was partially offset by higher prices for grains, eggs, peanuts, tobacco, and vegetables.
Falling livestock prices and high feed costs influenced farmers to reduce
their breeding stock.

Outstanding farm loans at District banks continued

well above year-ago levels during October, suggesting a slowdown in rates
of repayment.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO
Summary. Fears are growing that the economy is slipping back into
a recession. Christinas traffic is heavy at outlying shopping malls, but
actual buying is said to be restrained, especially for Big Ticket items.
Forecasts for autos and trucks are being scaled down.

Sharply higher inter-

est rates are putting a damper on many activities, but there is no sudden,
drastic impact such as occurred last March and April.

The strongest sectors

are electronics, computers, telecommunications, oil and gas development, and
defense.

Steel operations are holding at an improved rate. Most other sec-

tors are weak, both for consumer and business products.

Housing activity

has practically come to a halt except for site preparations.
accelerating.

Inflation is

Fuel supplies appear adequate for the winter, but problems

may begin to appear next spring.
Output and employment.

Purchasing managers in Chicago and Milwaukee

reported higher output in November, but employment was stable or lower. New
orders rose in November, but backlogs continued to decline.
Prices and wages.

Last August only about one-third of the purchas-

ing managers in Chicago and Milwaukee reported paying higher prices, while
about 10 percent reported lower prices.

In November, over 60 percent reported

higher prices, while less than k percent reported lower prices.

Steel,

aluminum, and gas and oil were up most. Chicago area employers boosted
white-collar salaries and wages about 9 . 5 percent in 1980, up from 8 percent
in 1979. Another rise of 9.5 percent is seen for 1 9 8 1 .
Retail sales. Customer traffic at big retailers has been heavy on
weekends. Nevertheless, most customers are buying very cautiously, especially

when instalment credit is required. Worried retailers are promoting
specially-priced merchandise heavily, a practice reminiscent of the I97U
Christmas season.

Stocks had been held down intentionally, "but there may

be need for liquidation sales in January.
Motor vehicles.

Sales of cars and trucks remain below expected

levels, especially for Chrysler.

Dealers are in jeopardy again, partly

because of the rapidly rising cost of floor planning. A major Milwaukee
bank has withdrawn from floor planning entirely. Most banks have raised
rates on consumer vehicle loans, and more are restricting loans to customers
or are taking other restrictive measures.
ter output schedules will be reduced.

Observers believe that first quar-

Purchase of vehicles by business are

fairly strong.
Capital goods. No revival is yet apparent in producer equipment.
Backlogs have leveled off in some cases, but continue to decline overall.
Demand for components needed for maintenance has increased moderately.
Hopes are growing for an improvement in farm equipment sales in the spring.
Construction equipment remains at a very low ebb.

Several plants have been

closed temporarily and some permanently.
Steel.

Deliveries of steel are up significantly and will continue

at an improved level into the new year.
is well in excess of capacity.

Demand for oil and gas country items

Sheet orders are on extended lead times,

while other lead times are normal. More bidding is being done on structural
steel.

Some of the improvement in steel demand represents a desire of

companies to rebuild depleted inventories to protect their LIFO base.
Housing. Mortgage rates have moved into the 15.5 to 1 6 percent
range with very few transactions taking place.

The inventory of finished

and semifinished houses is low, but builders have been preparing tracts of
land.
Nonresidential. Contracts for caissons and bidding on structural
steel suggest a continued high level of construction for office buildings,
hotels, and luxury apartments in Chicago's downtown area.

Other major

cities report similar trends on a smaller scale. An overhang of unrented
space is reported for the suburbs, however.

Substantial contracts are also

being let for renovations of existing office buildings and hotels.
Fuel. Fuel supplies appear adequate for the winter, but analysts
expect severe trouble next year if the Iraq-Iran war is not settled by
April 1. A crisis is certain if the war spreads.

Estimates of the rise

in oil prices next year have been raised. Natural gas is increasingly
looked to as the nation's best energy hope for the years ahead. Canada and
Mexico have surpluses, and domestic supplies are being augmented by findings
of huge quantities of gas "below the 15,000 foot level.
Municipal finance.

State and local governments are under pressure

to cut outlays to reduce budget deficits. At least one governor has frozen
hirings.

Tax receipts, especially gasoline taxes, have been running below

projections, and tax increases may be needed.

In Chicago, newly organized

militant fire and police unions, already among the highest paid anywhere,
are threatening to strike to get increases equal to the rise in the CPI.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The overall level of economic activity in the Eighth District has
remained virtually unchanged in recent weeks.

Largely reflecting the impact

of sharply rising interest rates, the optimism expressed by many businessmen
immediately after the November election has diminished.

Several businessmen

have suggested that the recovery is losing momentum, and that the chances of
a W-shaped recession have increased.

Consumer spending appears to have

stalled in November, with department stores reporting that sales in current
dollars are only slightly above levels of a year ago.

Automobile dealers

note that sales have improved from earlier in the year but that recent sales
have been disappointing.

Manufacturing activity, which had posted some gains

in certain industries such as steel, consumer durables and paper, showed no
further increases in November.

On the positive side, some increase in orders

for military equipment and energy-related products continues.

In the

building sector, nonresidential building activity remains relatively strong,
but homebuilding has declined again and concern over the survival of many
homebuilding firms has been expressed.

Loan volume at banks has increased in

recent weeks, but saving and loan officials report that mortgage lending
activity is at a very low level.
Retail sales have made only slight gains in recent weeks in contrast
to rapid price increases; hence, sales have declined in real terms.
Retailers report that higher quality merchandise is selling better than other
goods.

As a result of the sluggish sales outlook and rising interest rates,

some retailers report that they are paring down their orders for spring
inventories.

Although automobile sales are mixed, they appear, on balance,

to be modestly above last summer's level but substantially below the level of
a year ago.
Manufacturing activity has remained unchanged in recent weeks.
Automobile manufaicturing, which registered modest gains as the new models
were introduced, has remained steady in recent weeks, but at levels far below
those of a year ago.

Similarly, manufacturers of paper products, metals,

appliances, and fyrriiture report no further gains in recent weeks, following
a rise in the late summer and early fall.

Some manufacturers noted adverse

outlook signals such as sluggish retail sales, deteriorating home sales, and
sharply higher interest rates.

A number of building materials manufacturers

and an appliance manufacturer reported that the slowdown in residential
construction could likely affect their businesses in the near future.

On the

other hand, the manufacturing of military aircraft and energy-related
products continues at a strong pace.
Inventories are reported to be at satisfactory levels.

Some firms

report that a downturn in business activity would lead to inventory
adjustments with one major chemical firm reporting that some customers are
already realizing unplanned inventory increases.
Homebuilding continues to slow in the District because sharply
rising mortgage interest rates have discouraged homebuying.

Home mortgage

interest rates are now in the 14 to 15 percent range with lenders reporting
few loans at these rates.

One savings and loan official noted that three

out of four applicants are rejected because of inadequate income or savings.
Consequently, most home sales entail some kind of special financing
arrangements.

Some builders, for example, are making loans at below market

rates and absorbing the difference.

Nonresidential building activity appears

to be holding stable and at a relatively high level.

One nonresidential

contractor noted that his company has a full calendar of work for the next
few months and that new projects are on the drawing board.

It was also

revealed that a considerable portion of current construction projects is
being financed by short-term credit.
Loan volume at commercial banks has continued to increase in recent
weeks, reflecting increases in business and agricultural loans.

Increases in

business loans reflect a seasonal increase in loans to finance Christmas
inventories.

Higher than normal demand for agricultural loans is reported

because poor harvests and depressed farm income are requiring an abnormally
large carryover of loans.

In contrast, bank installment loans have remained

essentially unchanged in the past two months, partly because of slow consumer
spending on cars and other large purchases.

Several bankers report that loan

delinquencies are up and personal bankruptcies are unusually high.

In

Arkansas, bank lending to consumers has almost evaporated, reflecting the low
usury ceilings.

The attempt to amend the state's 10 percent usury law failed

again in a recent election.
In the agricultural sector, harvesting of this year's crops and fall
plantings of wheat are nearing completion.
up sharply throughout the District.

Wheat acreage is reported to be

A substantial increase in the double

cropping of wheat acreage is expected in 1981, if current prices hold.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Last month, the Ninth District's recovery was again sluggish.

Between

October and November, general merchandise sales and manufacturing production
expanded very modestly, mining activity remained weak but showed signs of improving, and car and home sales declined.

Mirroring these weaknesses was the

continuing sluggishness in commercial bank lending.

Agricultural conditions,

however, were quite strong, even though price changes were mixed.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending remained sluggish.

November's gains in general mer-

chandise sales matched October's modest increases, according to bank directors
and major Minneapolis/St. Paul retailers.

Not only were consumers hesitant to

purchase general merchandise, but they cut back their auto and home purchases.
The modest pickup in car sales noted in our last Redbook report did not carry
over into November, as bank directors and regional sales offices indicate that
car sales declined between October and November.

Home sales, which have been

declining since September, also fell last month, as the dollar value of mortgage
loan applications at Minneapolis/St. Paul area S&Ls dropped 25 percent.

Industrial Production and Inventories
Industrial activity also continued to be sluggish.

Bank directors

report that manufacturing production rose modestly in November as it did in
October.

This is consistent with a University of Minnesota survey which indi-

cates that Minnesota manufacturers have been increasing production, but not
enough to start hiring more workers. This slow growth, directors believe, stems
from recent interest rate increases pushing up inventory costs and causing
businesses to cut back on their ordering. Unlike manufacturing activity, mining

activity has at least been improving, although it is still slow.

Iron ore

inventories have been reduced enough in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan so that
iron ore production was increased modestly in November.

And in Montana, the

copper mining strike which began July 1 was settled in November.

Financial Developments
Because the district's recovery continued to be sluggish, bank lending
continued to be weak.

Directors from outside the Minneapolis/St. Paul area

indicate that their areas' banks still have plenty of funds to lend, and that
lending did not pick up in November.

In the Twin Cities, banks also have funds

to lend, but loans outstanding at commercial banks did increase modestly between
October and November.

Agricultural Conditions
In contrast to the sluggishness elsewhere, farm conditions were generally strong.

Last summer and early this fall, good growing conditions and

rising crop and livestock prices boosted farm income considerably.

The income

of crop farmers, who account for about half of the district's farm income,
continued to rise in November. In Minneapolis between October and November, the
average cash prices for corn and wheat rose about 5 percent, and for soybeans
9.6 percent.

Farmers have been able to take advantage of these higher prices,

as no transportation bottlenecks have been encountered.

Despite the sizeable

increase in crop prices, however, district gains in farm income were probably
held down somewhat by declines in livestock prices.

In St. Paul, the average

cash prices for cattle and hogs fell about 5 percent between October and November.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Economic activity in the Tenth District remains generally

sluggish, although r^fail sales show some strength.
are off sharply, however.

Sales of new automobiles

Manufacturers are trimming inventories of inputs

and reducing orders accordingly.

Agricultural credit conditions are improving

with improved prices for farm products.

Deposits and loan demand at commer-

cial banks are generally flat.
Retail Sale^ and Inventories.

Most Tenth District retailers report

that sales in recent mamJChs have improved, relative to the first three quarters
of 1980.

Mild winter weather has slowed sales of winter clothing and access-

ories but appliance s^l^e and sales of higher priced items have improved slightly.
Advertised promotional merchandise has sold well recently to very price conscious
consumers—a price awareness that is expected to continue through the Christmas
season.

Most retailers, who intend to continue to expand advertising expenditures

and promotional price cutting, are optimistic about 1980 Christmas sales.
Higher advertising and promotional expenses have put downward pressure
on retailer's profit margins, even though merchandise cost increases have not
been substantial in recent months.

Retail prices during December of this year

are not expected to increase markedly because of the influence of promotional
price cutting in Christmas merchandise.

The practice of tightly controlling

inventory levels has benefitted District retailers, as most of them are satisfied with current stocks.

Recent improvements in sales have left some retailers

slightly understocked, but most retailers expect to have enough merchandise to
meet anticipated Christmas sales.

District retailers will continue to monitor

actual sales closely in order to adjust inventory purchases accordingly.

Manufacturers' Inventories and Input Prices.

Half the purchasing

agents contacted report a slowing trend in input price increases in the past
three months, but most feel that prices will accelerate in early 1981.

Current

lead times on deliveries are lower than normal, but many purchasing agents
expect lead times to lengthen because their suppliers have cut back production
and depleted their inventories.

New purchase orders are mostly down from last

year as most companies have been trimming their materials inventories.

Most

companies are producing at somewhat below their normal levels, but only onethird of them report having workers on layoff.
Automobile Sales.

District Automobile Dealers Associations report

that auto sales in November declined markedly from their early fall levels.
High sticker prices seem to be the main factor, but high interest rates are
also having a depressing effect on sales even though loan money is available.
High interest rates are forcing dealers to carry fewer cars in stock, which
may also be having an effect on sales.

Association spokesmen warn that there

will be a wave of dealer closings if there is not relief from high interest
rates in the next two or three months.
Agriculture.

Agricultural credit conditions in the Tenth District are

showing sustained improvement.

Many bankers report they are experiencing higher

pay downs on agricultural loans this year than in the past three or four years.
Most attribute this increase to the substantial improvement in crop prices during
the latter part of 1980.

Loan demand remains slow in most District states as

farmers continue to reexamine their credit needs.

Sales of machinery, equip-

ment, and buildings to agricultural producers are very slow, in most cases.
Some replacement equipment is being purchased, but many farmers have decided to

"make do" with their present equipment for another year.

Machinery and equip-

ment dealers appear to be suffering from this loss of trade.
Banking Developments.
banks contacted this month.

Loan demand is flat at most Tenth District

Several banks in Oklahoma report moderate increases

in commercial and industrial loans related to the energy industry, one of the
few categories of loans that exhibits any strength.

In other parts of the

District, commercial and industrial loans have increased slightly because of an
apparent involuntary rise in business inventories.

Most bankers report that

agricultural loans are relatively weak, with high borrowing costs causing some
reductions in livestock herds.

The recent rise in lending rates has also

virtually eliminated any demand for mortgage and consumer instalment credit.
All of the banks contacted raised their prime or base lending rates in the
past month.

Most of the metropolitan area bankers currently have prime rates

of 18 1/2 per cent, following the lead of large money center banks.

Base fees

at some country banks have recently increased to 20 per cent.
Deposits at Tenth District banks contacted are generally flat.

Demand

deposits have increased slightly at some banks, but in most cases remain flat.
Savings deposits are down uniformly throughout the District.

The major source

of deposit strength is large CD's, which increased at banks experiencing some
loan expansion.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The recent rise in interest rates is beginning to take a toll on
economic activity in the Eleventh District.

Retailers are cutting prices

to clear Inventories and reduce financing costs.
continue

to

depress

sales

of

new

cars

and

High interest rates also
housing.

Nonresidential

construction is at the same high level of activity as last month, and
drilling for oil and gas continues at a record level.

Factory output

continues

of

to

Commercial

expand,

loan

but

demand

Is

some

industries

rising, while

show

consumer

signs
credit

weakening.

continues to

decline.
Price

cutting

is widespread

merchants attempt to reduce inventories.

at District department stores as
Some retailers are paring orders

for spring merchandise, as they anticipate a sales decline in the first
quarter.

Survey

respondents

report

slim

increases

in

dollar

sales.

Consumers are characterized as cautious, and credit card usage is down
significantly.
result

of

Part of the decline in use of credit cards, however, is the

recent

changes

in billing

procedures,

as banks

now

charge

interest from the date of posting.
New car sales continue to decline as many traditional sources of
auto loans dry up.

Because of state usury ceilings, banks no longer find

auto loans profitable.

In addition, only half of all potential customers

can qualify for loans with the higher prices and interest rates.
four out of five qualify.
without

perfect

credit

Normally,

Commercial banks are refusing loans to customers
records.

They are also requiring

payments and shorter loan maturities.

larger down

Construction activity is mixed.

Housing starts are declining, as

high Interest rates are discouraging both mortgage and interim construction
financing.

There is a slight buildup of inventories of unsold new homes.

The level of nonresidential construction activity shows no change due to
the large number of projects underway.

While high interest rates are

causing plans for some projects to be cancelled, the outlook is for little
slowing from current

levels of activity as builders of large projects

supply their own funds or receive unsecured interim construction loans from
commercial

banks.

Furthermore, most

large

commercial projects

in the

District utilize foreign equity, typically with a lower return than is
acceptable to U.S. investors.
Drilling activity Is running at a record level.
rigs, drill pipe, and crews persist In most fields.

Shortages of

A number of domestic

drillers are expected to pull out of Canada in response to the Trudeau
government's effort to nationalize that country's oil industry.

That may

help to alleviate shortages in some areas of the United States.
The growth in the dollar volume of loans at District banks is
very strong.

The rise in loan demand is being led by the oil and gas,

transportation,

and

wholesale

trade

industries.

Borrowers

in

good

financial positions are continuing to utilize credit, since they believe
they can ride out the current rise in interest rates.
loans is confined largely to consumer credit.

The weakness in bank

Bank deposits have risen in

recent weeks, but much of the increase has been in large CDs.
Mortage loans at S&Ls are down substantially from a month ago.
Deposit inflows are also slowing.

Most of the funds S&Ls are attracting

are In the form of large CDs.

S&Ls are maintaining their liquidity levels

by making fewer mortgage commitments.
Manufacturing has improved somewhat from a month ago; the outlook
is for slow growth.

Oil field equipment manufacturers are operating at

full capacity, as are many defense contractors.
still weak,

shows

signs

of

further

recovery.

materials and aluminum is still declining.
report

a

slowdown

in

new

orders

Chemical production, while

in

the

Production

of building

Fabricated metals producers
last

month,

while

a

major

electronics firm has scheduled layoffs in its consumer products division.
Agricultural conditions are little changed

from a month ago.

Winter plantings, as well as late harvests, are on schedule.

Farmers are

increasingly turning to Government agencies, rather than commercial banks,
for loans in order to take advantage of lower interest rates.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Fears of a downturn in the economy are widespread throughout the
twelfth district.

Expectations are that the recent increases in interest rates

will exacerbate the recession.

The swings in interest rates have made doing

business more difficult and businesses more cautious.

Retail sales are stag-

nant, but hopes are that they may rebound during the Christmas season.

The

housing market has come to a complete standstill with mortgage rates in the 16%
range.

Agriculture remains a bright spot in the region.

Financial institutions

are gloomy about their profits during 1980 and a general pessimism is expressed
about economic prospects for 1981.
Retail sales volume is down both from last month and last year.

While

nondurable goods are selling at about last year's level, consumer durable sales
are down substantially.

Consumers appear to be postponing capital outlays.

Very few credit card transactions are taking place since consumers are avoiding
paying the high interest charges and because of the purported change in attitude
towards the use of credit.

Most retailers are taking a wait-and-see attitude

before judging the magnitude of Christmas sales.

Some fear the concern over

economic conditions may put a damper on initially brisk sales activity.

Auto-

mobile sales, which had been rebounding somewhat in October and early November,
have been drastically reduced because of recent increases in interest rates.
The high cost of borrowing has also hurt the housing market.

With

mortgage rates in the range of 16%, housing activity has come to a complete
standstill.

The cushion of prearranged financing that held up through October

has been exhausted.
for financing.

Potential home buyers are finding it difficult to qualify

Banks and savings and loan institutions are reluctant to make

mortgage loans at any rate.

Expectations for the housing industry are grim

since a greater slowdown in construction activity is forecasted for December.
Interest rate volatility is of major concern throughout the district.
Respondents have universally indicated that the great swings in interest rates
have made doing business much more difficult.

Developing forecasts and planning

strategies is virtually impossible because of the uncertain economy.
mentation of effective asset and liability management is essential.
are also more cautious.

The impleBusinesses

Loan demand is down and businesses are reluctant to

borrow because of the unpredictability of interest rates.

As a result, businesses

are delaying capital expenditures and are cutting inventories.

The borrowing

that is being done is short-term.
Agricultural prospects remain bright throughout the region.
farmers are reporting large harvests and good prices.

Most

Cattle sales are expected

to be well above last year's levels and ranchers are expecting adequate profits.
Mixed feelings were expressed over what effect the recent increases in price
supports will have on dairy farmers.

Some fear that the price increase will be

offset by a substantial decrease in consumption.

The lumber industry remains

depressed and additional layoffs are occurring.
Financial institutions are reporting that high interest costs are
pushing profits down significantly.

Financial institutions increasingly are

unwilling to make long-term, fixed-rate loans.
are high.

Loan losses and delinquencies

No widespread outflow of deposits has occurred yet.

interest rates prompt concern about this possibility.
impact of NOW accounts was also indicated.

However, higher

Uneasiness over the

Financial innovations and regulatory

changes are spurring greater competition for funds, complicating portfolio management.

Some optimism was expressed that housing could be made more available

as savings and loan institutions make greater use of equity sharing as a
means of financing.
Expectations are pessimistic for 1981.

It is feared that the rise

in interest rates will choke the recovery and lead to very slow growth in
real GNP next year.

Energy and food prices are expected to skyrocket and

play a significant role in increasing inflation.

Both wage-rate increases and

unemployment are expected to be high in the coming year.

