CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 30, 1981

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY
page i
First
District-Boston
pagepage
1 5
Second
District-New
York
Third
District-Philadelphia
page 10
Fourth
District-Cleveland
page
Fifth
District-Richmond
page211814
Sixth
District-Atlanta
page
SeventhDistrict-St.
District-Chicago
2428
Eighth
Louispage
page
Ninth
District-Minneapolis
page
Tenth
District-Kansas
Citypage
page3731
34
Eleventh
District-Dallas
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 41

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.]

According to this month's district reports, economic activity in the nation
remains mixed. Agriculture probably offers the most consistent observations, with most
districts indicating bright prospects for crop yields and farm prices later in 1981. The
construction industry is in the doldrums for the most part, with residential building still
not showing any real life, and commercial construction beginning to lose its momentum.
Manufacturing remains soft in many areas, but reports from Minneapolis and Dallas hold
some hope for the industrial sector. Factory inventories are generally in good shape.
Retail trade is one of the brightest spots on the economic horizon at this time, with sales
running well ahead of the June 1980 levels in most districts, and ahead of most
projections as well. Auto sales remain a blemish, though. Financial institutions continue
to show very little, if any, loan growth and are experiencing deposit flow problems as
well.
Agriculture. The prospects for agriculture have brightened somewhat across
the nation. Excessive rains in parts of the midwest have subsided, and although plantings
of corn, cotton, and soybeans are behind schedule, normal yields are projected. Other
parts of the nation, suffering from drought conditions earlier this year, also got some
relief in recent weeks, improving the outlook for farmers in those areas too.

In

particular, a record crop of winter wheat is forecast, despite previous frost and drought
damage. Farm prices are generally depressed at this time. Some recent strengthening
has been noted in Atlanta, though, and is expected in most other districts as well.
Construction.

Every district reporting on residential construction tells the

same story in July—very little activity, owing primarily to high mortgage rates.
Creative financing appears to be offering very little help to the sagging homebuilding

industry, with many institutions offering VRMs, GPMs, VMMs, etc., but few potential
homebuyers accepting the new instruments.
Commercial construction is generally stronger than residential, but it too has
started to show some signs of tailing off. Commercial building continues to move at a
good clip in Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Dallas, but has started to soften in Chicago, St.
Louis, and San Francisco. High rates are said to be responsible in part for the dropback.
Many of the projects already in progress when credit conditions were initially tightened
are now reaching completion but are not being replaced with new ones, as developers are
scared off by high financing charges and economic uncertainty.
Manufacturing. Industrial activity is mixed in July. While Minneapolis and
Dallas report improvement in the manufacturing sector, some production cutbacks are
reported in Boston and Chicago.

New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and St. Louis all

indicate little or no change in factory activity in those areas. Both Boston and New York
say there has been little interest on the part of manufacturers to increase plant and
equipment outlays. Manufacturers' inventories are generally "in line" to "a little tight,"
except in St. Louis where some curtailment of production is planned to reduce excessive
stock levels.
Retail Trade.

Consumer spending on general merchandise is reported to be

quite strong in most districts, with sales outpacing both year-ago levels and expectations
as well. The exceptions are in St. Louis, where sales are up in nominal terms but flat
after adjusting for inflation, and in San Francisco where "a rather widespread and
substantial weakening in consumer spending" is noted. Part of the unexpected strength is
a result of heavy promotions, mentioned in a number of district reports.

Growing

consumer confidence, as evidenced by a pickup in recent credit sales, and the
anticipation of a tax cut are also cited as explanatory factors, however. As for the

future, most retailers are projecting a strong finish for 1981, with perhaps only a
temporary slackening in the third quarter.
Auto sales are almost universally very, very soft. Sales in many districts are
only slightly ahead of last year's depressed levels, remaining well below the prosperous
volume of 1978.
Finance. Loan demand is variously described as "flat," "sluggish," and "weak"
across the country, as both consumers and businessmen appear to have trimmed
borrowing to the bone. The prime rate ranges from 19 1/2 to 20 1/2 percent. Bankers
have tried to bolster borrowing with a variety of floating rate schemes, as noted by New
York, but apparently without much success.
Deposit flow problems are mentioned in a number of reports and seem to be
especially acute in the Twelfth District where there has been an increased call for
legislative action allowing thrifts and banks to more effectively compete with money
market funds.
Services.

A fair amount of strength in the services related to tourism is

implied in the district reports from Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis and Minneapolis. Summer
tourist trade is picking up in those areas, aided by adequate gasoline supplies and some
recent softening in gasoline prices, and has been giving tourist-related retail sales a
boost.

An exception is noted by Atlanta. In South Florida, the usual wave of foreign

tourists has been checked a bit by recessionary conditions in Europe, a stronger American
dollar, and some political unrest in nearby Central America.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
The overall level of economic activity in the First District has been
reasonably constant for the past several months.

However, manufacturing

respondents with markets abroad report that business in western Europe has
weakened significantly.

Manufacturers also report that, although sales of

routine items are slow, interest in products which increase productivity is
very strong.

Retail sales are keeping ahead of the rate of inflation.

Loan

demand is flat.
In the retail sector, general merchandise sales compare favorably
with year-ago levels.

High quality and discount products are selling more

successfully than items in the middle of the range.

Sales of home

entertainment products and sporting goods are particularly strong.
According to an executive of a large supermarket chain, food sales are
increasing at a rate just short of inflation; for the year to date, the
number of price increases for food products has been substantially below the
number in the corresponding period of 1980.
Manufacturers with activities abroad have observed a pronounced
slowing in sales in western Europe.

This is attributed variously to

recession conditions in the United Kingdom and West Germany, the strong
dollar, and political uncertainties.

Firms reporting such a slowdown

included a chemical manufacturer, several high technology companies in the
instruments field, and a manufacturer of a variety of fabricated metal
products.

Foreign markets other than Europe have remained quite strong.

Domestic sales of capital goods which increase productivity or lower costs
are very strong; however, sales of capital goods for replacement or

expansion or of products tied to the general level of industrial production
are weak.
Manufacturing inventory levels are seen as satisfactory.
increases from suppliers are more moderate than in the past.

Price

In a survey of

New England purchasing agents, fifty percent reported prices the same as in
the preceding month, fifty percent reported increases.

In most earlier

surveys two-thirds of the respondents reported increases.

Expectations as

to future price increases were also lower.
Banking respondents see little increase in loan demand; they continue
to lose demand deposits and NOW accounts.

Two large thrift institutions in

Boston announced that they are withdrawing from the mortgage business; many
others have dropped out unofficially.

However, one banker from rural New

England reports that thrift institutions in his area continue to make fixed
rate mortgages at rates below anything a commercial bank would consider.
Professors Houthakker, Eckstein, Samuelson, and Tobin were available
for comment this m o n t h .

Houthakker has found no good explanation of the

suprisingly strong growth of real GNP in the first quarter, and he expects
to see a compensating drop in the growth rate for the second quarter.
expects no recession during 1981 or 1982.

He

There is a good chance that the

inflation rate may fall to 6 or 8 percent by the end of 1981: increases in
productivity should allow prices to rise more slowly than compensation.
Nevertheless, high interest rates have not increased savings nor have they
deterred borrowers, implying that many believe that high inflation will
persist.

But Houthakker is encouraged by the Fed's recent success in

controlling money growth.

A continuation of current policy should enable

the Fed to issue a "victory bulletin" later this y e a r .

Eckstein fears that interest rates now may be too high.

While "there

is a volume of business to be done at today's rates, the economy is being
held back and will not go anywhere at least until the tax cut."

Now that

the rate of money growth has declined, "the Fed ought to play by its
r u l e s — h a v i n g accomplished its goals, the Fed is pushing its luck by holding
interest rates at their peak.

There is plenty of time later this year to

raise yields if slower money growth is required once taxes are cut."
Samuelson believes tbat much of the recent data indicates that real
growth in the second quarter will be negligible.

For the remainder of the

year, the "consensus forecast" shows "no solid evidence of the economy
springing back."

Fiscal policy is neutral: "Reagan's tax cut is not wildly

expansionary because it will be compensated for by lower spending."
Monetary policy is restrictive: Reagan's five-year forecast requires an
unprecedented and unlikely increase in money velocity over the next five
years.

The Administration's forecast contains an inconsistency: the clash

between the projected nominal GNP growth rate and the money growth target
implies high interest rates.

"High yields may stand in the way of renewed

g r o w t h — I can't see housing or autos coming back strong unless rates fall."
Tobin also believes that fiscal policy is not expansionary.

The

principal cause of current and projected future budget deficits is the slow
growth of the economy.

Reagan's forecast of income growth is

overoptimistic; so the deficit will be larger than projected.

This larger

deficit will not "crowd out" investment; the economic weakness that
increases the deficit also lowers investment demand.

The current money

targets can only depress the demand for housing, plant, equipment, and other
durable goods and, at the same time, increase the government's deficit by

constraining the growth of income.

"Hoping for rapid velocity growth due to

high interest rates is not a recipe for prosperity."

If, however, rapid

velocity growth is a c h i e v e d — i m p l y i n g the economy developed new money
substitutes or used existing substitutes more e x t e n s i v e l y — c a n the Fed
legitimately claim it achieved its targets once it considers the more rapid
growth of the properly measured money aggregates?

SECOND DISTRICT —

NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District was again mixed in late
May and early June.

Department store sales continued to be strong,

with most chains reporting sales moderately above plan.

There has

been a partial recovery from the post-rebate automobile sales slump,
but lower-priced models remain particularly w e a k .

Manufacturing

activity was varied with strength in steel production, for example,
but with further weakness in machine tool orders.

Business

economists still look for little real GNP growth for the next two
quarters.

On the financial side, the proportion of short-term

commercial loans issued on a variable-rate basis is increasing.

Consumer Spending
The unexpected strength of department store sales generally
continued into June.

Sales gains extended to most product lines and

to stores throughout the District.
strong.

Apparel sales were especially

As in the past several months, there was a great deal of

promotional activity.

The outlook for the near term is optimistic,

especially when a tax cut is taken into account.

Although one

respondent worried that the current strength might be coming at the
expense of sales later in the year, some chains are adjusting their
plans and inventories upward.
Automobile sales showed modest improvement over the post-rebate
slump, but are still running well below 1980 levels.

High loan rates

and recent price rises were most commonly cited for the sluggish

performance.

A dealer of less-expensive domestic cars reported the

worst June for new cars in his history.

A foreign car dealer

reported that lower-priced lines are not selling at all, although the
demand for higher-priced models remains strong.

The brisk, pace of

used car sales was taken by one industry specialist as a harbinger of
future strength of new car sales.

Inventories generally are being

kept as low as possible because of high interest r a t e s .

Manufacturing Sector
Manufacturing activity remained mixed in recent weeks.

Upstate,

steel production rose sharply to the highest level since September
1979, but a major paper products firm reported weakness across all
product lines.

The respondents in the capital goods sector indicated

an overall deterioration of demand, requiring a decrease in
production as backlogs have begun to fall.

None of the firms which

were surveyed reported any curtailment of their ongoing capital
spending programs.

However, high interest rates were said to be

discouraging some new projects at this time.
evidence that price pressures were abating.

There was little
Firms look forward to

possible tax cuts, but as yet they have not acted on their
expectations.

Economic Outlook
Despite the unexpectedly large first quarter real GNP growth
announced since the last survey, the consensus of business economists
continues to be for little real growth for the next quarter or two.
Some respondents look for improvement if and when tax cuts are

enacted, but even the most optimistic do not foresee any signs of
recovery until late in the year.
vary.

Forecasts for specific industries

A major conglomerate is projecting strength in plastics,

chemicals, and energy products, while a large oil producer expects
national demand for oil to continue to be w e a k .
signs that inflation is abating.

There have been some

One analyst suggested that the

growth in consumer spending may cool if the inflationary "buy-inadvance" psychology abates.

Financial Developments
Floating rate pricing schemes have become standard offering at
large commercial banks.

According to senior loan officers at major

Second District banks, most short-term commercial loans are being
issued on variable-rate basis.

Floating rate loans are generally

made at the prime rate or at a mark-up over that rate.

When the

prime rate is changed, the rates on these loans are automatically
changed.

The loans are pre-payable without penalty and usually have

maturities of 60, 90, or 1B0 days.
Financial Panel
Comments this month are from Henry Kaufman (Salomon Brothers),
Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty Trust), and Robert Stone (Irving
Trust).[Asterisk: Their views are personal, not institutional.]

Kaufman;

The sluggish economic pace will continue through the

summer months but will be followed by a sharp snapback in the fourth
quarter.

While the rate of inflation has slowed, it should be noted

there are transitory aspects to this improvement, including the
cyclical improvement in productivity, a good agricultural crop this
year, and the tight inventory posture of business.

In the financial

sector business corporations are again missing the ability to fund an
adequate volume of short-term indebtedness.

They will be pressed

with greater urgency to enter the long-term market in the next twelve
months at interest rate levels that were unacceptable just a year
ago.

The most vulnerable sector of the fixed-income bond market

during the year ahead is likely to be the municipal market.
of developments are highly unfavorable to this market.

A series

These include

tax reductions, the potential issuance of partially tax exempt
certificates of deposit, the reduction of grants and aid by the
Federal Government to state and local governments, the very limited
buying of tax-exempts by commercial banks, and the advent of spread
banking.
Rlefler:

Inflationary expectations have dropped. The Fed should

therefore tolerate lower levels of interest rates.

However, rates

should not be allowed to drop so rapidly and so far that the policy
would have to be reversed later in the year.

It is important that

this be the last peak in rates.
Stone:

While the economy will experience little or no real

growth in the second quarter, the prospect, in our view, is for a

resumption of moderate (4 percent or so) growth in the second half.
We also anticipate further reductions in inflation rates and in
inflationary expectations.

Against this background, and in view of

the recent behavior of the monetary aggregates, it is my opinion that
the time has come for the Fed to relax slightly the grip in which it
is holding the banks at the discount window.

Thus I suggest

provision of nonborrowed reserves such that borrowings for the next
three to four weeks center around 1.5 billion or thereabouts
followed, after that interval, by another slight relaxation to the
1.2 billion area should aggregates then be behaving in a satisfactory
way.
This course would reduce the chances of a material undershoot of
M1B over the next couple of months and, by the moderate nature of the
relaxation, would minimize the chances of laying the background for
substantial overshoot later.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District indicate that business activity is sluggish to
mixed, but hold some hope for improvement by year-end. Manufacturers report no real
change in overall industrial activity, with payrolls holding steady for the fifth
consecutive month. They expect a sharp upturn in the industrial sector to come some
time in the next two quarters. Local retail merchants say they are well ahead of last
year levels, owing, at least in part, to big promotional campaigns. The balance of '81
looks good also, as retailers expect sales to continue growing. Third District bankers
report sluggish to mixed loan activity.

C<5cl loan volume is up marginally in June, but

consumer loans are down sharply. Looking ahead to December, District bankers forecast
slight improvement in business borrowing and expect the current decline in retail
borrowing to level off. On the residential construction scene, sales have dropped off
sharply as high mortgage rates have discouraged many buyers, according to area real
estate contacts.

Contractors and developers are holding off on new groundbreakings

until they are more certain about future mortgage rates.
INDUSTRIAL
Area manufacturers responding to the June Business Outlook Survey report no
change in the level of overall industrial activity from last month. Specific indicators are
mixed. Factory shipments are up marginally in June, while new orders are off slightly
for the first time this year. Inventories, following last month's spurt, have slipped back
fractionally. As for employment, the first half of 1981 has been a period of stagnation
for area factory workers and this month appears to be no exception.

June survey

participants report, for the fifth consecutive month, no real change in factory
employment. However, a marginal increase in the average workweek is reported.

Despite the sluggishness that has beset area industry since January, local
manufacturers have retained their optimism.

Respondents to the June survey are

confident, predicting a strong boost for business within the next six months. Over onehalf of the respondents anticipate growth in new orders between now and December,
while a slightly smaller portion project increased shipments by year-end.

Producers'

backlogs are expected to swell marginally. The upbeat outlook may be good news for
area labor, as manufacturers plan to increase payrolls and lengthen working hours in the
second half of 1981.
On the inflation front, industrial prices are up again in June. Over 60 percent
of the survey participants report paying more for raw materials than they did a month
ago and nearly 40 percent say they are charging more for the products they sell. Area
mariufacturers expect inflation to continue throughout the balance of 1981, as over
three-quarters of the respondents expect input costs to increase by year-end and about
two-thirds plan to raise their own prices.
RETAIL
According to area retailers, June sales are well ahead of last year's levels,
surpassing all expectations by a good bit. Reports of sales volume in June range from 10
to 15 percent above mid-1980 figures, as big-promotional campaigns helped to boost
business. Credit card sales appear to be about even with early 1980 levels, matching the
volume that existed before the 1980 credit restraint program was instituted.

Credit

collections are fair to good. Sales of soft goods, particularly men's and women's quality
sportswear, are doing well, and big ticket items are starting to pick up.
For the longer term, area merchants are optimistic, expecting sales in coming
months to run 6-8 percent above year-earlier figures.

According to some contacts,

consumer confidence appears to be growing with the anticipation of tax cuts and further

easing of inflation. Local merchants look for a strong finish in 1981, anticipating a big
fourth quarter as seasonal factors give sales an added boost.
FINANCIAL
Third District bankers report sluggish-to-mixed loan activity in June. C&I
volume is up modestly, 4 to 6 percent, over year-ago figures, which is in line with area
bankers' expectations for the most part. Consumer loans, on the other hand, are off as
much as 15 percent from June '80 levels. In order to boost business loan demand, some
below-prime lending is taking place, but bankers are shying away from making fixed-rate
loans. Looking ahead to the balance of 1981, bankers expect business loans to show slight
improvement by year-end, and retail loans are expected to bottom out, putting a halt, at
least temporarily, to the steady decline in consumer borrowing observed since April 1980.
Deposit flows in the Third District are also mixed. Demand deposit levels are
about 4 percent below year-ago figures as area bankers are still adjusting to the
institution of NOW accounts.

Savings and time deposits are up slightly this month, and

CDs are in line with budgets.
Local bankers are currently quoting a prime rate of 20 percent. Projections
of the prime indicate an anticipated turnabout from the recent trend of rising rates.
Cuts in the prime are expected to leave the rate 300 to 500 basis points below its current
level by December.
HOUSING
Housing sales in the Third District have dropped sharply again this month
compared with year-ago levels. Residential sales are down as much as 50 percent from
June '80 figures. With conventional mortgage rates at 16 1/2 percent, more and more
buyers are pulling out of the market, causing a softening in residential prices.
Contractors and developers are holding off on new groundbreakings until interest rates

come down. Even then, however, many builders are, as one contact put it, "sitting on the
sidelines" waiting for pre-sale commitments before going back to work.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND
Summary.

Respondents in the Fourth District generally expect very

little growth in output through the third quarter, and many are beginning to
lower their inflation forecast for 1981.

Manufacturing activity in the District

continues to expand, although signs of third quarter weakness are emerging.
Consumer spending, weakened by the second quarter slump in auto sales, is
expected to strengthen in the third quarter.

Bank lending activity has increased

in J u n e , partly due to financing business inventories.

Local housing construction

has declined again in J u n e , as saving flows into S&Ls have weakened further.
Outlook.

The tone of the Fourth District Round Table meeting early

in June was somewhat more optimistic with respect to output and prices in 1981
than at the March meeting.

The median forecast of the 30 participants shows

growth in real GNP of 3.2% between the fourth quarter of 1980 and the fourth
quarter of 1981, and 4.0% in the subsequent four-quarter period.

One-third of

the group still expects real GNP to decline in the second quarter (-1.4%,
according to the median forecast), but all 30 expect resumption of at least
mild growth in the third quarter.

The projected acceleration in growth of

output later this year is in response to a personal tax-rate reduction and
less intense inflation that will increase growth in real income.

Nearly two-

thirds of the group assume that growth in M-1B in 1981 will b e within its
long-run target range and the balance expect that growth w i l l exceed the upper
limit of the range.

The bulk of the group expects a Federal deficit for fiscal

year 1981 in the range of $55-60 billion and a deficit for 1982 in the range of
$45-55 billion.

Prices.

Fourth District economists scaled down their forecast of

the GNP implicit price deflator a little from the March Round Table meeting.
The median forecast now shows the deflator increasing by 9.1% in 1981 (fourth
quarter to fourth quarter) and 8.6% in 1982.

While most participants expect

a gradually decelerating inflation trend to provide thrust to economic activity,
many remain doubtful that the underlying inflation rate has changed m u c h , despite
recent moderation in consumer and producer prices.

Some raised doubts that farm

price declines will continue much longer.
Manufacturing Activity.

The latest monthly Survey of Fourth District

Manufacturing indicates continued expansion in shipments and orders in J u n e ,
although some easing in the pace is occurring.

A steel economist reports a letup

in steel orders in recent weeks, apparently because of a sharp rise in imports
and hedging prior to the price increase in June.

Aluminum orders for the second

half of 1981 are weak virtually across the board, according to an aluminum
industry economist, and some cutback in production is anticipated in the third
quarter.

Also, two regional crude-oil refineries in the District are still

operating at about 70% of capacity.

Backlogs of machine tool orders have been

steadily cut to 12 months from 18 months a year-ago, according to an industry
economist.

The long slide in machine tool orders is unlikely to be reversed

for another quarter or two.

The spending surge for machine tools by the auto

industry has peaked, judging from recent cancellations and deferrals of spending
by GMC, especially for production of additional four-eyelinder engine capacity.
In view of the letup in capital spending by the auto industry, some machine
tool producers believe they have sufficient capacity to accommodate an upswing
in defense orders before reaching supply constraints, perhaps in 1983.

Consumer Goods.

Despite a second-quarter decline attributed largely

to weakened auto sales, consumer spending should increase by about 3% in 1981,
according to an economist for a major department store chain.

Retail sales of

food items are expected to be flat over the y e a r , but real growth in department
store sales should reach 4%.

A packaging producer for nondurable consumer goods

reports that shipments of corrugated boxes, usually a reliable coincident
indicator, have been dropping slowly.

Several producers of durable consumer

goods report that inventories continue to be tight at plant and retail levels,
with some seasonally volatile items (such as air conditioners) experiencing slow
deliveries as a result of low stocks.

Auto producers have been trying to

influence dealers to step up orders for the remainder of this model year, but
dealers are reluctant to order because of high interest rates on floor plans
and an uncertain consumer market.

An auto industry economist states that May

and June should be a post-rebate low point in auto sales, and summer months are
expected to show increases, on a seasonally adjusted basis.

This assumes,

however, continued moderation in consumer prices, further declines in gasoline
prices, and lower interest rates.

The economist asserts that availability of

instalment credit, hindered by usury ceilings in many states, is depressing
auto sales rather than higher interest rates.
Banking.

Loan demand by businesses has increased in recent months,

but consumer loan demand remains w e a k .
recorded a strong increase in June.

A bank economist reports that C&I loans

Inventory financing and a need for working

capital appear to be significant factors for the step-up in borrowing from small
and middle-sized corporations.

Continuation of interest rates at current levels

could have a crippling effect on smaller businesses over the next three to six
months, according to several bank economists.

Consumer instalment lending

continues to decline, according to a local bank official, but at a slower rate
than during the first quarter.

However, an area banker expects instalment

lending to receive a boost from new car buying in the fall.

Credit card usage

is showing signs of bottoming out.
Housing.

Mortgage loan demand remains very weak in the District,

with mortgage rates rising to as high as 18% on conventional 80% mortgages.
A 100-basis-point advantage on renegotiable-rate-mortgages has not overcome
consumer reluctance to buy homes under current market conditions, according to
an S&L official.

An official for a major builder reports that orders for new

houses in the second quarter are 30% below normal, with each month showing
progressive weakness.

The current order pattern, along with rising mortgage

rates, does not suggest a revival in housing starts similar to that which
occurred last summer.
Savings flows into S&Ls may fall as sharply in June as in April,
according to an economist for a regional FHLB in the District.

An S&L that has

benefited from a promotion to attract funds to their six-month money-market
certificate in May reports that competition from other S&Ls and higher rates
offered by commercial banks have reduced savings flows in June.

Several S&L

officials see little relief from their earnings problem this quarter or next.
Losses this quarter will apparently be even more widespread than last, which
will aggravate those associations that have already been operating with relatively
low liquidity.

An S&L official asserts that the proposed tax-free savings

certificate would promptly improve the supply of and demand for mortgages,
although several others feel such an instrument would be too late to benefit
this selling season.

FIFTH DISTRICT - Richmond
Overview
Responses to our latest survey of Fifth District business conditions
suggest a modest downturn has occurred over the past m o n t h .

On balance, manu-

facturers contacted report slight declines in shipments, new orders, and order
backlogs.

For m a n y , however, shipments and new orders seem to have held their

own and there remain isolated areas of moderate strength.

Retailers report

little change in total sales, but sales of big-ticket items have slowed in
recent weeks.
retail sectors.

Employment appears to have fallen in both the manufacturing and
The inventory situation is m i x e d .

buildup over the m o n t h .

Retailers experienced some

Manufacturers report significant accumulation of

materials while stocks of finished goods are down sharply from a month ago.
In general, loan demand across the District has been moderate, but residential
mortgage activity continues w e a k .

Recent severe weather conditions have

attenuated earlier optimism concerning crop and livestock production prospects.
Crop conditions remain generally favorable, but have declined in some areas
over the past two w e e k s .
Consumer Spending
It is difficult to discern any clear pattern in consumer activity.
Significant disparities exist among localities and sectors.

Our survey

suggests little change in total retail sales from a month a g o , but some
weakness in big-ticket items, particularly automobiles.

Overall, however,

demand for consumer installment loans is seen as moderate with significant
strength appearing in some areas.

Among general merchandise lines, those of

better quality continue to be the better performers.

Those retailers surveyed

report inventories unchanged to slightly higher and employment unchanged to
slightly lower.

Richmond directors also found little change in retail inven-

tories other than automobiles.

Automobile dealers have experienced rising

inventories, but this has been attributed to seasonal factors.
The Manufacturing Sector
In the manufacturing sector activity declined modestly over the latest
survey period.

This decline was most noticeable in new orders and order back-

logs, but shipments were also off slightly.

The textile, building materials,

furniture, and electrical equipment industries held their own over the m o n t h ,
but most other groups seem to have experienced some relative weakness.

Accord-

ing to our survey respondents, materials inventories have risen lately while
stocks of finished goods were down sharply.

Our directors, for the most part

characterized manufacturing inventories as steady.

Nonetheless, over half of

manufacturers surveyed feel current inventory levels are higher than desired.
Employment was off slightly among those surveyed, but the average workweek
was unchanged.
The Financial Sector
Loan demand has generally been steady in recent weeks but does seem
to vary by type of loan and locality.

Commercial and industrial loans have

been weak to moderate with only isolated areas of significant strength.

De-

mand for consumer installment loans has been steady and moderate in most areas,
b u t , once again, areas of strength have emerged.

Demand for non-residential

and, particularly, residential mortgages continues to be w e a k .

The Outlook and Prices
Manufacturers and retailers surveyed report a continued abatement
of price increases.

Over 40 percent of the manufacturers surveyed paid no

higher prices than a month ago, and over two-thirds held the line on prices
received.

Nearly half of the retail respondents reported no change in prices

paid and received over the month.

Manufacturers ace somewhat less optimistic

than a month ago about the business outlook, but retailers are decidedly so.
Fewer than half of the retailers expect business activity nationally, locally,
and in their respective firms to improve over the next six months.

Nearly one

respondent out of eight, from both sectors, expects business to deteriorate
over that period.
The Agriculture Sector
Fifth District crop production prospects for 1981 were fairly optimistic as of mid-June.

With the exception of soybeans, virtually all spring and

summer crop plantings were complete.
reportedly as follows:

Conditions of the major crops were

tobacco, good to excellent; peanuts, fair to excellent;

cotton, fair to good; corn, fair to excellent but mostly good; and early-planted
soybeans, peaches, and apples, mostly good.

High temperatures.caused crop con-

ditions to decline in South Carolina during the third week of June however, and
resulted in the loss of more than 75,000 broilers and breeder hens in North
Carolina.

SIXTH DISTRICT-ATLANTA
Economic activity in the Sixth District remains mixed.
to send out diverse signals as they have since April.
improved, but auto sales remain depressed.

Indicators continue

Consumer retail spending has

Residential builders continue to be plagued

with high interest rates. Commercial construction appears strong, with numerous large
projects underway. Inflation has moderated somewhat recently but is still in the doubledigit area.

The prospects for agriculture have improved due to recent rainfall that

has brought some relief to the Southeast.
Consumer Spending and Inventories. Retail sales have been holding their own.
A few merchants, who directors characterize as innovative and particularly aggressive,
are doing better than expected.
home furnishings.

Demand has been strong for seasonal fashions and

Credit sales have picked up recently—a pattern that one retailer

interpreted as a display of consumer confidence in the economy. Inventories continue
to be closely monitored.

Businessmen are active in development of mechanized

information systems where point-of-sale terminals are tied directly to the computer to
facilitate the maintenance of proper inventory levels.
Used car sales continue to be the mainstay of new car dealerships as a result
of high interest rates.
buying.

Dealers say many people are looking and comparing but not

Chevrolet and Pontiac dealers complain about the unavailability of J-cars.

Auto dealers seemed pessimistic and, as a group, do not expect to see their position
improving significantly in the near-term.
Inflation evidently is slowing in the Deep South as in the rest of the country.
From May 1980 to May 1981, the all-item consumer price index for Miami rose 10.6%.
While this inflation is still unacceptably high, it represents a marked improvement over
previous months.

This same index had risen 14.8% from March 1980 to March 1981

and 13.2% from January 1980 to January 1981.

Although transportation costs were

primarily responsible for the slowing, housing costs rose by much less than in previous
periods.
Financial and Construction.

Housing starts slowed to a trickle in May and

early June following two months of increasing activity.
permits also subsided.
April.

The spring surge in building

In Atlanta, permits for single-family houses fell by 34% from

With soaring interest rates, prospective buyers are unable to qualify for

financing—even

with

an

ever-lengthening

wraparounds, and renegotiate mortgages.

menu

of

options,

such

as

buydowns,

Savings and loans are being crippled as the

cost of funds is exceeding their loan portfolio income. The average price for a singlefamily home reached $93,000 in south Florida recently.
condominium conversions are putting pressure on rental units.

High home prices and
Demand for low-cost

rentals is outstripping supply in most areas of the District.
Commercial construction appears strong.
have boosted construction in central Louisiana.

Contracts at military installations
In south Florida, foreign investors

continue to buy up properties, and in Tennessee, much construction activity has been
generated by preparations for the World's Fair.
Employment and Industry.
improvement.

The employment situation has shown moderate

Expansion of military weapon systems has added to employment rolls;

still, youth unemployment remains high. High school students have staged two marches
in Atlanta to protest lack of summer jobs.
Port tonnage is up over last year throughout the District with the exception
of the Port of Mobile, where the United Mine Workers strike curtailed coal exports.
The Port of Miami continues to expand into one of the world's most active specialized
ports as growth prospects have led port executives to finalize a long range 20-year
expansion program.

The quarter-billion-dollar

expansion has been approved and

environmentally endorsed.

Business is also brisk at the Tampa Port, with the largest

dockside cold storage facility in the country.
According to travel experts, business has improved in recent weeks in north
and central Florida.

A successful spring season and the availability of gasoline have

heightened expectations for continued improvement in that region.

A less optimistic

outlook is expressed for south Florida, however, where tourism (Florida's largest industry)
is heavily dependent on foreign visitors.

This year, economic problems in Europe,

political unrest in Central America, and the sudden strength of the U. S. dollar are
discouraging foreign visitors.

Merchants are predicting that some shops will not last

through the summer. Tourist trade from Venezuela, which sends more tourists to south
Florida than any other Latin nation, has slowed this year because the country's oildriven economy has been stagnating after years of fast growth. State tourism figures
show that foreign tourists traditionally spend about $500 more per person on visits to
Florida than do domestic tourists.

Tourist-generated business receipts of $16.1 billion

in 1980 will be hard to match in 1981.
Agriculture.

Recent rains have provided some relief from the drought and

curtailed impending water restriction plans in Florida.

Prospects for high yields for

crops look promising in most District states, and the wheat crop is expected to be
two-thirds larger than 1980's harvest.

Prices for hogs and beef cattle have begun to

show strength in recent weeks in response to the long-awaited reductions in hog
marketings.

SEVENTH D I S T R I C T — C H I C A G O
Summary.

Seventh District business activity, overall, is unlikely

to show significant improvement in the second and third quarters, although many
firms will report good gains from the depressed periods of 1980.

This prospect

suggests continued adverse comparisons with the national economy.

Most business

firms now anticipate lower sales in the near-term than they had expected a few
months ago.

Moreover, a smaller rise in farm income is projected.

plans, both residential and nonresidential, have been scaled down.

Construction
Loans are

available in virtually all credit markets, but high interest rates deter
borrowing.

With rising personal income, retail sales have held up w e l l .

There

is a widespread view that an acceleration in general activity will begin late
in 1981, and continue into 1982.

Such forecasts assume lower interest rates,

tax rate reductions, a boost from defense spending, and further easing of inflationary pressures.
Employment.

Demand for workers is weak.

New layoffs or extended

vacations have been announced recently for farm equipment, meat packing, and
electrical products.

However, claims for unemployment compensation are running

well below last year's level.

Indefinite layoffs reported by auto producers

are down to 160,000 from 240,000 last year.

Summer jobs for youth are hard to

find, partly because of cutbacks in CETA programs.
governments have frozen hirings.

Various state and local

Many help-wanted ads in district newspapers

attempt to lure skilled workers to the South and West.
Personal income and labor negotiations.

Worker compensation continues

to rise at a rate of about 9 percent in the district, despite a surplus of workers.

Efforts of employers to get organized labor to moderate new demands, or to renegotiate existing contracts, have been successful only under a threat to shut
down the operation.

Mass transit workers of the financially-strapped Chicago-

area RTA system threaten walkouts over any move to adjust their liberal compensation and work rules.

Building trades have negotiated 8.5 to 11 percent increases

this year.
Retail sales.

Some very large retail chains have been pleased by

double-digit increases in sales in recent weeks.
and aggressive pricing.

They are using heavy promotions

Consumer credit delinquencies remain high.

ticket items often bought on credit are not selling w e l l .
chains are losing m o n e y .

Most big

Most general merchandise

An old chain has filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11.

Vacation travel and sales of recreational vehicles are being aided by ready
availability of gasoline.
Inventories.

Most firms are holding inventories at low levels to

reduce heavy finance charges.
advance buying.

Expected price increases no longer spur anticipatory

In some cases product lines have been narrowed and delivery times

have been allowed to stretch out in order to economize on working capital.

Low

inventories act as a buffer against any possible recession, but they also provide
a springboard for faster inflation if final demand accelerates.
Steel.
seasonal reasons.

Orders for steel slowed somewhat in the past month, partly for
Steel demand is very strong for "oil country goods", and is

above last year for vehicles and appliances.
softened.

Orders for structural steel have

More steel users are buying from service centers in order to keep their

own inventories low.

Total steel shipments from U . S . mills are now projected

at 93 million tons for 1981, up from 84 million in 1980, but well below 100
million in 1979.

Capital goods.

Most district producers of capital goods report new

orders w e l l below their capacity and below expectations expressed earlier.
weakest sectors are equipment for construction, mining, and railroads.
for farm equipment and heavy trucks has been disappointing.

The

Demand

Equipment for

oil and gas exploration is booked to capacity, but this sector is relatively
unimportant h e r e .
Autos and trucks.
levels.

Sales of autos and trucks have remained at low

Output of cars and trucks in the second and third quarters will sub-

stantially exceed last year's reduced levels, but will remain far below the
prosperous levels of 1978.

Inventories may rise in the months ahead partly to

encourage concessions by the UAW.
Residential construction.

Housing starts are running somewhat above

last year's very depressed level in district centers.

Home mortgages are offered

at 16.5 to 17.5 percent or m o r e , but with few takers.

"Creative financing" is

not helping m u c h .

Many S&Ls and banks are not making any mortgage loans.

It

is already too late in the season for lower interest rates to help housing construction in the district this year.
Nonresidential construction.

A large number of smaller shopping center

office buildings, warehouses, and other nonresidential construction projects were
postponed in May and June.

Interest rates of 14 percent or m o r e , often with

equity participations, are too high to attract developers.

Most life insurance

companies and pension funds have halted all commitments on commercial mortgages.
Public construction is very w e a k , especially road work.
Agriculture.
of Iowa.

Recent rains eased remaining drought concerns in parts

However, plantings, already unusually late in the Eastern cornbelt,

were further delayed.

These developments are dampening hopes for good crop

yields in the Midwest.

Farm income in the Midwest was especially suppressed in

the first half because of low livestock prices.

These prices have risen in the

past two m o n t h s , and are approaching breakeven levels after a prolonged period
of losses.

High interest rates and low farm earnings are blamed for sluggish

capital spending by farmers.

Revised industry projections put 1981 sales of

farm equipment only modestly above the depressed level of 1980 instead of the
strong rebound expected earlier.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District has been generally
sluggish in recent weeks according to reports from area businessmen.
Retailers report that unit sales of general merchandise and automobiles have
shown no improvement in the past two months, although dollar sales are above
the depressed levels of a year ago.

Appliance, chemical, paper, and

building materials firms report a slowing in activity and plan to adjust
their production schedules to reduce their inventories.

Homebuilding

activity remains quite sluggish, although nonresidential building remains
fairly strong.

Bank lending activity is flat and savings and loan

associations continue to curtail lending.

In agricultural areas, the

planting of crops was delayed by excessive rainfall, but corn and cotton
planting is now complete.

However, some crops, particularly cotton, have

been damaged in some areas by excessive rainfall.
Consumer spending in dollar amount has been rising, but in real
terms has been flat or declining in recent weeks according to area
retailers.

Department store representatives reported that dollar sales are

well above last year's level, but noted that year-ago sales at this time
were extremely low.

Automobile dealers report their sales have changed

little during the past two months, but are above year-ago levels.
Manufacturing industries have shown some weakness.

Representatives

of two major appliance firms reported that recent sales have been sluggish
and that appliance inventories are high.

One firm plans to curtail

production for several days in order to reduce inventories.

Manufacturers

of chemical and paper products, which reported some strength earlier in the

year, noted a recent slowing in sales.

A l s o , with weakening homebuilding

activity, producers of wood and wood products, connector plates, and other
building products report that sales are very sluggish.

A manufacturer of

uniforms and other apparel noted that sales were essentially flat in the
first half of this year.

On the other hand, firms producing

energy-efficient equipment, oil and gas equipment, and military hardware
continue to experience strong demand.
Some service industries report relatively strong activity.

For

example, a representative of a firm that owns and operates hospitals
nationwide, stated that his business is very strong.

Tourism in the

district is also expected to make gains this summer, aided by lower gasoline
prices.
Residential and nonresidential building activity are reported to be
slowing.

Homebuilding continues at a particularly slow rate.

St. Louis

area housing permits rose somewhat in the first half of 1981 compared to a
year ago, but activity is now falling off again.

Traffic levels at building

sites are estimated to be less than one-half that of early this year.
Nonresidential building activity in the St. Louis area remains fairly strong
based on a sizable number of projects underway.

With the fewer new

projects, however, there is some indication that such activity is slowing.
One large construction and engineering firm reported fewer new projects for
industrial plants and highways, and that in the past 60 days three large
construction projects had been postponed at a very late stage of development.

Overall, loan activity at district banks is reported to be flat.
Business loans have been unchanged in recent weeks while installment loans
have increased only slightly.

Officials of area savings and loan

associations report that few mortgage loans have been made at the 16 to
16-3/4 percent rates now prevailing.

So far the new variable rate mortgages

have not been offered, although most associations are considering them.

S

and L officials report some success in building liquidity by reducing
mortgage lending and investing in short-term assets.
In the agricultural sector, most crop plantings were later than
usual because of excessive rainfall.

Nevertheless the intended amounts of

corn and cotton have generally been planted.

An estimated 10 to 20 percent

of the cotton acreage in the upper Mississippi Valley, however, has been
damaged by excessive rainfall and will be abandoned.

Soybean planting is

only 80 to 90 percent complete, but the planting can be continued until
about July 4th and still produce a normal yield.
harvested over most of the District.

The wheat crop has been

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS
Although sluggishness persists
provement occurred in May and early June.
Consumer

spending, particularly

in the Ninth District, signs of imThe signs of improvement were many:
for merchandise, continued

the im-

provement it began in April.
Industrial activity

improved

as suggested by an increase in manu-

facturing firms' new orders and by

the settlement

of

construction

strikes.
Late spring rains have improved growing conditions, and crops are off
to a good start.
Despite these improvements, farm prices and auto sales in May and early June
were disappointing after showing signs of improvement in April, and mining and
lumbering remain weak.

These weaknesses continue to be reflected in sluggish

bank lending.
Consumer Spending
The district's consumers continue to be less hesitant to spend than
they were in March.

Our last report indicated that general merchandise sales

increased somewhat more than seasonally
continued.

in April, and this improvement

has

Two major district retailers reported sales gains in May and early

June and indicated that sales exceeded expectations.

Directors from Minnesota

and Montana also reported

sales have continued

improve.

that general merchandise

to

Not only are consumers spending more in stores, but they are traveling

more, for reports from Minnesota and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan indicate a
more-than-seasonal pickup in tourist spending in May and early June.

This pickup in spending, however, does not extend to autos and homes.
A regional sales manager for a domestic automobile manufacturer indicated that
in May and early June, car sales returned to their depressed pre-rebate levels
after improving

in April.

Home

sales did not drop, but did not

improve;

mortgage loan applications at Minneapolis-St. Paul S&Ls in May and early June
were unchanged from April's depressed level.

Industrial Activity and Inventories
Like consumer spending, industrial activity showed signs of improving
in May and early June.

Manufacturing orders have increased.

Our last report

indicated that gains in some manufacturing firms' new orders were being offset
by declines at other firms.

But 46 percent of the respondents to a recent

University of Minnesota survey of Minnesota manufacturers reported increases in
new orders in May, 35 percent reported declines, and 19 percent
changes.

reported no

Most of these firms also said that they had no buildup of unwanted

inventory, and several reported that the prices they paid for inventories had
either stopped rising or had declined. Construction activity has also picked up
as the strikes, which had shut down many Minneapolis-St. Paul area construction
projects since early May, were settled in mid-June.
In contrast to the improvement in manufacturing and construction, mining and lumbering remain in the doldrums. A Montana director indicated that the
forest products industry in western Montana continues to operate at 60 percent
of capacity.

Similarly, in northeastern Minnesota and the Upper Peninsula of

Michigan, some iron ore mines remain closed and others are operating only part
of the time.

Agricultural Conditions
Improved growing conditions have coincided with the improvements elsewhere in the district, but farm prices remain a concern. At the time of our last
report, substantial portions of the district were still experiencing drought.
Rains came to most of these areas in late May and early June, and crops throughout the district now are off to a good start.
proved, farm prices haven't.

Although crop prospects have im-

After increasing in April, cash grain and live-

stock prices in Minneapolis and South St. Paul, except for slaughter cattle and
hogs, either remained the same or declined between April and M a y .
prices remain well below the highs attained late last year.

All these

The continuing

weakness in grain prices stems from export sales being low; for example, an
economist for a major Upper Midwest railroad indicated that his firm's grain
shipments to West Coast ports have been less than anticipated.

Financial Developments
Although there are signs that the district's business activity may see
some improvement, it remains sluggish at the moment.
consistent with this overall assessment.

Recent loan growth is

Loans at Minneapolis-St. Paul area

banks in May and early June remained at April's lackluster level, and outside
the Twin Cities, bank directors reported no pickup in bank lending.

TENTH D I S T R I C T — K A N S A S CITY
Overview.
growth.

The Tenth District's economy is showing little real

Over the last y e a r , current dollar retail sales increased only

slightly faster than retail prices.

Purchasing agents report input prices

up about 10 per cent above June 1980 and expect price increases to accelerate by year-end. Housing starts have increased very little over last year's
depressed levels, due to high mortgage rates.

Although the national winter

wheat crop is expected to set a new record, Tenth District crops have been
substantially reduced by frost and drought damage.
deposits at commercial banks is slow.

Growth in loans and

Prime lending rates are unchanged

from last month and range from 19 1/2 to 20 1/2 per cent.
Retail Trade.

A l l Tenth District retailers report their current

dollar sales during January-May 1981 were in excess of 10 per cent above
those of January-May 1980.

Double digit sales increases have been reported

throughout the District since March of this year.

Most Tenth District

retailers indicate that merchandise cost increases remain in the 6-8 per
cent range.

Retailers are maintaining full inventory markups and gross

profit margins by passing these cost increases on to consumers.
Current stocks of merchandise at District retail stores are satisfactory relative to recent sales growth.

However, most retailers expect

sales to level off in the third quarter of this year.
therefore, be watched closely in coming months.

Inventory levels will,

A majority of Tenth District

retailers expect sales to pick up in the fourth quarter of 1981.

Any build-

up of inventories in the third quarter will then be used to ensure merchandise
availability later in the year.

Purchasing Agents.

Most purchasing agents report that input prices

are more than 10 per cent above year-ago levels.

Although they report a

stabilizing trend in recent months, most agents feel that price increases
will accelerate before year-end. Lead times are generally low throughout the
District, and materials inventories have been reduced to satisfactory levels.
Overall, companies are buying slightly more inputs than last year.

About one-

third report laid-off workers and excess operating capacity.
Homebuilders.

Homebuilders

1

Associations indicate that housing

starts are currently only slightly above last year's depressed levels.
builders expect starts to remain low until Autumn.

Most

Some improvement is

expected during the last quarter of 1981, depending on the level of mortgage
rates.

There are no reports of excess inventories of unsold homes in the

District.

Yet, home prices appear to have risen very little, as high mortgage

rates have restrained demand.
exist.

No problems with material availability currently

But most builders note that if starts increase, some shortages will

occur as suppliers of materials incur start-up lags while bringing idle
capacity back into production.
Agriculture.

A record U . S . winter wheat crop is projected for 1981

because of an increase in acres planted, despite frost and drought damage during
the growing season.
Kansas.

Frost damage was worst in northwestern and west central

Some areas of the Tenth District report hard red winter wheat production

to be as much as 40 per cent below average levels.
be reduced as much as 56 million bushels.

The Kansas wheat crop may

Colorado and Nebraska crops will

probably be reduced by 10 million bushels and 22 million bushels, respectively.

Winter wheat production in areas of Oklahoma may also be lower than
anticipated because of hail damage and drought conditions during the
growing season.

The shortfalls in hard red winter wheat yields are

expected to be offset by improved prospects for other portions of the
wheat crop.

Due to low prices, many farmers are holding much of their

wheat crop off the market, anticipating higher prices later this year.
Range and pasture conditions throughout the District have
improved due to recent rainfall, but additional moisture is necessary
to maintain the rangeland in good condition.
Financial.

Loan demand at commercial banks in the Tenth District

is weak to moderate in most categories.

However, growth of commercial

and industrial loans continues strong in those regions experiencing a boom
in energy-related activities.

Lending rates for prime business customers

are predominantly within a range of 19 1/2 to 20 1/2 per cent, with no
appreciable change in the past month.

Some of the larger banks have

adopted or are thinking of adopting a change in the method for establishing
lending rates that more nearly reflects their marginal cost of funds.
Growth of deposits at most Tenth District banks is weak or moderate and concentrated in 6-month money market certificates.

A number of

banks are offering retail RP's to attract funds, due in part to intense
competition from money market mutual funds.

Several other banks are

considering offering retail RP's in the near future.

ELEVENTH D I S T R I C T — D A L L A S

The expansion of the Eleventh District economy continues at a
moderate pace.

Mining, equipment manufacturing, and commercial

construction are spearheading the District's growth.

Some

manufacturing firms have laid off employees, but overall employment
is u p .

The growth in department store sales is down slightly from

pre-Easter levels, and auto sales are w e a k .
declining.
growth.
loans.

Housing starts are

Total loans and deposits at commerical banks show little

S&Ls report lower deposit outflows, but they are making few
Heavy rains have reduced some crop yields in the District.

Total employment in Texas has increased steadily throughout the
year and is up 6 percent from year-ago levels, despite layoffs in
electronics, commercial aircraft, and residential construction.

The

unemployment rate Increased 1.1 percentage points from April to 5.3
percent, comparable to the May 1980 level.

Much of the growth in

manufacturing employment is associated with the Increase in
production of oil field equipment.
Manufacturing output is rising.

Makers of oil field equipment

report increasing sales and are operating at full capacity.

Delivery

schedules continue to lengthen—especially for high-technology
items.

Respondents expect current conditions to continue at least

through 1982.

The high level of steel production is stable, and

sales in the apparel and furniture industries are increasing.

Weak

sales in consumer electronics have led to layoffs by a few large
electronics manufacturers.

Texas Instruments reduced the work force

in its consumer products division by 2,800 in M a y .

Most

manufacturers reported a moderation in the increase of materials
prices.
The number of drilling rigs operating in the District is at a
record h i g h .

Additions to the fleet of rigs in Texas have exceeded a

rate of one per day since the end of April.

Shortages of well

casings, drill pipe, and experienced drilling crews persist.
Construction in the District remains active due to the number of
large office projects under construction.

Residential construction

is falling, and the pace of highway, municipal, and utility
construction is unchanged.
Total loans and deposits at commercial banks show little
increase since April, but business loans and large certificates of
deposit at large District banks are significantly higher.
the fastest growing C&I loan category.

Mining is

Bankers report a rise in the

number of small firms on their "concern" list.

The volume of the

consumer loans dropped sharply after the Texas usury ceiling rose to
24 percent.

Consumer loan rates are currently 18 to 19 percent.

The

decline in demand deposits is offsetting the growth in time deposits
(NOW accounts and large CDs).

Large certificates of deposit are the

major source of funds at commercial banks at this time.
S&Ls report their deposits outflows slowed in early June, and
they are maintaining their restrictive lending policies.

The decline

in outflows is attributed to the narrowing in the difference between
yields of money market funds and money market CDs and a savings

buildup following tax refunds.

The number of NOW accounts are

described as increasing steadily.

S&Ls are investing in money market

instruments and in commercial projects.

Liquidity levels are down

from the first quarter.
The growth of department store sales in nominal dollars has
slowed since April, and the level of sales is 11 percent over a year
ago.

Strong sales were reported in the week before Father's Day, and

retailers expect sales to increase through the fall and Christmas
seasons.

Apparel continues to sell well, and furniture sales are

recovering from their low levels earlier in the y e a r .

Inventories

are slightly over plan, but are not a source of concern.

Price

discounts are greater than originally planned, but promotional
activity is otherwise normal for this season.

Retailers have not

altered their credit card policies following the change in the state
usury ceiling, but they anticipate changes within a year.

The

proportion of sales purchased on credit is stable and below last
year's percentage in the months before the credit constraint program
was put into effect.
Automobile sales are up slightly from April but remain below
seasonal levels.

Dealers attribute some of the current weakness to

advanced purchases made during the rebate programs and a rise in new
car loan rates to 18 to 19 percent.

Traffic is described as good at

dealerships, and sales are expected to improve.
selling slightly better than imports.

Domestic models are

Used cars are selling

extremely well even though loan rates on used cars are about 21
percent.

Dealers are building inventory for sales through fall.

Heavy rains have reduced wheat yields by as much as 10 percent
across much of the District.

However, total wheat output will still

be relatively large because more acres were devoted to wheat this
year.

The increase in soil moisture has improved the outlook for

most spring-planted crops.

Southern New Mexico is the only major

area of the District that remains abnormally d r y .

The added moisture

has not improved the financial condition of farmers and ranchers,
however.

The ability of many to repay their loans remains a source

of concern.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The consensus in the Twelfth District is for a weakening in the
economy.

Most are forecasting a continued decline in consumer spending.

Consumers are especially hesitant to buy large items.

The unemployment

and inflation picture in the region is following the national trend.
rates have edged upward, while the inflation rate has slowed.

Unemployment

With housing,

energy, and food prices leading the w a y , very optimistic short-run inflation
expectations are being expressed.
market.

Little activity is occurring in the housing

Mortgage rates are still h i g h , up to 18 percent, and consumers

are hesitant to obtain adjustable rate mortgages.
strong and many areas are reporting good harvests.

Agriculture continues
Financial institutions

are increasingly troubled by the outflow of deposits to money market funds.
It is felt that the current regulations are inequitable and that the restrictions
need to be immediately loosened so that banks and thrifts can better compete
with other institutions offering financial services.
CONSUMER SPENDING
Indications were given to suggest a rather widespread and substantial
weakening in consumer spending.

Sales of durable goods, especially automobiles

and appliances, are said to be extremely sluggish.

It was suggested that

with the ending of the rebate programs, car sales will continue to be slow.
In many areas, department stores are engaging in large promotional campaigns
in an attempt to attract buyers.

However, it was felt that consumers are

reluctant to spend due to fears over the weakening state of the economy.

EMPLOYMENT
Most areas in the region are reporting a slight upswing in unemployment.
The construction-related industries are still in a major recession.
improvement is expected until interest rates fall.

Little

The Pacific Northwest

continues to be especially hard hit as its economy is highly dependent on
the forest products industry.

Employment in the electronics and computer

industries continues to benefit from increased demand.
continue to create new employment opportunities.

Plant expansions

Aerospace employment has

leveled off as orders, especially for older craft, have declined.
REAL ESTATE
Little activity in the housing market is being reported.

With

mortgage rates as high as 18 percent, few potential buyers are able or willing
to obtain mortgage loans.

Home buyers are very reluctant to obtain adjustable

rate mortgages even though they are being offered at lower interest rates
than other mortgage instruments.
tailing off.

Commercial construction appears to be

Vacancy rates are on the rise and builders are hesitant to

engage in any new activity.

In some cases these rates have doubled from

last year's level.
PRICES
An optimistic outlook is being expressed over the short-run inflation
picture.

Housing, energy, and food prices appear to be significantly holding

down inflation.

With high interest rates discouraging home buyers, housing

prices appear to be leveling off.
prices.

The oil glut has helped to lower gasoline

Food prices have also dropped slightly.

It was indicated that

consumers appear to be staying away from high priced items and this, too,
has helped to keep prices down.

However, most are dubious that the improved

inflation picture will remain past the summer.

If the economy begins to

expand, prices, especially for raw materials, are expected to accelerate.
AGRICULTURE
Agricultural prospects remain bright.

For the most part, recent

rains have eased concerns over a potential water shortage.
the cotton planting, but a good crop is projected.

The rains delayed

Despite a freeze in

the Pacific Northwest, the apple crop may be as large as last year's record
harvest.

Wheat farmers are expecting high prices for their product, and

farmers in general are said to be in as good a

financial position as they

have been in five years.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
The outflow of funds from savings and loan associations is said
to be reaching record levels.

This outflow is adversely affecting both

the profitability of these institutions and the availability of funds for
residential housing.

Consumers are better informed and are less willing

to be satisfied with below market rates.

There seems to be an increased

call for legislative action that would aid thrifts and banks.

Most desire

an easing of restrictions so that these institutions could compete on a
more equal footing with money market funds.

Many argue that thrift institutions,

with their aging portfolios of mortgage loans, can be in serious trouble
in the very near term if interest rates do not go down and legislative action
is not taken.

The FSLIC insurance reserves are deemed insufficient to withstand

the demands that are likely to be imposed.
slow.

Banking activity is relatively

Lending activity has slowed for both commercial and consumer loans.

