CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 16, 1981

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY
page i
First
page
1 6
SecondDistrict-Boston
District-New
York
page
Third
District-Philadelphia
page
11
Fourth
District-Cleveland
page
Fifth District-Atlanta
District-Richmond
page
1915
Sixth
page
22
Seventh
District-Chicago
page
25
EighthDistrict-Minneapolis
District-St. Louis page
29
Ninth
page
32
Tenth
District-Kansas
City
page
36
Eleventh
District-Dallas
page
39
Twelfth
District-San
Francisco
page 42

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
Overview:

Economic conditions deteriorated further during

November, according to the District reports.
slowed or fell in many regions.

Growth in consumer spending

The slump in manufacturing worsened,

and layoffs, production cuts, and plant shutdowns appeared to be spreading.
Residential construction failed to revive despite a decline in interest
rates.

Nonresidential construction activity continued strong in some

Districts.

While consumer lending remained soft, business borrowing

strengthened in a few Districts.

Low prices depressed agricultural

incomes and created anxiety about farmers' abilities to meet loan obligations.

Economists have revised their forecasts of near-term eco-

nomic growth sharply downward.

Many believe the downturn will reach

the trough by the first or second quarter of 1981 and that the economy
will then rally over the second half of the year.
Consumer Spending:

The retail sector was soft throughout

the country during November.

Many areas experienced reduced sales

growth or actual declines, although the pace improved after Thanksgiving
in the Northeast.

Real sales, however, were lower in Richmond, Atlanta,

Chicago, and Minneapolis.

After falling in October, nominal retail

spending in San Francisco recouped the loss in November, but in real

terms holiday expenditures are not expected to reach last year's mark.
Although high quality products were selling better than low-cost goods
in Boston, durables and other big-ticket items were moving especially
slowly in many other locations.

Merchants in numerous Districts were

counting on a late surge to produce an acceptable holiday season, with
some stores relying on heavy promotions and price markdowns to increase
activity.

Despite the overall sluggishness in retail sales, inventories

were mentioned as a problem in only five Districts.

No improvement in

automobile sales was evident, and dealers in Cleveland were prepared
for one of the worst months ever.
Manufacturing:

Manufacturing activity nationwide appeared

to be worsening from last month's depressed levels.

All Districts

reported drops in new orders or shipments for at least some industries.
Hard hit by the downturn were producers of capital goods, building materials, textiles, paper, steel, and consumer durables.
for high technology products has slipped.

Even demand

Difficult conditions per-

sisted in mining in Minneapolis and San Francisco.

Strong spots were

noted in defense industries in Boston and New York and energy-related
industries in St. Louis and Cleveland.
but Dallas.

Layoffs rose in all Districts

Manufacturers in Philadelphia and Chicago indicated an

easing of price pressures.
Construction;

Residential construction and home sales re-

mained virtually at a standstill, as little additional activity resulted
from recent declines in interest rates.

Housing prices have begun to

fall in Atlanta and Chicago, but Dallas reported that further interest
rate reductions were likely to cause prices to jump sharply.

Nonresidential construction continued to be strong in New
York, St. Louis, and Dallas.

Office construction in Chicago received

a boost when financing problems were resolved for some large projects.
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco had moderate activity in the nonresidential sector.
Financial Developments:

Consumer loans continued to lan-

guish, but increased demand for business loans was observed in some
areas.
cent.

In Philadelphia, consumer loans declined by as much as 20 perIn contrast, business loans were rising in New York, Philadelphia,

Kansas City, and Dallas.

Inventory financing, mergers, cash shortages,

energy development, and below-prime lending were cited as factors contributing to the upturn.
Agriculture:

Although good'?-to-excellent crops were reported

in several Districts, lower-than-expected prices were reducing net returns in agriculture.

Consequently, the financial positions of farmers

prompted growing concern.

In Kansas City, the low prices prevented any

improvement in customers' creditworthiness as interest rates fell.
Agricultural loan delinquencies continued to climb in Atlanta, but lenders
hoped foreclosures could be held to moderate levels.

In Dallas, private

lenders were carefully watching their agricultural loan portfolios, although few immediate problems were foreseen.
The Outlook:

In the face of widespread sluggishness, econo-

mists lowered their forecasts of real GNP growth.

Fourth quarter declines

are projected to be as large as 7 percent, but the recession is generally
expected to bottom out in the first or second quarter of 1982.

Many observers

anticipated a strong recovery by the second half of the year, although
Chicago warned that any subsequent upturn expected next year would
leave that District far short of full prosperity.

Manufacturers differed

about when they thought that business would pick up.

At the extremes,

Philadelphia firms hoped for expanding orders between now and June,
while many Richmond companies believed the slump will deepen over the
same period.
were voiced.

Fears that increased inflation will accompany the recovery

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Manufacturing in the First District has weakened over the past
month and a half.

Many more firms than usual have announced shutdowns over

the Christmas season.

The retail situation is more difficult to assess;

since Thanksgiving, sales have been strong in some areas, weak in others.
Also, last year the Christmas season began slowly but ended on a strong
note and the season as a whole was quite good; it is impossible to tell yet
if this is happening again.

Retailers are somewhat concerned about

inventory levels; most manufacturers, despite the recent downturn, do not
view inventories as a problem.

The housing market remains weak, but

mortgage rates are now beginning to fall.
Until Thanksgiving, New England retail sales in November continued
to reflect the weakening economy.
planned.

As a result, inventories are higher than

Since Thanksgiving, retailing has been very mixed.

Some areas

are showing unexpected strength, and in others, sales have fallen well
below the usual seasonal levels.

The picture in Massachusetts is

complicated by a heavy weekend snowstorm that closed most stores for a day.
One merchant cites particular strength in sales of high quality
goods, partly a result of that firm's efforts to attract more high income
customers and partly because the recession is affecting high income
shoppers less.

This is consistent with sales reports showing greater

weakness for discount stores than for full price department stores.
All the merchants are optimistic about Christmas sales.

If last

year's sales pattern is repeated, sales may fail to show real strength
until the last week before Christmas.

Retailers are currently uncertain as

to whether to repeat the pre-Christmas markdowns and promotions they
undertook last year in response to the sluggishness of the early holiday
season.
November brought a downturn in First District manufacturing.

In a

survey of local purchasing agents, the number of firms reporting that
orders increased over the month fell sharply while the number reporting
lower orders increased.

There were also substantial increases in the

numbers with lower backlogs and reduced employment levels.

The downturn

appears to be quite general; high technology industries have been affected
and the region's leading computer manufacturer is shutting down plants for
the Christmas week for the first time in its history.
business remains really strong.

Only the defense

Areas which were weak have remained weak

or weakened further - housing products, consumer hand tools and hardware,
aircraft engines and parts.
developing.

In addition, new areas of weakness are

A machine tool company has no backlog at all and orders are

flat. A manufacturer of word processing equipment reports a gradual
softening in sales.

A producer of packaging equipment and materials has

seen a downturn in capital goods orders in the past six weeks.

For some

the change has been very sudden: one high technology firm in the
instruments industry reports that domestic business was very strong through
the first three quarters of 1981 but "on October 15 someone threw a switch."
The downturn in orders will be reflected in a downturn in
employment.

The manufacturers of aircraft equipment have been laying off

for some months; the producer of word processing equipment has recently cut
back; a large camera manufacturer has announced publicly that workforces
will be reduced by 1,000 in 1982; and the high tech instruments maker has

instituted a hiring freeze.

Many First District firms are choosing to shut

down for two weeks over Christmas rather than reduce workforces
indefinitely.

Some firms have always shut down over Christmas but the

number this year is unusually large and there are more shutdowns for two
weeks.

Because employment statistics are based on the week including the

twelfth day of the month, the statistics will not pick up the Christmas
closings and will not fully reflect the downturn.
Even firms which are cutting back on employment feel that
inventories are under control and generally satisfactory.

Price increases

and lead times are no longer seen as problems, although one firm claims
that lead times for some products have lengthened because inventories are
so lean and goods are not in stock.

With respect to prices one executive,

who previously expressed some bitterness about the restrictive monetary
policy, made the following comment:

"I foresee a return to a time when

business raises prices only with great care."
The only positive development other than the improving price
situation was one firm's statement that the overseas market has improved
slightly as buyers have become accustomed to a stronger dollar.

Other

respondents have not observed any change abroad.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, and Samuelson were available for
comment this month.

Eckstein continues to forecast that this recession

will be "routine"—the peak to trough decline in real GNP will be 2 percent
and the recession will last ten months, ending in May.
expects a "routine" recovery in 1982 and 1983.

Eckstein also

Although he previously

recommended that the Fed not allow short-term interest rates to fall below
12 percent, Eckstein now feels that short-term yields should be allowed to

fall to 10 percent as quickly as possible.

This lower "floor" is justified

because "the important longer-term yields have not fallen all that much
recently," Ml-B remains below its target range, and short-term yields of 10
percent "are consistent with" the current state of the economy.

Eckstein

does not now advocate yields as low as 7 or 8 percent, but he is prepared
to reduce his 10 percent floor for interest rates if the economy should
become weaker than he now expects.
Professors Houthakker and Samuelson believe there is no good
justification for an interest rate "floor."

Houthakker contends that such

an interest rate target is a return to a discredited policy.

By observing

such a provisional floor or ceiling, monetary targets are abandoned when
they matter most—when real GNP is falling or rising too rapidly.

If the

Fed believes it can buy a degree of interest rate stability by increasing
the volatility of money growth and real GNP growth, then "it has taken a
big step backwards."

By restricting the movement of short-term yields the

Fed can only exaggerate cyclical swings in economic activity, thereby
disrupting capital markets and capital market yields all the more.

The Fed

switched to monetary aggregates targets because interest rate targets
ultimately failed to stabilize either GNP growth or interest rates.
Samuelson contends that the Fed needs to defend any deviation from
its avowed "monetarist policy" with good reasons, otherwise the credibility
of monetary policy is eroded.

There seems to be no good reason to suspend

the monetary targets at this time because the economy is weak, Ml-B is
below its target (despite the all-savers rush, M2 is only at the top of its
more restrictive target), and credit market yields remain high.

"Those who

would observe the money growth targets when interest rates are high and

then suspend the targets when yields are low are not true friends of
monetarism, they are shoppers for arguments for restraint."

No one has

accused the Fed of "chickening out" in 1981, and it should not allow
provisional interest rate targets to create procyclical swings in policy
which may exaggerate the current recession and the ensuing recovery.
Indeed, interest rate forecasts are most error prone during economic swings
and the corresponding interest rate targets are most unreliable.

Samuelson

never understood the argument that low yields early in 1980 caused the
overly vigorous expansion that ensued.

If the Fed made an error, it may be

accused of allowing yields to rise too slowly during the expansion.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Economic activity remained sluggish in the Second District
during November, with some further softening evident.

Retail activity

unexpectedly slowed before Thanksgiving but has since recovered somewhat.

Poor conditions persisted in manufacturing and additional weak-

ening in capital goods orders was observed.

Residential construction

continued to be depressed, but a falloff 1ID< nonresidential construction contracts was believed to be temporary.

Business economists now

expect sizable declines in real GNP during the fourth quarter and no
real pickup until the second quarter or half of 1982.

On the financial

side, mergers, acquisitions, and cash shortages pushed up the demand for
business loans.
Consumer Spending
Retail activity virtually stopped growing in early November,
with some department stores experiencing a drop in business.

The pace

has quickened since Thanksgiving, but most retailers are still slightly
below plan.

Since the bulk of Christmas buying has been occurring later

in the season in recent years, merchants are hopeful that the pickup in
sales will continue, producing a reasonably good holiday season overall.
Many stores are depending on heavy promotions and price markdowns to spur
sales.
yond.

All respondents expressed serious concern about January and be-

Manufacturing Activity

Manufacturing activity remained depressed during November,
with further weakening reported by some firms.

After appearing to

bottom out during September and October, new orders received by capital
goods producers declined again.

Although one capital goods supplier

maintained output by depleting its backlog, all others cut production
levels.

Workforces have been reduced through layoffs or attrition.

One establishment, however, preferred to retain highly skilled employees and to add the excess output to its inventories.

Capital

spending by many of these producers of durable equipment has been
lowered, and, in one instance, stopped altogether.
Other manufacturers also experienced flat or slightly lower
sales.

Even the previously strong demand for data processing equip-

ment has slipped.

The only increase in business was reported by a

company whose aerospace division received a large quantity of new defense contracts.

Businesses are adjusting to the bleak situation with

stringent cost controls, the elimination of internal inefficiencies,
and in one case, a restructuring of pricing policies to curtail price
cutting competition.
Construction and Home Sales
Construction activity continues to be very low in the residential sector and strong in the nonresidential sector.
are down from October's poor level.

Home sales

High financing costs are blamed

for the sluggish activity in the residential area.
interest rates have not yet improved conditions.
are expected to be modest and temporary.

Recent declines in

Any gains that do occur

As for nonresidential con-

struction, a drop in the value of contracts let in New York City is

viewed as only temporary.

Major projects such as Battery Park City

are scheduled to begin soon, and the new work should be sufficient
to sustain a high rate of office construction activity.
Economic Outlook
Business economists have revised their forecasts of economic growth sharply downward.

A dismal fourth quarter is expected

to yield a real GNP decline as large as 7 percent, followed by negligible growth at best during the first quarter of 1982.

Manufac-

turers generally agree with this outlook, anticipating no significant upswing in business until the second quarter or later.

Overall

growth for next year is estimated to be one percent or lower by all
but one economist.

The prime rate is projected to average 14 per*-

cent during the coming year.

The 1982 inflation outlook is unchanged

from the 8 to 9 percent level forecast last month.
Financial Developments
Lending officers at commercial banks report that there
have been moderate to significant increases in demands for business
loans during recent weeks.

Mergers and acquisitions were an impor-

tant source of the increased demand, as was the greater-than-expected
deterioration of corporate cash flows.

A related source of the

strength in loan demands has been the need to finance unintended inventory accumulations.

While demands for bank loans have been strong,

the growth of commercial paper outstanding has been sluggish.

Al-

though rates on commercial paper are appreciably below the posted
prime rate, bank borrowing demands have remained strong because of
the flexibility of such borrowing arrangements and the widespread
use of below-prime lending facilities.

Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Francis Schott (Equitable
Life Assurance), Robert Stone (Irving Trust) and Albert Wojnilower
(First Boston Corporation):
Schott:

Institutional money flows are beginning to im-

prove under the influence of lower interest rates.

But demand for

long-term funds is very heavy, partly in order to improve liquidity
ratios and partly to finance investment projects, especially in energy.

Therefore, long rates may stay relatively high.
Financial markets are less concerned with fiscal 82 Federal

deficit than with the grim prospects for fiscal 83 and 84.

Money

growth targets and fiscal prospects are viewed as clashing, with the
private sector the likely victim.
Stone:

By letting borrowings get so low the Fed has ef-

fectively severed the connection between the discount rate and the
Federal funds rate.

The funds rate will nevertheless hold up in

December, if only because of the seasonal strength in short term
credit demands.

But when these demands subside in January, for

seasonal and perhaps for cyclical reasons as well, short term rates
could fall sharply.

Such a drop in rates could well be followed

by a surge in the aggregates at what might be a most unpropitious
time.
Recent increases in aggregates should push required reserves up, and I believe the Fed should respond by letting enough
borrowings emerge to reestablish the connection between the discount rate and the funds rate.

"Enough" borrowing for this pur-

pose are $500-600 million exclusive of seasonal borrowings and

extended credit.

Once that connection is reestablished the Fed can

again do what it did so effectively over the past two or three months

—

lead the rate structure downward at its own pace by periodic reductions in the discount rate.
By this means the Fed is most likely to achieve the objective
of lowering interest rates while minimizing the risk of a serious
overshoot in the aggregate.
Wojnllower:

Such indications as I am able to gather from

business contacts support the view that the business decline may soon
slow materially.

This prospect, coupled with apparent acceleration

of monetary growth, is roiling the bond market.

Severe securities

market repercussions are to be expected if average Federal funds rates
were to rise.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District point to a slowdown in business activity
for the month of December.

Area manufacturers report a substantial decline in

industrial activity this month, but anticipate improvement by mid-1982. Industrial prices
are up in December, but at a smaller portion of surveyed firms than at any time since
December 1977. In the retail sector, December sales are off to only a fair start, but are
in-line with retailers' expectations fa* the most part. Most merchants say shoppers are
holding off on high volume holiday buying until later in the month. Third District bankers
report mixed loan activity in December. Consumer loans are down from a year ago,
while C&I loan volume is better, but still not strong. Local bankers forecast little to no
improvement in business borrowing over the next six months, but anticipate growing
strength in retail loan activity by mid-1982.
INDUSTRIAL
Respondents to the December Business Outlook Survey report a substantial
decline in area manufacturing activity this month as the recession settles in in the
Delaware Valley. About 65 percent of the executives polled in December indicated some
deterioration in the business climate, while only 7 percent noted improvement. These
results suggest the most pervasive one-month drop in local industrial activity in over a
year.

In specific terms, new orders dropped for the second month in a row, and

shipments are down as well. December also marks the fourth consecutive month in which
inventories have been cut back.

On the labor scene, the situation appears to have

worsened, as the largest percentage of respondents since the survey began reports cuts in
factory employment accompanied by a further shortening of working hours.
Despite the slump that has beset area industry, manufacturers remain
optimistic, anticipating a general upswing in business within the next six months. About
two-thirds of the survey participants project climbing levels of new orders and shipments

between now and June, and the anticipated step-up in manufaturing may prove beneficial
to labor, as respondents plan to increase factory work forces and lengthen the average
workweek. It appears that manufacturers will wait for stronger signals on the economy
before really preparing for a boom though. Many plan to keep a lid on inventories and
capital expenditures over the next six months.
Industrial prices are up again in December, but at a smaller portion of
surveyed firms than at any time since December 1977. Just over one-quarter of the
respondents report paying higher input costs than they did in November, and only about
one-tenth say they are charging more for their finished products.

Looking ahead,

manufacturers expect inflation to rekindle, however, as 8 out of 10 of the survey
participants expect to be paying more for raw materials by mid-1982 and nearly 6 out of
10 plan price hikes for the goods they sell.
RETAIL
Retail merchants in the Third District say December sales are off to only a
fair start this month, running about 8 to 10 percent ahead of last year's sales volumes.
This leaves only small gains in real terms. The sluggishness comes as no surprise to most
store operators. Local retailers say that most shoppers are still comparing prices on
their Christmas purchases at this point, and high volume buying won't get underway until
later in the season. In an effort to bolster sales volumes, and compensate for a shorter
Christmas shopping season this year, many area merchants are keeping longer hours this
season, running big promotions, and marking down merchandise earlier than usual. One
major chain already kept its doors open until midnight for a special one-day only sale.
As for the remainder of the Christmas shopping season, area retailers expect
to finish ahead of last year, but not by much. Shopkeepers generally feel that uneasiness
about the economy win make shoppers somewhat reluctant to part with their money, and
they expect to finish the season only slightly ahead of last year, perhaps by as little as

10 percent in nominal terms. As a result, most retailors are keeping a close watch on
stock levels. Although no shortages are expected, storeowners are not laying in as much
merchandise as they did last year.
With regard to overall sales in the fourth quarter of 1981, local retailers
expect to show only slight improvement over year-ago levels. They hope for current
dollar sales gains of about 7 1/2 percent.
FINANCIAL
Third District bankers report soft-to-mixed loan activity in December.
Consumer loan volume is down as much as 20 percent, but this is pretty much by design,
according to local bankers. Contacts say they are holding off pushing consumer loans
until the rates come down a bit further and marketing efforts might prove more
fruitful. Reports of C&I loan volume range from 3 percent below to 10 percent above
year-ago figures. Some banks report modest inventory financing which has, at least in
part, boosted their business loan volume to the upper end of this range. In attempts to
bolster business loan demand, many banks have increased below-prime lending activity
and are willing to make fixed rate loans. Also, area bankers say, aggressive marketing is
helping.

Looking ahead to June, Third District bankers expect C&I loan volume to

remain flat, for the most part.

Consumer loan activity is expected to show some

strength by mid-1982, as local bankers plan to start emphasizing retail borrowing should
the rates continue to drop. Retail loans are expected to grow by 2 to 3 percent by
summer.
Reports of deposit flows in the Third District are mixed. Demand deposit
levels are down as much as 14 1/2 percent from last year's figures. Local bankers say
depositors are shifting their deposits to longer-term, high yielding time deposits which
accounts, at least in part, for the lackluster performance in demand deposits over the

last quarter. Reports of time and savings deposit levels run from 2 to 11 percent over
December '80 levels.
Third District bankers are currently quoting a prime rate of 15 3/4 percent.
Further cuts in the prime are expected to come soon, leaving the rate 100 to 375 basis
points below its current level by mid-1982, when contacts expect the recession to bottom
out.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Respondents in the Fourth District have generally lowered

their forecasts of real GNP to show deeper declines this quarter and next,
especially because of inventory correction.

Capital goods orders are deteri-

orating, except in limited cases such as energy and aerospace.

Steel production

continues to decline, as inventory liquidation weakens orders.

Post-Thanksgiving

Day retail sales rose less than anticipated, and several retailers are pessimistic about the remainder of the shopping season.

District unemployment is

expected to rise further in December, because manufacturing industries are
experiencing shutdowns and seasonal hiring in nonmanufacturing is relatively
light.

Housing may be bottoming out, but several S&Ls expect a very sluggish

recovery.
Outlook.

Several economists, who expected a decline in real GNP

between 3% and 5% in late October, now have lowered their fourth quarter forecasts to show a decline between 5% and 7Z (annual rates).

Effects of high

interest rates and a sizable inventory accumulations are primary reasons
given for the larger than expected weakness in economic activity.

The

peak-to-trough decline- in- real GNP is expected to be milder than the 1980
recession.

Although most respondents expect the recession to trough in the

first quarter of 1982, a bank economist expects a turnaround no sooner than
mid-1982, when consumer tax cuts and capital spending provide stimuli.

Since

sharp recoveries often follow an inventory adjustment; an initial surge in
economic activity

is likely, followed by a sluggish advance until capital-goods

spending accelerates in the second half of 1982, according to a capital-goods
economist.

Capital Goods.

Capital-goods spending is still basically flat,

according to several respondents, but a few producer-goods manufacturers
report that orders have been deteriorating a little more rapidly recently.
Generally, weakness in capital spending for trucks, industrial machinery,
and farm machinery has been offset by continued strength in computer equipment, energy, and electronics.

Within electronics, an economist for a cap-

ital-goods producer notes a slowdown in orders for production-related equipment, even though order books for advanced technology equipment are full into
1984.

Recent weakness in construction of office buildings has resulted in some

decline in commercial air conditioning parts, according to one producer.

Weak-

ness has also occurred in utilities and their construction-related activities,
according to a capital goods supplier, because of declining power consumption.
Several respondents expect capital spending to decline in the first half of
1982 because of concern that interest rate will remain high, as well as
because of declining operating rates and a lagged effect of weak profits during
the second half of 1981.
Steel.

The pace of decline in steel orders is slowing, but steel

production still exceeds demand.

Current operating rates, according to a

steel economist, are at about 60% of capacity, while order rates are
equivalent to only about 50%.

Inventories are accumulating at the mill and

among customers, although a steel distributor reports some customers are requesting Immediate delivery to maintain production.

Operating rates could

fall below 50% in the weeks ahead in an effort to control steel inventories.
However, an industry economist states that inventory liquidations underway
may cause shortages and could result in a recovery in steel orders by next

March.

A steel fabricator reports business activity has slowed substantially

since mid-August, with even some softness emerging among oil industry customers
where oil projects have been disrupted by bankruptcies.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales in the District have deteriorated

more than nationally during November, in contrast to recent months.

An

economist for a major department store chain believes that some pickup in
retail sales began in late-November, mostly In auto sales,„but further gains
in December are expected to be divided between auto sales and GAF.

Several

local retailers report post-Thanksgiving Day sales slightly below year-ago
levels, but total sales through November were slightly above year-ago levels.
Heavy promotions are expected through the remainder of the year.

An economist

for a major grocery-store chain reports a gradual slowdown in sales as customers
experienced falling disposable income in recent months.
has made consumers more cautious.

Spreading unemployment

A producer of home and personal care goods

reports mild year-over-year gains in sales (about 2-3%), but these gains are
considered to be below expected normal increases (about 4-5%) under present
economic conditions.
Auto sales were very weak in November, according to several local auto
dealers, and December could be among the worst sales months ever.

No sales

promotion are being offered in December, although new promotions may begin in
January.

An area dealer has cut orders from producers by 75%, while retaining

a 90 day stock. Several import dealers also report weak sales, although less
severe than domestic dealers.

A turnaround is not expected until next spring,

and possibly not before the next round of consumer tax cuts.
Employment.

Plant shutdowns for inventory control are expected to

produce a substantial further increase in District unemployment in December.

Declines In manufacturing employment have already exceeded nationwide declines
since the mid-1981 high.

The sharpest decline in the District, in absolute

and relative terms, occurred in auto and auto-related industries.

Only in

primary metals has the decline in the District been less than nationwide.
Most respondents to the latest Fourth District Manufacturing Survey report
tightening control on labor costs and overtime, but virtually all of the
recently announced lay-offs are occurring among durable-goods producers.
Housing.

Some housing officials believe a trough in housing could

be in the fourth quarter, if easing mortgage rates, which have declined to
about 17%, continue to ease
year.

and if an economic recovery occurs early next

Housing orders, according to a major builder, are below year-ago levels,

although recent year-over-year percentage declines have narrowed since summer
of 1981.

A local builder is skeptical that falling mortgage rates will contribute

much to increasing the number of qualifying loan applicants.
Also, mortgage lending may be slow to pick up, according to several
S&L officials, because increased savings flow will be absorbed by repaying
FHLB advances.

Savings flows thus far continue to be weak but positive.

have been more aggressive than banks in promoting IRA accounts.

S&L

Some S&L

officials note that All-Savers certificates have shown only marginal increase
in November, with most the funds coming from existing accounts.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Although there is now evidence that earlier reports may have understated the strength of the Fifth District economy, most current information
suggests a marked deterioration of business activity in the past month. Manufacturers surveyed report a broad decline in shipments, new orders, and order
backlogs over the past month.

Retail sales activity also softened with most

respondents in this sector also reporting month to month declines in activity.
Residential construction and sales, auto sales, and several industries dependent
on those are showing pervasive
workweeks.

weakness which has led to layoffs and reduced

As a result, unemployment has risen significantly in some, though

not all, areas of the District.

Several of our Directors find the confluence

of cyclical and structural (tax changes, IRAs, etc.) factors promoting personal
savings at the further expense of retail sales, particularly of durable goods.
Manufacturing
Somewhat more than two-thirds of the manufacturers surveyed experienced declines in shipment, new orders, and order backlogs over the past month.
Increases in any of these measures of activity were rare.
goods continued to rise and remain somewhat worrisome.

Stocks of finished

As noted, employment

and the length of the average workweek have declined among District manufacturers.

The textile industry seems

to have been particulary hard hit

as demand for housing and auto related products continues extremely weak.
Such industries as furniture, primary metals, and building materials
appear little better off, however.

A notable change from recent periods is

the virtual lack of strength in any significant District industries.

Prices

were essentially stable over the past month, with indications that prices received

by District manufacturers may actually have declined slightly.

Generally,

plant and equipment capacity is in excess of present needs, but current
expansion plans are considered appropriate.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending seems to have weakened further in recent weeks.
Retailers surveyed report declines in total sales and relative sales of big
ticket items.

Our impression is that this weakness has become generalized.

Sales and discounts, unusal for this time of year, are widespread.

Although

our survey results suggest further inventory reductions have occurred at the
retail level there remains some concern about current stocks.

Several of

our Directors attribute the consumers' reluctance to buy to doubts about the
course of the economy, the interest rates available on savings, and the
recent and prospective changes in the tax treatment of savings (all-savers, IRAs).
Some of them perceive in this a lasting change in the attitudes concerning consumption and savings which they find encouraging for the longer term.
immediate effect

Its

on economic activity, however, is apparent and not at all

encouraging.
Housing and Construction
There has been no discernible change in the construction sector in
the past month.

Housing construction remains spotty, but generally depressed.

Non-residential construction continues to provide some support, although, this
too, is becoming somewhat more localized.
The Financial Sector
The shift toward savings, whether it is transitory or permanent, is
being felt by financial institutions.

Bankers we have contacted have experi-

enced positive responses to market interest rate instruments and expect a

pickup in activity after the first of the year with the expanded eligibility
for IRAs.

There is some disagreement as to the aggregate effects of the IRA,

but general agreement that it will be a significant source of long term funds
to the financial sector.

It is probably fair to say that a majority of our

respondents do expect IRAs to generate a large amount of new money for financial institutions in the District.

The Outlook
The outlook continued to deteriorate over the month judging from our
survey responses.

About half of all respondents expect the level of business

activity nationally and in their respective market areas to decline over the
next six months, while almost as many expect further declines in business at
their own firms or establishments.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
The recession is continuing in the Sixth District. Consumer spending
is flat compared to last year, housing remains severely depressed, and labor
markets are slack, with layoffs occurring frequently throughout the District.
Agricultural loan delinquencies are increasing.
Consumer Spending and Inventories.

Retail sales are flat to down in

real terms. Merchants hope that a late surge in holiday spending will brighten
the outlook.

The high- and low-priced ends of the merchandise spectrum are

holding up better than middle-ranged goods. Employment in department stores
for the holiday season this year is about the same as last year.

Consumers

appear to be taking advantage of markdowns and discounts, watching their
pocketbooks closely. Tenants in large Atlanta malls express concern over high
inventories in relation to sales and many are actively promoting to generate
business.
Financial and Construction. Throughout the Sixth District, construction
activity continues at a low ebb. Only nonresidential construction shows signs of
life, mostly on the part of large firms. Overall residential sales and starts are at
a standstill. Many county zoning departments report a November 1981-over-1980
increase in building permits for additions and improvements, while permits for
new residential dwelling units are down. In south Florida, for the first time in
three years, asking prices for houses have shown a decline, with virtually no
change in the number of listings. Apartment vacancy rates have dropped sharply
over the last few months as potential home buyers wait out high interest rates.
Only 10,000 realtors attended the National Association of Realtors Convention
on Miami Beach in November—20,000 less than in 1980.

Large numbers of

realtors are leaving the business.

In Georgia, for example, new real estate

licenses are down 47 percent from last year.
Employment

and

Industry.

Employment

growth

is

slowing,

unemployment rates are easing upward, and layoffs have been more common.
Although some areas are more depressed than others, slow employment growth
and higher unemployment were frequently mentioned.

Even in sunny Florida,

past observations of robust job growth and falling unemployment rates were
noticeably absent from directors' reports. Air Florida, with most of its employees
based in south Florida, recently announced widespread layoffs and pay reductions.
Alabama has been particularly hard hit. The state unemployment rate
was bordering 12 percent at last reading and some directors reported rates above
13 percent. Those high unemployment rates are supported by a growing number
of layoffs. In Alabama, weak demand forced General Electric Company, to place
its entire work force on furlough last month. Fruehauf, producer of bodies for
tractor-trailers, has half of its work force on indefinite layoffs. Exxon closed
one of its subsidiaries in the Orlando, Florida area, and the Ford Glass Plant in
Nashville laid off a large portion of its work force and will close earlier than
usual for the holiday season.
In north Georgia, where 50 percent of the nation's carpets and rugs
are produced, shipments dropped sharply in October after having shown some
growth during the prior nine months. The fourth quarter will likely show a dropoff of 20 to 30 percent in shipments.

A slowdown in the paper industry is

causing temporary closings at paper mills during December. Although the factory
employment picture looks bleak at this time, for the most part, manufacturers
believe the forecasts of economic recovery in the spring of 1982.

Persistent high interest rates have dealt a severe blow to car rental
companies. In Florida, believed to be the largest car rental market in the nation,
a large rental franchise recently declared bankruptcy. Attendance at Florida's
major tourist attractions is down somewhat from the same period last year, and
the outlook for the winter season is not bright.
Agriculture. Contacts with lenders across the District reveal that the
number of agricultural loan delinquencies is continuing to rise, but the major
problems rest with the Farmers Home Administration where many borrowers'
financial problems have grown more severe during 1981, thanks to the drought
and low agricultural prices.
Borrower liquidations will increase in cases where collateral for
additional indebtedness is unavailable, but lenders hope to keep foreclosures to
a moderate scale.
Southeastern farmers have planted as much or more winter wheat as
they did in the fall of 1980 when acreage jumped by 225 percent from the yearearlier level. Farmers are again in need of a quick cash-earning crop.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

Economic conditions in the Seventh District deteriorated

rapidly in the fourth quarter.

Manufacturers of both consumer and producer

durable goods are scheduling extended plant closings in December and January.
Layoffs and short work weeks are increasing. Demand for workers is very weak.
General merchandise and specialty stores have been trying to boost lagging
sales with selective price discounts. Inflation has also slowed in wholesale
markets.

Complaints are widespread about slow payments by trade creditors,

including governmental units. State and local governments are paring
operations because of financial stringencies. The prolonged downturn in
agricultural prices—especially corn, soybeans, and livestock—with no sign of
a significant reversal, has raised increasing concern over the financial
viability of farm entrepreneurs carrying substantial debt burdens.
Construction activity is in a depressed state, except for large office
buildings, but there is hope that lower interest rates next year will increase
transactions. The list of sectors showing continued gains is limited to
business services (especially law and accounting), and medical care and
supplies.

Recreational vehicles and mobile homes also have reported gains

this year, but from a low base.
Confidence Ebbs.

Important sectors in the Seventh District have had

serious problems for two to three years. (The region had been reasonably
prosperous until early 1979 when the gasoline shortage hit.) Not since 1929-33
has the region been afflicted by declines of more than a year or so, and,
typically, downturns since World War II did not strike all sectors
simultaneously.

In recent months the malaise has broadened further. Now motor

vehicles, most capital goods, recreational equipment, home appliances,
furniture, agriculture, and government are all in a depressed state.
Confidence has been further eroded by a series of incipient upturns all of
which proved abortive, e.g. farm prices late last year, housing activity in
1980 and again last spring, and auto sales in August.

These experiences have

drained the morale of many who now say they see "no light at the end of the
tunnel". The slump in housing, building materials, motor vehicles, and farm
and construction equipment is unprecedented since World War II in magnitude
and duration.

A growing number of older plants are being closed permanently.

Many small businesses, retailers, distributors, and component suppliers
associated with these depressed sectors are being pushed out of business or
have cut back the scale of their operations. In short, confidence in the
district has suffered a damaging below which will not be corrected in the
short run.

Most observers here expect demand to bottom out in the first half

of 1982, perhaps as early as February, but any subsequent upturn anticipated
next year would leave the district far short of full prosperity.
Inflation. The proportion of purchasing managers reporting paying higher
prices is down sharply from last year.

Discounting is reported for steel,

nonferrous metals, scrap iron, and building materials.

Because inventories of

materials and components are typically at very low levels, price cuts are
expected to be reversed as demand revives.

The big inflation issue for 1982

is the push by management for labor concessions on compensation and work
rules, which so far has achieved only scattered success.
Employment.

Many district manufacturers normally shut down for a week

between Christmas and New Year's Days.

This year many plant closings will

begin before Christmas and extend into January.

Other firms are eliminating

extra shifts or reducing work weeks. Plant closings are reported for farm and

construction equipment, motor vehicles, home appliances, and tires. Some
district companies that avoided layoffs in past downturns have been forced to
follow the trend because of continued declines in orders. White collar staffs
are also being reduced.
Consumer Purchases.

Large general merchandise chains reported poor sales

in both October and November, with volume down 5 percent or more after
inflation.

This has led to a buildup in inventories, and a rash of

pre-Christmas price cutting, to an extent not seen since late 1974.

Consumers

are especially cautious on purchases of big ticket items, and luxury services
such as air travel, restaurant meals, and recreation.

However, merchants have

not given up on a late surge in Christmas sales.
Inventories.

Stocks of motor vehicles, appliances, farm and construction

equipment, and most general merchandise are now excessive because of poor
sales. Production cuts have been ordered. Oil industry inventories have been
reduced to confortable levels. Manufacturers' delivery times are very short,
but most distributors are working on minimal stocks.
Captial Goods.

Virtually all lines of business equipment produced in the

district for farms, factories, offices, and transportation reported
deteriorating demand in recent months. Components such as castings, forgings,
engines, power transmission, and electrical controls are also affected. Auto
companies and electric utilities have cancelled additional major capital
spending plans, because of reduced estimates of demand and financial
pressures. On the brighter side, some large office buildings started in
downtown Chicago earlier this year, but halted for lack of financing, have
been given the green light.
Motor Vehicles.

Demand for cars and trucks remained near the depressed

October level in November.

Fourth quarter output will be the lowest since

1959, and schedules for early 1982 have been reduced.
had been strong, dropped off recently.

Used car sales, which

Cars at the "high end of the line" are

selling best, often for cash.
Steel.

Orders for steel declined sharply in the fourth quarter.

Operating rates dropped back to the severely depressed level of the third
quarter of 1980.

All products are now weak, including oil line pipe.

Demand

is expected to remain near the December level in January, with some rebound in
February as customers' plants reopen.
Housing.
the district.

Residential activity is at a post-World War II low throughout
Effective prices are down 10-20 percent, threatening the equity

of many owners.

Few potential buyers accept the concept of variable rate

mortgages, particularly if adjustments are frequent.
stimulated a few transactions.

Recent rate declines

A drop in the conventional rate to 13-14

percent, analysts believe, would boost home construction substantially because
the inventory of finished units is very small.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The sluggishness ill the Eighth District economy has persisted
through early December.

Retail sales are generally lower than expected,

resulting in excess inventory.

Most manufacturers report declining orders

for spring deliveries, and some have made additional layoffs of personnel in
the past month.

Construction activity remains mixed.

Both commercial and

residential construction have leveled off, commercial at a relatively high,
and residential at a very low level.

Financial institutions report a

moderate increase in time and savings deposits, while commercial banks
report a moderate increase in loans.

In the agricultural sector, favorable

weather permitted the harvesting of record crops.

In addition, the outlook

is for a relatively large livestock production.
Consumer spending, based on department store sales, generally
weakened in November and early December.

One major St. Louis department

store reported excessive inventories given the current sales volume.
Elsewhere in the Eighth District, reports of consumer spending are
mixed—some retailers reporting sales declines and some reporting gains of
15 percent or more from year-ago levels.

Most of the firms surveyed

reported slim margins and declining profits.
line with sales of other consumer goods.

Automobile sales are about in

Of the five dealers reporting,

three reported weaker sales, one reported no change and one, stronger than
year-ago levels.
Manufacturing activity in the District is generally weak.

One

large paint manufacturer reported that declining sales had resulted in the

first layoffs in his firm's history.

One major shoe manufacturer reported

that orders and output were from 0 to 10 percent below year-ago levels.
Similar reports were received from manufacturers of electric motors and
equipment, home appliances, and paper box construction.

One uniform

manufacturer reported that business was down 2 to 3 percent from a month
ago.

Optimistic reports were received only from the manufacturers of oil

drilling and energy-related equipment.
Inventories have now become somewhat burdensome in a number of
cases.

A major St. Louis retail outlet reported that inventories were 5 to

10 percent too high at the retail level, that September inventories were the
third highest in the decade and that price cutting was in prospect to reduce
them.
Construction remains generally unchanged from early autumn levels.
Commercial construction is at a relatively high plateau, while homebuilding
is at a standstill.

A St. Louis area reporter for commercial contractors

estimated that 1982 would be as good a year as 1981, which was considered
very good.

He reported a number of major projects soon to be started.

More

pessimism is heard, however, than a year ago and a number of former general
contractors have now become subcontractors.
A moderate increase in savings was reported by most financial
institutions.

A major savings and loan company in St. Louis reported that

November savings were up 1.3 percent from a month earlier.

Also, time and

savings deposits were up moderately at Eighth District commercial banks.
Loan demand, however, remains weak.

A major savings and loan association

reported little or no loan activity.

Loans at large Eighth District

commercial banks have increased moderately since the end of October, but,
some banks indicate that this increase is largely seasonal.
in collection problems is surfacing.

Some increase

A Louisville industrial collection

firm reported that the percentage of collections per million dollars dropped
significantly in October as compared to a year ago.
Record-breaking crops have been harvested over most of the
District, but net returns to farmers are about the same as a year ago.
Prices received have generally been lower than expected; hence, the good
yields and high production have been offset by lower prices.

Consumers,

however, are being favored by relatively large food supplies at relatively
moderate price increases.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The slump in business activity

that the Ninth District has been

experiencing since midsummer deepened in November and early December.
sumer

spending

remained

depressed;

new manufacturing

Con-

orders continued

to

decline, with consumer durables and home building supplies hard-hit; the iron
mining and lumbering industries weakened
continued

to plague agriculture.

further; and falling farm prices

The continued

economy has kept bank lending depressed.

softness in the district

The one bright spot is that the

winter sports industry has been buoyed by above-normal snow.

Consumer Spending
The slow drop-off in general merchandise sales that began in midsummer continued.

In November, the four large Minneapolis-St. Paul retailers

that we survey reported that poor sales of large durable goods continued to
depress general merchandise sales.

All four also indicated that early Decem-

ber sales were disappointing and inventories are now higher than desired.

To

encourage holiday buying, these retailers have been holding sales promotions
earlier than usual.

According to our Bank directors, general merchandise

sales outside the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area were also weak.

The

only durable goods reported as strong sellers were high technology products
like video tape recorders and big screen televisions.
Consumers were still very reluctant to purchase homes and autos.

The

Minneapolis Board of Realtors reported that home sales in Minneapolis and

suburbs declined 15 percent between October and November.

New car sales in

November, according to regional sales managers for domestic manufacturers,
remained at September's depressed level.
Spending on winter sports appears to be the exception to the general
sluggishness in the district's consumer spending.

A lack of snow during the

last two winters hurt businesses dependent on snowmobiling and skiing.

While

Montana still needs snow, in Minnesota early snowfall is about 12 percent
ahead of normal and spending on winter sports has been good.

Sales of tow

tickets at one major northern Minnesota ski area, for example, are up 30
percent from of a year ago.

Industrial Activity
Our Bank directors reported that declining orders have led to cutbacks by many manufacturers in the district.

Manufacturers of consumer dur-

ables and building supplies indicated that they have been particularly hurt by
falling demand.

For example, a large district manufacturer

of household

freezers reported that its new orders began slowing in mid-August. Inventory
build-ups at its plant and dealerships have induced it to cut production and
lay off one-half of its workers.

A manufacturer of microwave ovens stated

that business has been "rotten" for the last six months.

The firm has laid

off about a third of its workers and is concerned about high inventories.

A

large Minneapolis-St. Paul manufacturer of building supplies, which had reported a sizeable sales decline in October, reported an even bigger decline in
November.

The iron mining and forest products industries also remained in the
doldrums.

In November, the unemployment rate for Minnesota's iron ore workers

remained at around 20 percent.

Likewise, sawmills throughout the district

that were closed in October remained closed through December.

In Montana, of

56 sawmills, 16 are closed and 20 have curtailed operations.

Agricultural Conditions
Falling prices continued to trouble district farmers.

Prices for

district farm commodities, which have generally been declining since late
1980, fell again in November, except for wheat prices.

All prices, including

those for wheat, were considerably below their year-earlier levels.

Cash

livestock prices in November at South St. Paul, for example, were down about
10 percent from a year earlier, and cash prices at Minneapolis for wheat,
corn, and soybeans were down 9, 24, and 28 percent, respectively.
The falling prices for grains and soybeans can be attributed to
abundant supplies and falling demand.

As reported in our last Redbook, dis-

trict farmers had bumper crops this fall.
haven't been strong.

But the markets for these crops

Grain shipments going east on the Great Lakes totalled

3.2 million tons in October this year as compared to 4.2 million tons in
October last year.
fall.

Shipments west by rail also were reportedly down this

Financial Developments
The softening in the district economy continued to show up in weak
bank lending.

Outstanding loans at Minneapolis-St. Paul area banks in Novem-

ber remained at last spring's lackluster level, and Reserve Bank directors
indicated that loan demand was very sluggish in most areas.

In addition,

several directors noted an increase in personal and small business bankruptcies.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Summary.
relatively weak.

Economic activity in the Tenth District continues to be

Although retail sales have been soft, retailers generally

report satisfactory inventory levels.
weak in most areas.

Residential construction and sales are

Improvement in mortgage demand and mortgage commitments

at savings and loans institutions depends on hoped-for greater inflows of savings
and lower mortgage rates after the first of the year.

The new winter wheat crop

is off to a good start, but cattle prices remain unfavorable to producers.

Loan

demand at Tenth District banks remains mixed, as does deposit growth.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers in the Tenth District report sales for

the first 11 months of 1981 about 10 percent higher than last year.

But sales in

October and November of 1981 were less strong, due to weakness in sales of winter
clothing, furniture, and appliances.

Sales of Christinas merchandise throughout the

District also have been less than most retailers anticipated.

In spite of relatively

weak sales, most retailers express cautious satisfaction with their inventories, in
part due to optimism about sales during the rest of December.
Industry Costs and Inventories.

Most purchasing agents contacted in the

Tenth District report input prices have increased from 6-12 percent over the past
year.

No further price increases are expected this year, but many expect increases

of up to 10 percent in early 1982.

Although fuel costs have been relatively

stable, total aviation industry costs rose 12-20 percent over the past year, with
further increases expected.
Tenth District manufacturers.

Input availability is generally not a problem for
Half the companies contacted report inventory levels

well above desired levels due to declining sales and are planning to trim their
inventories as much as possible in the coming months.

Housing Construction and Finance.

Most Tenth District homebuilders

associations indicate that housing starts have decreased 25-50 percent over the
past year, with single-family units leading the decline.

Albuquerq-ue seems to

be hardest hit, with a decline in housing starts of approximately 80 percent.
Denver, on .the other hand, continues to have a strong market, with declines of
less than 5 percent and single-family starts 6 percent above a year ago.

Apart

from Denver, house sales are sluggish but inventory levels are near normal.
Building materials availability is expected to become a problem in the coming
months, particularly for lumber, due to lumber mill shutdowns in some parts of
the country.
At savings and loan institutions in the Tenth District, savings inflows
in 1981 were down considerably from last year.

Most savings and loans hope for

some slight improvement in inflows in the near future, primarily due to hoped-for
inflows from the new IRAs that the institutions plan to offer after January 1, 1982.
The demand for mortgage funds at Tenth District savings and loans is reported as
low-to-nonexistent, resulting in abnormally low levels of mortgage commitments.
Most of the weakness in mortgage demand is attributed to high mortgage rates,
which are currently averaging 17 percent at Tenth District savings and loans.
Those rates are expected to fall slightly by the end of the first quarter of
1982, resulting in some slight improvement in mortgage demand and mortgage commitments.
Agriculture.

The winter wheat crop in the Tenth District is currently

in good condition, with approximately the same acreage planted as last year.
Despite the unfavorable cattle price situation, lower ,feed costs and lower prices
for calves entering feedlots point toward somewhat more profitable fed cattle

production by the spring of 1982.

Some livestock producers are holding calves

because of currently unfavorable prices, and grazing them on abundant wheat pasture.
Other cow-calf producers have sold off breeding stock to generate cash to repay
loans, but are also holding calves over the winter.

At the same time, District

bankers report that many feedlots in their area are currently at full capacity.
The recent declines in interest rates may not significantly improve customers'
creditworthiness for new loans, since bankers feel that continued low commodity
prices have offset the relief brought by lower interest rates.
Banking Developments.

Loan demand at Tenth District banks is following

the mixed pattern of recent months.

Commercial and industrial lending is very

strong in those areas serving the energy industry.

Consumer lending remains

sluggish across the District, and real estate loans are nonexistent.

Prime rates

range from 15 3/4 ta 16 1/4 percent, down from 16 3/4 to 18 percent last month.
Deposit growth continues to be strong in areas with sizable loan demand
but is relatively flat elsewhere.
CD category.

Most of the growth has occurred in the large

While some banks continue to rely on CD's to finance new lending,

other institutions are using CD's to reduce their exposure in the overnight market.
Across the District, bankers report more than adequate liquidity.
After an initial spurt, consumer interest in All-Savers Certificates has
tapered off and most institutions contacted anticipate little activity in the
future.

Attention has now turned to IRA/Keogh programs.

Most bankers surveyed

are extremely optimistic about these accounts becoming a stable source of long-term
funds.

However, there are considerable differences of opinion about the volume

and sources of funds that might be attracted to these accounts.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

With
construction,

the

exceptions

signs of

recession

Eleventh District economy.

of

the

energy

are

becoming

and

nonresidential

more widespread

in the

Christmas sales are off to a slow start, and

auto sales remain at a low level.

Manufacturers indicate new orders are

declining, some production schedules are being pared, and the number of
layoffs is rising.

The recent decline in interest rates resulted in small

increases in housing sales and mortgage demand.
largely

energy

Deterioration

related,

in farm

and

consumer

incomes

is cause

The rise in bank loans is

loans

continue

to

decline.

for concern among agricultural

lenders.
Christmas
retailers

have

sales

revised

at District

their

department

forecasts

downward.

stores are weak, and
Credit

proportion of total sales is about even with last year.

sales

as a

Inventories are

over plan, and advertising and price discounting are being used liberally
to stimulate sales.

Merchants hope a surge in sales during the week of

Christmas, as occurred last year, will reduce inventory levels and boost
revenues.

Increased buying by Mexican nationals is bolstering retail sales

along the Border.

The seasonal demand for retail clerks is down from a

year ago.
Auto sales are little improved
respondents

expect

negligible

improvement

from the low in October, and
in the near

term.

Imported

models are selling slightly better than domestic new cars, and used car
sales are described as good.

New car inventories are high, and dealers

expect it will take some time to work off current stocks.

District

manufacturers report

significant

strengthening

is expected

slowed

nonelectrical

machinery,

for

communication
inventories

and

computing

rising,

firms

in

declines
before

spring.

fabricated

equipment.
these

in new orders, and no

metals,

With

industries

New orders have

sales

are

and

electrical

weakening

reducing

and

production

schedules, although most firms have not yet laid off a significant number
of workers.
output

Some oil field suppliers report a slowdown in new orders, but

still

remains

high.

The

demand

nonresidential construction continues strong.

for

structural

steel

for

Most manufacturers report

small increases in materials and production costs.
The Texas Employment Commission reports a "fairly sharp" drop in
number of job openings.
states

are on

expected

to

the

rise

But inquiries from job seekers in as many as 30

increase.
this month

The unemployment
from

the

rate

5.5-percent

for the state is
rate

reported

for

November.
Nonresidential construction continues at a high level.

With so

much office space becoming available, prospective tenants are playing one
developer off against another to get the best rental agreement.
Sales of new homes perked up slightly with the recent decline in
interest rates and increased availability of subsidized financing by some
builders.

Respondents

indicate further declines in mortgage rates will

unleash demand for housing at such a fast rate that builders will not be
able to keep pace.
sharply.

As a result, they expect housing prices to move up

Loan volume is rising moderately at commercial banks.
funds

is greatest

by

the mining

construction and retail trade.

industry,

followed

by

Demand for

nonresidential

Consumer loans continue to decline, and

credit card delinquencies are up slightly.
outpacing the rise in time deposits.
slowed considerably since October.

Growth in demand deposits is

Sales of all-savers certificates have
Commercial banks are relying heavily on

the Federal funds market to finance the growth in credit.

IRA and Keogh

accounts are expected to spur an increase in deposits in 1982.
S&Ls report small increases in mortgage loan demand and savings
deposits.
rise

Respondents are generally optimistic, but expect no significant

in mortgage

lending until next

summer.

Demand

for

"all-savers"

certificates is very low.
Favorable weather across the District has speeded crop harvests
and improved winter pastures.

Crop yields have been good, but prices are

below early-season expectations and will not provide the income that many
farmers need to cover costs.
continue to be concerned

Banks and production credit associations

about the quality of their agricultural loan

portfolios, although few expect significant problems in the near future.
However, approximately 30 percent of FHA's 15,000 farm borrowers in Texas
are delinquent in making loan repayments, and FHA contacts indicate that
funding is unlikely to be adequate to carry all of these borrowers through
another year.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy appears to have weakened further in the
last month.

Retailers report stability in sales in November, following

October's decline.

But early indications point to a disappointing

Christmas season, with December sales just about matching the year-earlier
level and thus failing to keep up with inflation.

Serious deterioration is

evident in the manufacturing and mining sectors, where production cutbacks
and layoffs are becoming deeper and more widespread.
inventories point to further production cutbacks.

Moreover, growing

Residential construction

and home sales continue at extremely depressed levels with the recent
decline in mortgage rates having no appreciable stimulating impact.
Farmers are experiencing a further reduction in income as a result of a
continuing decline in commodity prices.

Commercial loan demand remains

slow for capital spending purposes but has increased to finance excess
inventory.

Banks continue to suffer an outflow of deposits to higher-

interest bearing market instruments.

Sales of the All-Savers Certificate

have dropped sharply after an initial flurry.

These certificates have had

little effect in bringing in new savings or reducing the cost of deposits.

Consumer Spending
Respondents generally describe retail sales in November as having been
"flat."

After declining in October, sales in nominal terms in November

apparently just about matched the month-earlier pace.

Consumers are

exhibiting an extremely cautious spending attitude, and department stores
and other retail outlets are having to engage in intense pre-Christmas

promotional campaigns —
attract business.

including widespread price discounting —

to

Partly as a result of discounting, most merchants

expect December retail sales in nominal terms to just about equal last
year's level, representing a decline in real expenditures.

Faced with

rising costs and markdowns, retailers complain of a squeeze on profit
margins.

Adding to their financial problems, collections are slowing.

Manufacturing and Mining
Respondents report serious further deterioration in industrial
production and employment.
construction and metals —

Depressed industries —

such as lumber,

continue to experience cutbacks, while weakness

also is spreading to other industries that had been expanding.
benefitting from energy development —

Alaska

—

apparently is the only Twelfth

District state to still be experiencing growth of payrolls.
In the Western lumber and metal industries, further price weakness is
forcing additional closures and curtailments.

Western lumber production

currently is running about 45 percent below the 1978 peak and a further
drop in output is expected.

Copper producers in Arizona and Utah recently

announced further production cutbacks.

The Bunker Hill Company will

permanently close its silver and zinc mining facilities in Idaho this
month, laying off 2,000 workers.

Kaiser Steel Corporation plans to phase

out primary steel production at its Fontana, California, plant and to
continue only fabricating operations.
Slow commercial orders are forcing further layoffs in the aerospace
equipment manufacturing industry.

Lockheed Aircraft Corporation plans to

discontinue production of its L-1011 jet transport.

Orders had slowed to a

trickle due to the poor financial performance of the nation's airlines.
Semiconductor firms in California have scheduled extended shutdowns during

the Christmas holiday period to reduce excess inventories.

In fact, excess

inventory is becoming a more pervasive problem in the manufacturing sector,
pointing to a further broad-based production decline.
Real Estate
Respondents report little change in homebuilding activity or home
sales recently, with both remaining at extremely depressed levels.

The

recent decline in conventional mortgage rates has had no appreciable effect
in spurring home sales, and bankers and builders do not expect a
significant upturn in housing activity until rates drop to around 13-14
percent.

Nonresidential construction is reported to be slowing, although

activity remains above the level of a year ago.

Twelfth District farmers and ranchers are experiencing growing
financial problems as a result of continued weakness in farm and livestock
prices.

One respondent reported that cattle prices have now dropped below

production costs for most ranchers.

Agricultural production is up from

year-ago levels, but bountiful supplies and weak export demand continue to
depress prices for a wide range of products.

The combination of falling

prices and rising production costs is severely squeezing farm incomes.
Financial Institutions
Business loan demand remains slow except for a pickup in short-term
credit requirements to finance inventory.

The recent decline in domestic

interest rates has had no appreciable effect in spurring borrowing for
capital spending purposes.

Rather, firms are reported to be turning

increasingly to foreign sources for funding.

Consumer and mortgage

borrowing from banks continue to be extremely slow; declines in mortgage

rates thus far have been insufficient to rekindle consumer enthusiasm.

The

money market mutual funds continue to siphon off low-cost core deposits at
banks and S&Ls and these institutions continue to rely more heavily on
consumer-type certificates and other more expensive funds.

Sales of the

All-Savers Certificate were strong in October, but fell sharply in
November.

These certificates apparently have had little effect in bringing

in new savings or reducing the cost of deposits.

