CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 30, 1981

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 5
Third District-Philadelphia page 9
Fourth District-Cleveland page 13
Fifth District-Richmond page 17
Sixth District-Atlanta page 20
Seventh District-Chicago page 23
Eighth District-St. Louis page 27
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 30
Tenth District-Kansas City page 33
Eleventh District-Dallas page 36
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 39

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.]
The nation's economic activity, as reported by the twelve District
Banks, was generally slow during August and September.
relatively strong regional economy.
and

services

in most

promotions, were

Consumer spending was weak for most goods

districts.

strong

in only

production were sluggish.

Only Dallas reported a

Automobile
three

sales,

districts.

even with

rebates

and

orders

and

Manufacturing

Some inventories increased in some districts.

struction, particularly for new homes, was slow almost everywhere.
tural growing
generally

conditions were very

declined.

The

demand

good

for

Con-

Agricul-

in most districts, and farm prices

most

types

of

loans

slowed, and

the

quality of loan portfolios at financial institutions deteriorated somewhat.
Consumer Spending
Consumer

spending

only a few bright spots.

generally

has

declined

in most

districts,

with

General merchandise sales are reported weak or mixed

by nine districts, and San Francisco reports that even retail food sales are
slowing in some areas.
Sales

of

consumer

durables,

languid in most of the nation.
in Kansas
tricts.

City, "weak"

such

as major

appliances,

have

been

Sales are "down" in St. Louis, "disappointing"

in Cleveland, and

similarly slow in many other dis-

Only Dallas reports that appliances are "selling well."
Sales

of

automobiles

have

been

stimulated

by

rebates,

interest

subsidies, and other promotions, but they are still low in most areas.
mond calls auto sales "weak."

Rich-

Chicago notes that production schedules for the

fourth

quarter

have

been

cut.

Only

Dallas,

St. Louis, and New York

have

experienced strong auto sales.
Some

districts

selling well.
equipment

observe

that certain other goods and

St. Louis and Philadelphia

and entertainment

report

services were

strong sales of electronic

systems, such as video tape recorders;

Philadel-

phia and Boston report a good showing in sales of soft goods, such as apparel;
Dallas

indicates

that back-to-school

sales were

strong; and Minneapolis

re-

ports that tourist spending was good.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing

orders and production have been sluggish.

Except for

Philadelphia, all districts report that orders and production have been weak
or declining.

Boston attributes

the weakness

in manufacturing

U.S. dollar making U.S. goods uncompetitive overseas.
Atlanta, and

San

Francisco

attribute

the weakness

to the strong

Minneapolis, St. Louis,
to the

soft

industry, which has depressed the forest products industry.

homebuilding

Cleveland and New

York attribute it to cutbacks in capital spending; St. Louis attributes it to
poor auto sales; and Chicago attributes it to both of these developments.

Oil

field

and

equipment

is

the

only

product

that

has

enjoyed

strong

orders

production.
In spite of the sluggishness in new manufacturing orders, there are
no reports of serious general
report some build-ups.
tory

build-ups;

increases

in inventories.

A few districts do

Minneapolis and Richmond report slight general inven-

Cleveland

reports

build-ups in forest products.

build-ups

in

steel;

and

Atlanta

reports

Chicago, on the other hand, reports that inven-

tories of certain manufactured products are below comfortable working levels.

Construction
Construction,
tricts.

Home

particularly

construction

and

homebuilding,

sales

were

was weak

depressed

in most

almost

dis-

everywhere.

Atlanta, for example, reports that housing construction has been "reduced to a
trickle" by high interest rates.

St. Louis reports that single-family housing

permits in the St. Louis area were down about 50 percent from a year ago.
In some areas, weak homebuilding activity was partially offset by
strong commercial and industrial building.

Dallas, Richmond, and Atlanta

report vigorous activity in nonresidential building.

Agriculture
Crop production has been very good in most districts.
districts indicate that crops and harvests have been robust.

Virtually all

Richmond expects

gains over last year in peanuts, cotton, soybeans, and corn.
pects above average output in corn, soybeans, milo, and rice.

St. Louis exKansas City

looks for record production in corn and near-record production in soybeans.
Minneapolis anticipates a 20 percent increase from last year's corn crop,
which was harmed by drought.
Farm prices have generally declined.

Minneapolis reports that cash

grain and livestock prices since July have remained the same or declined.

San

Francisco reports that crop prices in its district have been depressed by the
impact of the strong U.S. dollar on crop exports and by fears of the Mediterranean fruit fly infestation.

The one exception to the soft farm prices is

tobacco prices, which Richmond reports up 15 percent over last year.

Financial Conditions
High
slowed

demand

mortgage

interest
in most

loan demand

rates

and

districts
is reported

weak

economic

for most

report

that

business

loan

types of loans.

by half the districts:

mond, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, and
Louis

conditions

demand

Weak

to have

consumer

or

Philadelphia, Rich-

San Francisco.

is easing.

appear

Richmond and

However,

St.

energy-related

loan demand is reported as strong by Kansas City, Dallas, and Chicago.
The quality of loan portfolios also has declined at financial institutions in some districts.

Farmers in the Kansas City district are continuing

to have trouble servicing their debt, and Dallas reports that its banks expect
more carry-over

loans this year because of low prices for grains and cotton.

San Francisco reports that much of the business loan demand in its district is
attributable to cash flow problems, and Boston reports that problem loans are
showing up among home developers and home furnishing firms.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic conditions in the First District have not changed significantly since the last report.

Manufacturers are generally operating below

capacity; there are no indications of an upturn.
problem area.

Foreign sales remain a

The retail picture seems somewhat brighter; sales tax revenues

over the summer were up strongly from year-ago levels.

Banking respondents

see an increasing number of problem loans.
Manufacturers have been saying the same thing since spring.
are soft; backlogs are low.

Sales

For firms engaged in the export business, foreign

sales are a source of weakness.

The problem appears to be the strong U.S.

dollar more than the state of foreign economies; firms with subsidiaries
abroad are not experiencing sales declines comparable to those suffered by
exporters.

One large exporter, the first to report exchange rate problems,

believes that the European situation has bottomed out; new orders seem to be
picking up.

This respondent thinks that the improving U.S. inflation rate is

starting to offset the effects of the strong dollar.

Among the domestic areas

which are particularly weak at present are commercial aircraft components;
heavy capital equipment for glass-making and other process industries; and
circuit breakers, appliances, and other construction-related products.

The

demand for automotive parts, on the other hand, has strengthened slightly.
The manufacturing firms contacted are proceeding with capital spending plans despite disappointing sales.

They are "building for the long run."

However, all those contacted are large firms which rely heavily on internal
financing.

Also, sales of electrical equipment used in industrial construc-

tion have now begun to fall off.
Reports from the retail sector are more encouraging.

Sales tax

revenues over the summer months were up sharply from year-ago levels, suggest-

ing that retail sales were stronger than previously thought.

Food sales are

reported to be keeping pace with inflation while general merchandise sales
have been running ahead of inflation.' Apparel has been particularly strong.
Credit sales are said to be picking up.

One large department store chain

recently announced a major capital expansion in the region; however, a supermarket chain and another department store chain have just closed operations.
Banking respondents report an increasing number of problem loans.
For a large southern New England bank, these problems are concentrated in real
estate related areas; developers and, more recently, manufacturers in the home
furnishings business have been encountering difficulties.

These banks are

generally unenthusiastic about the "all-savers" certificates but are gearing
up to pursue IRA funds.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, and Tobin were available
for comment this month.

Professor Eckstein feels the climb in initial claims

may be signalling a recession.

He feels real GNP in the third quarter fell

more than the "flash" estimate and predicts less than 1 percent growth this
quarter.

He argues the Fed should "live by our principles"—i.e. , seek to

achieve the M1B target by the end of the year.

He believes the lower end of

next year's targets are "disastrous" and the mid-points are "highly ambitious."

Eckstein believes that the Fed cannot ignore nominal interest rates

and favors a floor of 12 percent at present for the Federal funds rate.

He

argues that "our understanding of the relationship between either interest
rates or reserves and the aggregates is sufficiently loose that we should not
use those instruments too aggresively."
Professor Houthakker favors giving "absolute priority to fighting
inflation unless it raises unemployment a lot."

Since present policy has not

raised unemployment so far and is working to slow inflation, he sees no reason

to change policy.
serves.

He is concerned about the recent rapid growth of re-

Neither the dollar nor the current account should be of concern to

current monetary policy.
Professor Samuelson notes that the weakness in housing and autos is
spreading to fixed equipment and durable goods.
in the stock and bond markets as "hysteria."

He regards the recent drops

It is not reasonable to regard

increased deficits due to weak economy as inflationary rather than as a symptom of weakness.

Federal spending is not out of control; most of the recent

revisions reflect higher interest costs.
is not unhealthy.

With the economy weak, he sees no dilemma in returning

money growth to the target range.
in a weak economy.

When the economy is weak a deficit

This is no reason to resist a drop in rates

Further easing is fully consistent with the stated policy

of pursuing moderate money growth regardless of the level of the deficit or
prevailing rates of interest.
Professor Tobin raised
monetary and fiscal policy.

the issue of the appropriate mix between

He noted that the commitment to steady reduction

of the monetary growth targets makes no allowance for the recently proposed
increases in fiscal restraint or for the performance of the real economy.
Tobin sees ample room for easing within present policies without
destroying the System's credibility.

He noted that any undershoot this year

would be built into next year's targets, making that policy stance tighter.
He is suspicious that the strength of M2 relative to M1B may reflect a shift
from long- to short-term financing triggered by high rates and uncertainty
rather than a more' generous monetary policy.

Tobin notes that the Treasury's

continuing to issue long-term bonds is not consistent with the conviction that
long rates are out of line with future short-term rates and inflation.

With

this conviction, an "Operation Twist"—with the Treasury borrowing short and

the Fed selling bills and buying bonds—would reduce future government interest costs.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District remained sluggish in August
and September.

The retail sector showed limited signs of recovery.

Depart-

ment store sales recouped some of July's decline, and rebate and interest rate
subsidy programs spurred automobile sales.

Lackluster conditions persisted in

manufacturing industries, with high financing costs said to be discouraging
new orders.

Business economists do not anticipate any gains in real GNP until

the end of the year despite small reductions in the prime rate.
real GNP to grow between 2.5 percent and 3 percent in 1982.

They expect

On the financial

side, consumer resistance to upward adjustment on renegotiable-rate mortgages
was evident.

Consumer Spending
In August and September, retail activity in the Second District
rebounded somewhat from the one-month drop that occurred in July.

While the

fall season began slowly due to the late Labor Day and school openings, most
department stores are now achieving their sales goals.

Products for the home

exhibited weakness, with a retailer attributing the softening to the appreciation of the dollar and consequent fall-off in tourism and foreign business.
Merchants believe the rest of the year will be "good."

National retailers

reported that sales in the New York area were generally healthier than in
other parts of the country.

In contrast to the relative strength of suburban

locations evident in July, city and suburban stores are now performing equally
well.

None of the establishments foresaw any need to cut their inventories.
Automobile

sales

improved

in August, matching

levels which most of the dealers considered respectable.

the previous year
Strength appeared in

both domestic and foreign automobile lines and across the price and size

spectrums.
upturn.

Rebate and interest rate subsidy programs were credited for the

Dealers expect a slowdown with the expiration of these programs.

higher prices of the new 1982 models could depress sales further.

The

Inventories

are at acceptable to low levels, as the higher activity removed the excesses
existing in prior months.

The used car market has remained strong and truck

sales have picked up.

Manufacturing Activity
Weakness in manufacturing industries lingered into September.

New

orders received by capital goods producers stayed at the low levels of July,
though one firm recorded an additional 40 percent to 50 percent decline.
Consequently, some companies have laid off workers and cut production from
already contracted rates.

Many businesses indicated that high interest costs

have caused customers to defer purchases and reduce inventories.

Two estab-

lishments noted an increase in returned items as clients sought to avoid
payments.

None of the respondents expected any immediate upswing, and even

defense contractors were uncertain whether rising national defense expenditures would result in much new business.
Some firms have reacted to the sluggish activity by trimming inventories of final output, even to the extent of eliminating less profitable
product lines.

One concern has maintained sales by cutting prices, but its

growth has fallen to a fraction of the earlier pace.

Companies are trying to

proceed with planned capital spending especially in high technology industries
such as electronics.
competitive

positions.

These expenditures are seen as essential to protect
Increases

changes are not yet apparent.

in capital

spending

due

to recent tax

Negotiations on wage settlements are easing as

job security is being emphasized over pay hikes.

Economic Outlook

Business economists foresee no growth or a small drop in real GNP
during the third quarter and a flat fourth quarter.

Real growth in GNP during

1982 is expected to be in the 2.5 percent to 3 percent range as some economists have revised their forecasts downward.

Interest rate projections indi-

cate a prime rate of 17 percent to 18 percent by the end of the year, a more
modest fall from current levels than some previous estimates.

In reaction to

a sluggish economy, the inflation rate is predicted to decelerate through
1982.

Financial Developments
In recent years, a number of mortgage instruments containing rateadjustment provisions have been adopted by mortgage lenders.

The paucity of

experience with rate adjustments on these loans magnifies the importance of a
recent episode in upstate New York.

Buffalo Savings Bank recently abandoned

plans to raise the rates on callable loans written in 1975 and 1976 from 8.5
percent to 14 percent.

The loans had been made at below-market rates because

of a binding usury ceiling, which has since been removed.

In response to the

public outcry, the bank extended the 8.5 percent rate for the full 25- or 30year amortization periods of the loans.

Financial Panel

This month we have comments from Francis Schott (Equitable Life
Insurance Company), Robert Stone (Irving Trust Company), and Albert Wojnilower

(First Boston Corporation):
Schott:

Long-term

financial markets are seriously

depressed.

Disintermediation is once again impeding the supply of institutional funds.

But high short-term rates have only very recently

become a deterrent to the use of short-term credit for long-term
needs.

Federal Reserve credibility is growing month by month as long as
the move toward ease is very slight and aggregate targets are
observed.

Stone:

I see no viable alternative to this well-judged policy.

The short-run aim of policy at this juncture should, I

think, be to maintain a posture such that interest rates continue
to decline gradually to levels that would permit moderate real
economic growth and that would not threaten significant undershoots or overshoots in the aggregates.

In my view the tactic most likely to achieve that result would be
to

provide

non borrowed

reserves

such

that

"basic" borrowings

(those exclusive of seasonal borrowings and extended credit) be
maintained in the general area of $600 to $900 million.

To go

much below that range for an extended period would in my view risk
a troublesome overshoot—the last thing anyone wants under present
circumstances.
Wojnilower:

Business activity is weakening on a broad scale and

this is beginning to affect investment planning.

There is no

reduction whatsoever in credit availability for large companies,
even those of lower credit quality.

The President's speech, in my

judgment, will probably have a negative impact.

In practical

terms, cutting the budget will intensify rather than ameliorate
economic and financial problems.

Nevertheless, I still expect

some modest upturn in the economy by year end.

Our people believe

that the tax benefit transfer provisions of the new tax law will
have the result that many major companies will pay no corporate
profits tax at all for several years.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District point to mixed business activity for the
month of September. Area manufacturers say industrial activity is showing some signs of
expansion, for the second month in a row, which could signal the start of the upward
trend they've been predicting for some months. As for the future, they project a strong
boost in industrial activity by March. Local retail merchants report mixed sales volumes
in September but look forward to a strong Christmas season this year. In the financial
sector, District bankers indicate sluggish loan activity. Business loan volume is slightly
ahead of year-ago figures, while consumer loans are said to be down sharply in
September. Area bankers forecast little to no improvement in loan activity over the
next six months. On the residential construction side, sales have dropped off sharply,
owing primarily to a tight mortgage market according to area real estate contacts.
Some new groundbreakings for townhouses and condominiums are reported, but area
contractors and developers are said to be holding off on starts for detached single homes.
INDUSTRIAL
Area industrial activity is showing more signs of expansion in September.
Manufacturers responding to the September Business Outlook Survey report, for the
second consecutive month, a slight pickup in overall manufacturing activity. This could
signal the start of the upward trend in business they've been predicting for some
months. Reflecting the upturn in industrial activity in September, reports of rising new
orders and shipments are more widespread than at any time since April 1977. On the
employment front, the situation looks a little better as well this month. Manufacturers
responding to the survey report lengthening the average workweek, marginally, for the
first time in over two years. However, no real changes in payrolls are reported.
For the longer term, survey participants continue to be optimistic as over
one-half of the respondents are projecting a strong boost in industrial activity by

March. New orders and shipments are expected to take off and producers' backlogs to
swell by then also. The upbeat outlook may be good news for area labor as well, as
survey participants plan to increase factory payrolls and add hours to the workweek
within the next six months. Growing expenditures on plant and equipment are also
forecast at 1 out of 3 firms polled.
Local industrial prices are up again in September with over one-half of the
survey participants paying more for raw materials than they did in August and about onethird charging more for their finished products. Area manufacturers expect inflation to
continue over the next two quarters, as 9 out of 10 survey respondents anticipate higher
input costs by March and nearly 8 out of 10 are planning price hikes for the goods they
sell.
RETAIL
Although September is traditionally a big month for "back to school" business,
overall retail activity remains mixed. Reports of current dollar sales range from 4
percent below to 10 percent above September '80 levels. Area retailers say sales of soft
goods (apparel, shoes, and small household items) and luxury goods (electronic equipment
and entertainment systems) are making a better showing than other lines this month.
Credit card sales continue to be strong and collection is good.
As for the future, District retailers are optimistic about the next six
months. Some area contacts say the October 1 tax cut may give sales an added boost,
about 2 to 3 percent. Other merchants, on the other hand, fear the Administration's
budget cuts will pinch household budgets even more, leaving retail sales volume lower by
March. Nevertheless, a strong Christmas season is expected and retailers are beginning
to build up their stock levels. Inventories remain in-line and inventory-sales ratios are
reported to be healthy.

FINANCIAL
Third District bankers report mixed loan activity in September. C&I loan
volume is up 5 to 10 percent over year-ago figures, with some bankers reporting belowprime lending which has boosted their volumes to the upper end of this range. Consumer
loan activity, however, is down as much as 21 percent this month from a year ago and is
well below budget. Business borrowing is in-line with area bankers' expectations, for the
most part. Looking ahead to March, local bankers say they are not too optimsitic about
the next six months. Some contacts are projecting commercial loans to increase only
modestly, about 2 to 3 percent, if at all, while others forecast a slight slippage, 5 to 6
percent, in business borrowing. No improvement in retail loan activity is expected over
the next two quarters as area bankers expect consumer loans to slide further by March.
Reports of deposit flows in the Third District indicate demand deposit levels
to be mixed, running 11 percent below to 2 percent above last year's figures. Time and
savings deposits, on the other hand, are up 4 to 11 percent and generally as planned.
Local bankers in the Third District are currently quoting a prime rate of
19 1/2 percent. Area contacts are anticipating a slowdown in the economy over the next
two quarters which, they say, will drop the prime to about 16 to 16 1/2 percent by March.
HOUSING
Housing sales in the Third District are down sharply this month compared
with year-ago levels, according to area brokers. New residential sales are reported down
50 to 75 percent from September '80 figures, while resales have fallen 25 to 50 percent.
Prices are said to be softening by as much as 10 percent on new homes and by about 5
percent on resales. Mortgage rates of up to 18 1/4 percent have discouraged many
buyers. Area brokers say if mortgage rates drop 4 to 6 points by next spring, their sales
could increase by 25 percent.

On the construction scene, activity appears to be mixed. No new starts on
detached single homes are reported, although contacts say new groundbreakings for
townhouses and condominiums in downtown Philadelphia and the New Jersey shore are
picking up.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Respondents in the Fourth District generally report scaling

down their GNP forecasts for the third and fourth quarter of 1981 because of
sustained high interest rates.

Current interest rates are expected to prevent

improvement in capital goods spending over the remainder of the year.

Steel

orders have experienced across-the-board weakness in September, caused by a
weaker-than-expected economy and ample availability of steel.

Although retail

sales have been virtually flat, retailers and manufacturers expect some improvement in household appliances at the expense of auto sales.

Housing construction

remains at a standstill, with S&Ls continuing to experience heavy outflows in
September.
Outlook.

Several economists now expect real GNP in the third quarter

of 1981 to have declined at a 1% annual rate.
gain from higher consumer spending.

One, however, expects a slight

A capital-goods producer forecasts a

slightly positive growth in real GNP in both the third and fourth quarter of
1981 because further declines in already depressed cyclical industries,
especially autos and housing, are unlikely.

Some expressed concern that loss

in consumer confidence could have more serious dampening effects on spending
than now anticipated in most forecasts.

A financial economist expressed the

view that interest rates are two to three percentage points higher than
warranted in view of the federal funds rate, and expects money market rates
to ease further as commercial credit demands weaken.

Several revised fore-

casts of real GNP show a reduction in real GNP growth from over 3% to about 2%
in 1982.

Most of that growth is expected to occur in the second half of 1982,

in response to lower interest rates and further tax cuts.

Capital Goods.

A major reason for the weakness in capital goods

spending is the sustained high level of interest rates, according to several
respondents.

However, several report that low utilization rates and low prof-

itability are equally important in restraining capital spending programs.

A

capital goods producer notes that a large share of investment funds is going
into acquisition rather than new capital.

A machine tool producer reports

that shipments of cutting tools in 1981, which have been supported by substantial
reduction in backlogs, will exceed 1980 by about 15% in nominal terms and 6%
in constant 1972 dollars.

The oil field equipment industry remains among the

few bright spots in capital expenditures, as even auto producers are canceling
or delaying machine tool orders.

A motor vehicle supplier reports that truck-

related orders are very weak, and truck sales are projected to fall 3% below
last year's depressed level.
Steel.

A slight pickup occurred in steel orders during August and

early September, but orders have since flattened.

Orders, according to a

steel economist, are now falling behind expectations, as the economy fails to
strengthen and customers become less concerned about steel availability.
Operating rates are currently between 75% and 80%, with the order intake equal
to about 70% to 75% of capacity.

Shipments in the second half of 1981 are

expected to decline 10% from the first half levels.

Some inventory building

appears to be occurring at the warehouse level, apparently because of a sharp
increase in steel imports.

An industry economist is also concerned that a

typical year-end inventory liquidation could reduce shipments below the
expected 90 million tons in 1981.
about 3%.

Shipments in 1982 are expected to increase

Consumer Spending.

Retailers generally report sluggishness in sales.

Some are still optimistic over prospects for the next quarter, while some
expect smaller year-to-year gains.

Sales of household appliances, such as

dishwashers and ranges, are weak, while microwave oven and air conditioner
sales are among the few bright spots.

A weak housing market will prevent much

of a recovery in production and sales of consumer household goods, according to
an appliance producer, but some improvement is likely in the fourth quarter if
consumers decide to shift their spending pattern from autos to other durable
goods.
are low.

Several respondents report that inventories of consumer durable goods
A major national retailer, however, asserts that retail inventories

in the third quarter were boosted across-the-board involuntarily because
retailers generally over-anticipated sales gains.

Therefore, he expects

curtailment of stocks in the fourth quarter in response to moderate increases
in sales and price promotions.

Retail sales in the Pittsburgh area so far

this year have amounted to about 1% below the national rate, according to a
bank economist.
Higher auto sales since the August rebates have reduced inventories
substantially, according to some area auto dealers.

However, an economist

with an auto producer reports that sales in September were well below their
expectations.

Even though inventories were reduced in recent weeks, dealers

are unlikely to build stocks of 1982 models because of sluggish sales and
high cost of floor plans.

He expects a 5.7

million annual rate of sales for

at least the next two quarters, with little prospects for recovery until the
second round of tax reductions next summer.

A local dealer reports that

dealer margins have held steady because of less willingness to negotiate price.
An import dealer reports a well-balanced 30-day supply of new cars.

Housing.

Housing construction remains depressed, reports a major

regional builder, with orders for custom houses well below half of year-ago
levels.

Consumer traffic has been off only about 10-15%, but many applicants

fail to qualify for mortgage loans.

A local builder has reduced his work force

to a fraction of last year's levels, and fears the prospect of closing when his
current line of bank credit ends in October.

Several respondents expect no

improvement in residential construction for the remainder of 1981, and a consumer durable goods economist is forecasting new housing starts at 1.5 million
units in 1982.

A housing analyst anticipates a recovery beginning mid-year

1982, even if mortgage rates were to fall to 14%.
S&Ls continues to be hard pressed by heavy outflows of funds, despite
some success in attracting funds away from banks through repurchase agreements,
jumbo CDs, and 30-month certificates.

Losses in passbook accounts, certificates

of deposit, and money market certificates have more than offset gains from
repos, according to an economist for a regional FHLB in the District.

September

outflows are expected to be worse than August, but not as bad as the near-record
losses in July.

Several respondents expect the "all savers" certificate to

improve the cost position of S&Ls, along with the recent decline in interest
rates.

Nevertheless, a sharp step-up in merger activity is expected over the

next few quarters.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
There are numerous signs that Fifth District business activity has
slowed in recent weeks.
and order backlogs.

Manufacturers have experienced declines in new orders

Manufacturing employment appears to have softened during

September after a period of significant growth.
durable goods, have also weakened.

Retail sales, particularly of

Housing construction continues depressed

and sales of houses are very slow in most areas.

There remain pockets of

strength in commercial and industrial construction, however.
also seems to have slowed generally.

Loan demand

Indications at this time suggest that

gross income of most District farmers this year will be well above last year's
level.

The Manufacturing Sector
According to District manufacturers surveyed this month
held steady while new orders and order backlogs fell sharply.

shipments

The performance

of inventories was mixed as stocks of materials fell while finished goods on
hand were somewhat higher than a month earlier.

Inventories generally grew

relative to desired levels, however, and now nearly 40 percent of the manufacturers surveyed feel current stocks are excessive.

Survey

results also

suggest a reduction in employment among manufacturing respondents and the
first reduction in the average work week in quite some time.

Approximately

one third of the respondents find current plant and equipment capacity somewhat in excess, but there is virtually no sentiment for altering current
expansion plans.

Survey responses further suggest, however, that much of

the weakness in the manufacturing sector was concentrated in the various
consumer goods industries.

Responses from such diverse industries as textiles

and apparel, furniture, and consumer electronics indicate weakness.

On the

other hand, the primary metals, chemicals, machinery and equipment, and shipbuilding groups seem to have held their own.

Consumer Spending
The retail sector also appears to have slumped over the past month.
Total sales and relative sales of big ticket items were reported to have declined.

Indications are that durable goods accounted for much, although by

no means all, of the weakness.
to down slightly.

Employment by retail respondents was unchanged

Inventories at the retail level, exclusive of automobiles,

showed little change according to our respondents.

Automobile sales continue

weak and inventories in that sector remain a problem.

Other retail inventories

are viewed as somewhat higher than desired.

Housing and Construction
Residential construction continues very weak in most areas of the
District.

Inventories of new and previously owned housing are substantial

and, according to our Directors, are having the effect of holding the line on
sale prices, at least once financing concessions are factored in.

There is

still evidence that commercial and industrial construction is taking up some
of the slack created by the residential sector.

In addition, public sector

construction is proceding as planned in most areas, as projects already funded
are being pushed to completion.

Several of our Directors, however, note an in-

creasing reluctance of state and local governments to begin moving on new projects.

Finaneing costs and. rising operating expenses are tending to cap future
capital projects.

There is some concern about what this portends for con-

struction once projects now in the pipeline are completed.
The Financial Sector
According to our Directors there has been a noticeable easing of
loan demand in recent weeks.
across the District.
been widespread.

Demand for home mortgages has weakened almost

Weakness in consumer installment loan demand has also

There is increasing evidence of a general softening of

business loan demand.

Agriculture
During the first half of the year, total cash receipts from farm
marketings wer^ 13 percent above those in the same period last year, with
gains recorded in all states except South Carolina.

Crop

production prospects

as of September 1 were even brighter than they were a month ago, pointing to
significant increases over last year in the peanut, cotton, soybean, and corn
crops.

Marketing of a good quality crop of flue-cured tobacco continues, with

the general average price 15 percent above a year ago and the value of gross
sales up 21 percent.

But of course final crop output is still far from certain,

and the improvement in crop prospects nationally has weakened prices.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
High interest rates continue to undermine seriously the financial stability for
a number of Sixth District businesses. The home building sector remains depressed and
the forest products industry is on the brink of a major phase-down. Economic problems
have caused an acceleration in savings and loan mergers. Positive developments are
spotty, with an uptick in retail sales and expansion in the high-technology industries
notable bright spots.
Consumer Spending and Inventories. Retail sales have strengthened recently
compared with last year. Gains appear to be spread uniformly along product lines.
Back-to-school sales were particularly healthy. Perhaps characteristic of the consumer's
mood was the observation of one retailer that video tape recorders (clearly a luxury
item) were his hottest sellers. He thinks that, since housing and auto sales have been
stalled by high interest rates, more consumer dollars are being spent on retail items.
Inventories were reported as being under control, but "profits have been cut back due
to high carrying costs," according to several merchants. Credit card use has picked
up. Retailers contacted were generally optimistic—expecting strong sales through
December.
Auto dealers say that promotions offering below market financing rates have
stimulated new domestic car sales somewhat. Nonparticipating agencies reported
declines in sales. All dealers contacted expressed a belief that conditions were unlikely
to improve over the next three to six months.
Financial and Construction. Home buying and building have been reduced to
a trickle by high mortgage interest rates. A spokesman for one of Atlanta's largest
savings and loans characterized construction lending as "substantially terminated." At
this time of year, builders are usually restocking their inventory before winter, he

added. The only people still buying homes are those who don't have a choice such as
transferees. Homes that are being sold require some type of owner financing and/or
second mortgage arrangement. In northern Alabama, banks report a large overhang of
unsold houses which were financed by construction loans to builders.
One response to the high cost of funds and weak loan demand has been an
increase in savings and loan mergers in the District as across the country. In Georgia,
a Gainesville savings and loan and one in Savannah formed a holding company that plans
to expand statewide. One of Georgia's largest associations also plans to merge with
three others in the state to reach combined assets approaching $1.4 billion. A Miamibased association will combine with one in New York and California to form the largest
savings and loan association in the nation. In an attempt to maintain their loan volume,
some District financial institutions are seeking loans outside their immediate lending
area.
Brisk activity in office and industrial construction continues throughout most
of the District; however, softness in the rental market for office space is anticipated in
a number of areas as buildings that were just starting up when interest rates began to
soar reach completion. This softness is expected to be only temporary.
Employment and Industry. The home building dilemma has seriously affected
the forest products industry. Due to lack of demand for lumber and plywood, mills are
on the brink of a major phase-down. Large companies have all the inventory they can
handle and small companies cannot afford to borrow at high interest rates to stay in
operation. Significant layoffs have occurred as a result of mill closings and curtailments
of operations. Mills in the District are concentrated in Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi.
Building supply outlet sales to residential builders have declined noticeably, a reflection
of the decreased building activity. There seems little hope for a quick turnaround,
since there is always less demand for building materials during the fall and winter.

Tourism traffic in Florida appears to have fallen far short of expectations.
The southwest region of the state had its slowest season in ten years, off almost 25
percent from last year. At the Port of Miami, cancellations of cruise reservations are
growing and attendance at major central Florida attractions has been down significantly
from year-ago figures. Business lenders hope that the recently completed $300 million
futuristic Orlando Airport will help boost the central Florida tourist industry.
On a brighter note, clusters of high-technology companies are emerging in
the District. Expansion has been rapid in southern Florida with its economic ties to
the Kennedy Space Center and at Huntsville, Alabama, site of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration's Marshall Space Flight Center. Technology Park in Atlanta
has attracted more than 40 high-tech firms to the area.
Atlanta-area employers predict an improved employment outlook for the next
three months, according to a recent survey by a temporary help firm. Openings are
expected mostly in the service industries.
Agriculture. Crop production prospects are much improved from 1980's level
because farmers planted more acres of most crops and 1981's weather has been a good
deal more favorable. Projected yields for most crops are up one-fifth or more from
1980's level; however, lingering dry weather in some areas has prevented a return to
normal. Cattle producers are somewhat encouraged by the prospective abundance of
feed crops, but calf prices remain 22 percent below the year-ago level. The poultry
industry has also suffered with lower prices and high production costs. A strong dollar
overseas has curtailed egg exports.
Quick action in Florida on the Medfly problem now appears to have averted
damage to the state's crops.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

Economic activity in the Seventh District shows no signs

of the revival that had been hoped for by this time.
goods have slowed further.
reduced further.
recent weeks.

Orders for capital

Inventories are being held at low levels, and

Retail sales of general merchandise slipped back in

Employment prospects are bleak, but compensation continues

to rise rapidly.

The housing market dropped even lower in late summer.

Excellent crop forecasts reduce farm income prospects.

Financial markets

are strained, but credit is available to qualified borrowers.

Some im-

portant district companies are experiencing severe financial problems.
Despite the generally gloomy outlook, we do not detect signs of a sudden
sharp drop in total activity such as occurred in the fall of 1974 and
the spring of 1980.
The tax act.

District executives are carefully examining the

complicated Economic Recovery Tax Act to determine how it might affect
demand for their products and their own investment plans.

Faster deprecia-

tion, liberalized investment tax credits, and other tax reductions are
expected to have a distinct positive impact on the demand for capital
goods, but only after some easing of credit terms and clarification of
uncertainties, here and abroad.
Attitudes.

Surveys and public statements indicate that confidence

of consumers, businessmen, farmers, and lenders eroded in the third quarter.
For many this reflects a failure of the upturn to appear as predicted rather
than a sharp decline in income and sales.
Companies in trouble.
pressed financially.

Some large district corporations are hard-

Facilities are being closed or offered for sale, work

staffs are being trimmed, payments delayed, and debts restructured.

Capital expenditures.

Order backlogs of most capital goods producers

are declining and further cuts in output are probable.
have become more common.

Order cancellations

Included are equipment for agriculture, construction,

railroads, trucklines, and various factory facilities.
has deferred various large projects for new products.

The motor industry
A large nuclear

power plant has been cancelled and construction of other power plants is
in doubt.

On the other hand, some well-financed capital goods producers

are going ahead on schedule with programs for new products.
Inflation.

Price discounting is reported for building materials,

metals, gasoline, and some capital goods.

However, most district companies

are paying higher prices on average each month.

Prices that are depressed

currently could recover lost ground rapidly if demand strengthened.
Inventories.

Stocks of steel, non-ferrous metals, building

materials and various equipment components are below comfortable working
levels.

Nevertheless, an "inventory squeeze" is in progress under pressure

from financial executives who wish to improve year-end balance sheets and
reduce borrowing costs.

Fortunately, low inventories reduce the chances

of a cumulative recession, and improve prospects for an upturn after the
turn of the year.
Employment.
performance.

District employment continues to lag the national

New layoffs have been announced in various industries, but

the real problem is reduced hiring by both industry and government.
Compensation.

Increases in compensation in the district have

averaged close to 10 percent this year, despite substantial unemployment.
Most employers are budgeting similar increases for 1982.
increases have been much larger.

Some compensation

Construction equipment operators recently

accepted a 14 percent first-year increase after a long strike.

Truckers

and the steel and auto firms are pressing hard to moderate increases in

compensation, especially COLA clauses, but strong union resistance is
certain.
Consumer purchases.

General merchandise retailers report that sales

weakened in the summer after showing strength in the spring.

Weakness is

"across-the-board", but has been most pronounced in big ticket items including appliances and furniture.
Motor vehicles.

Sales of cars were stimulated artificially in August

and early September by rebates and interest subsidies.

Although inventories

were reduced significantly, production schedules for both cars and trucks
for the fourth quarter have been cut.
Steel.
reduced.

Demand for steel has ebbed and, shipment estimates have been

The main cause is lower demand from the auto industry, but in-

ventory reductions are in progress in most industries.

Leadtimes are

very short.
Housing.

Sales of both new and used housing have sunk to an

extremely low level. Many builders and subcontractors have gone out of
business and others are expected to follow.
only to order, and orders are few.

Most builders are building

An unusually high proportion of mort-

gage loan applications are being rejected because potential borrowers are
unable to meet credit standards.

The housing slump is expected to continue

into next year.
Nonresidential construction.

Most heavy construction in the Chicago

area was halted by an equipment operators' strike that began July 20 and
lasted eight weeks.

Many projects will be pushed ahead with long hours

at overtime to make as much progress as possible before bad weather hampers
operations.
next year.

Contract data suggests a decline in nonresidential construction

Agriculture.

Abundant summer rains raised estimates of yields on

principal crops. With the exception of Indiana, prospects for the district
are especially good.

Corn output in the district is expected to set a

new record while soybeans are likely to match the 1979 record.

Depressed

crop prices suggest very low earning for farmers for the second year in a
row and analysts do not expect a significant improvement next year.

This

means continued depressed sales of equipment and other items to farmers.
Financial.

Extremely high interest rates continued to dampen

activity in most sectors.

But credit remains available to borrowers who

can meet strict standards, in contrast to the situation in the spring of
1980.

Hopes for an early, substantial decline in interest rates are

fading.

Local analysts complain that credit demands of the federal

government and the energy sector crowd out many other borrowers.

The

new "All Savers" certificates are being promoted actively, but little
benefit for housing is expected.

A decline of three or four points in

long-term rates, we are told, would stimulate a surge of demand for
funds for home mortgages, corporations and municipalities.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Area business representatives report that economic activity in the
Eighth District has remained sluggish and generally unchanged over the past
month.

Retailers report a mixed pattern of consumer spending.

Sales of

apparel and other nondurables are up, while sales of household appliances
are generally down.
previous month.

Home construction has fallen from the low levels of the

Representatives of financial institutions report no major

changes in either loans or deposits from the previous month.
activity appears mixed.

Manufacturing

Area manufacturers of shoes, textiles, carpet,

oil-related products and military equipment report strong sales, while sales
of building materials, household appliances and primary metals are weak.
The outlook for agricultural output in the Eighth District is good.
Consumer spending - Reports on consumer spending are mixed.
Department store representatives report that sales are up from last month,
but still below what they had anticipated.
appliances are down.

Consumer expenditures on major

The demand for electronic video recorders and related

products was the only strength in an otherwise weak market.

However,

industry representatives indicate that some of the softness may be
seasonal.

Auto sales appeared to be strong in August, but some auto dealers

reported a significant decrease in sales in the past few weeks.

Consumer

resistance to high prices and high interest rates was cited as the reason
for the recent drop in sales.
Construetion - The number of single-family housing permits issued
in the St. Louis metropolitan area declined in August, and is running at
about 50 percent of the level of a year ago.

Industry experts indicate that

this general decline in construction worsened through September, and are
forecasting very low levels of construction activity for the last five
months of 1981.

Nonresidential construction remains fairly strong but has

shown some signs of weakening in recent weeks. The switch of insurance
company portfolios from debt to equity assets was cited as a possible
problem for nonresidential construction.

Construction activity elsewhere in

the Eighth District appears to be following a similar pattern to that in
St. Louis.
Financial developments - Total loans in the Eighth District have
showed marked fluctuations over the past month with no basic trend, although
they are down somewhat from their levels of the previous month.
and industrial loans dropped about 1.5 percent in August.

Commercial

Agricultural loan

demand has increased in recent weeks, while consumer installment loans
remain essentially unchanged.
Real estate loans declined somewhat over the last two weeks.
officials have indicated a reluctance to make new mortgage loans.

S&L

S&Ls

lending activity appears to be aimed at shortening the maturity of their
loan portfolio.

Most S&Ls are offering loans at below market interest rates

on homes on which they hold the mortgage; however, several S&L officials
indicated that even this loan activity is light.
Deposits of financial institutions have remained fairly steady over
the past month.

Area commercial banks report modest increases of demand

deposits and a general leveling off in the outflow from passbook accounts.
S&Ls report a continued, and perhaps accelerating, outflow from passbook

savings.

Some S&Ls have been able to offset passbook deposit losses with

high interest rate deposits which can be converted to "All-Savers
Certificates" at the depositor's option.

S&L officials continue to be

optimistic about the prospects for "All-Saver Certificates."
Manufacturing - Manufacturing activity continues to vary greatly
from industry to industry.

The production of building materials, household

appliances and other products particularly sensitive to high interest rates
is at relatively low levels.

Automobile output in the St. Louis

metropolitan area remains sluggish, with no significant change reported in
the past month.

However, other Eighth District auto plants have reported

increased production.

Producers of shoes, textiles and carpet report

increased sales, while chemicals appear to be steady. The manufacture of
oil-related products and military equipment remains strong.
producers continue to report sluggish sales.

Primary metal

One area steel manufacturer

has closed shop because customers have failed to honor their commitments.
Some manufacturers who reported declining sales over the past month
indicated that they continue to be in fairly good shape due to backlogs of
orders.
Agriculture - The agricultural outlook for the Eighth District
remains good.

Greater than average production is expected for corn,

soybean, milo and rice.

Crop maturity and harvesting are normal for this

time of year. The topsoil moisture is adequate in most areas of the
District.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District's economy was lackluster in August and early
September, despite some positive developments.

The positive developments were

good tourist spending, strong oil and gas exploration and production, and good
growing weather.

But more than offsetting these positive developments were

depressed levels of consumer spending on general merchandise, automobiles, and
homes; a drop-off in manufacturing orders; cutbacks in output of forest products and mining companies; and weak farm prices.

The overall weakness in the

district's economy was reflected in a continuing slackness in bank lending.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending for most goods and services was sluggish.

Three

major Minneapolis-St. Paul area retailers, who had reported a modest increase
in sales at the time of our last Redbook, indicate that their sales declined
slightly between July and early September.

Our Bank's directors from outside

the Twin Cities also report some letup in general merchandise sales.
auto sales have been disappointing as well.

Home and

According to directors, home

sales remain at the depressed levels reported in recent Redbooks.

According

to regional sales managers for domestic automobile manufacturers, new car
sales in late August and early September were still at their depressed levels
of June and July.
The only positive development, according to directors, is that the
late summer tourist and travel business in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan,
northern Minnesota, and Montana has been good.

Industrial Activity and Inventories
Industrial activity in the district has generally been slow.
recent University of Minnesota

In a

survey of Minnesota manufacturers, only 36

percent of the respondents indicated increasing orders in August as compared
to 46 percent reporting increases late last spring.

In addition, 39 percent

of the current survey's respondents reported recent inventory increases as
compared to 32 percent reporting inventory increases late last spring.
directors confirm this letup in new orders.

Our

A large Twin City manufacturer of

building supplies reports that its orders declined more than seasonally in
August and early September, and an Upper Peninsula of Michigan director reports layoffs at his area's manufacturing plants because of declining new
orders.
The depressed forest products and iron mining industries have sunk
further into the doldrums.
large

forest

Montana.

products

Because of weak demand for building products, one

company

recently

closed

three

mills

in

western

Also, Minnesota's largest Iron Range taconite plant announced in

mid-September that it was cutting its output by 40 percent.
Energy exploration and production has been the one bright spot in
industrial activity.

One Montana director, for example, states that 10 to 12

oil leases in his county alone in the last 60 days have provided considerable
economic stimulus.

Agricultural Conditions
Growing conditions have improved since July.

Excess moisture was

slowing district crop development in July, but recent hot, dry weather has
enabled most district crops to catch up.

Most crops have now matured enough

so that even an early, heavy frost wouldn't damage them, and district farmers
are now expecting their corn harvest to be 20 percent larger than last year's
drought-depressed crop.
To the disappointment
prices have dropped.

of district

farmers, however, agricultural

Since July, cash grain and livestock prices at Minne-

apolis and South St. Paul have either remained the same or declined.

Financial Conditions
Reflecting the sluggishness in the district's economy, lending at
district banks has been slack.

Bankers throughout the district indicate that

loan demand remains at the weak level reported in earlier Redbooks.
attribute this to the high level of interest rates.

They

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Summary.

The Tenth District economy is showing signs of

weakening, although no clear trend is evident.

The primary indicators of

slippage are in retail sales and housing, where reports of slowing activity
and expressions of concern about the outlook have increased from a few
weeks ago.

Nevertheless, parts of the Tenth District continue to enjoy

very strong economic activity which is primarily energy-related.

These

differences in business conditions across the District show up clearly
in the growth rates of bank deposits and in loan demand.

All-savers

certificates, bankers also say, will not have any impact on the interest
rates they charge.

Despite good crops and some improvement in cattle

prices, farmers continue to have trouble servicing their debt.
Retail Sales.

Most retailers are satisfied with their current stocks

of merchandise, but some are concerned that sales may weaken soon, with a
resulting excess of inventories.

Retail trade has picked up in some parts

of the Tenth District in recent weeks, but slowed in others; sales of new
cars and other durable goods continue to be disappointing.
Purchasing Agents.

The aircraft and electronics industry represen-

tatives report some difficulties obtaining certain items, but buyers for
other industries say supplies are plentiful.

Agents report that the prices

of industrial inputs average about 7 percent above those of a year ago.
Homebuilders and Savings and Loans.
very sluggish.

Sales of new homes- continue to be

Housing starts are down almost everywhere in the District

including the energy-related boom towns.

Homebuilders believe that they will

not see any improvement in their business until interest rates come down.
Current mortgage rates average near 17 percent on adjustable rate loans.
Savings and loan institutions expect the all-savers certificates to
Improve their inflows, which have been deteriorating.
Agriculture.
difficulties.

Cattle producers continue to experience financial

Cattle feeders who took advantage of recent increases in

fed cattle futures prices can anticipate marginal profits.

Cow-calf opera-

tors appear to be retaining more calves this year than last due to favorable
range and pasture conditions.

The September Cattle-on-Feed report indicates

increased marketings and reduced placements compared to one year ago, which
should mean continued strength in fed cattle prices during coming months.
An expected record corn crop should keep feed costs down and improve profit
margins.

The financial position of hog producers appears to be holding

steady according to District bankers.

The September Hogs-and-Pigs report

suggests a larger supply of pork during autumn months than had been expected,
so some moderating in hog prices may result.
Crop condition reports from District bankers are consistent with
USDA estimates of a record corn crop and near record soybean crop.

Because

of late plantings, both corn and soybeans are still susceptible to a hard,
early frost in some areas.

Due to the depressing effect of large crop

supplies on market prices, more farmers are expected to participate in
government grain reserve programs this year.
Financial Developments.
banks are mixed this month.

Reports on loan demand at Tenth District

Banks in areas where economic activity is robust

due to energy-related investment spending report strong demand for commercial

and industrial, commercial construction, and consumer loans.

Banks in

other areas of the Tenth District report flat-to-weaker growth in these
loan categories.
remains weak.

Agricultural and residential real estate loan demand

Prime lending rates, which range from 19 to 20 1/2 percent,

have declined 25 to 100 basis points in recent weeks.
Deposit growth has increased moderately in areas of the Tenth
District affected by energy-related investment spending and has been flat
in other parts of the District.

In all areas of the Tenth District, growth

in deposits is concentrated in large CD's and money market and small saver
certificates; little or no growth is occurring in other deposit categories.
A few banks are paying less than the ceiling rate on small saver certificates.
The majority of bankers do not expect the volume of all-savers certificates to be substantial.

They think the bulk of these funds will come from

current deposits, especially money market certificates.

Bank respondents

expect the all-saver certificates to marginally decrease their aggregate cost
of funds, and to have almost no impact on lending rates, including mortgage
rates.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Economic growth in the Eleventh District continues to be centered
around energy and commercial construction.

These two sectors account for

most of the increase in business loans at commercial banks.

Department

stores and auto dealers report sales are proceeding briskly, but growth in
consumer loans at banks remains sluggish.

Durable goods manufacturers that

sell in markets extending beyond the Southwest report considerable slack in
production.

Residential construction continues to slide, and S&L lending

is extremely low.

Lenders in agricultural areas are expecting a large

number of carryovers this year.
Durable-goods manufacturing is expanding on the boom in output of
oil field equipment.

Production of durable goods that are sold nationally

and internationally is considerably weaker.

Steel manufacturers report

much

oil

of

their

production

nonresidential construction.

is

going

into

field

equipment

and

However, they anticipate a decline in new

orders from the construction industry in the fourth quarter.

Orders for

steel products from general manufacturing industries, already low, have
declined in the last two months.

A large manufacturer of hand tools

reports a year-long increase in orders may have peaked in September as
retailers have placed unusually small orders for Christmas.

Producers of

semiconductor and aluminum products report continued slumps in sales.
Housing is in critically short supply in such areas as Odessa,
Texas, where drilling activity is booming.

One major reason is that oil

field wages are higher than construction wages.
motel rooms indefinitely.

Some families have booked

The lack of housing has limited the expansion of

oil field services and equipment manufacturing in such areas.
Construction

of

office

buildings,

centers continues at a rapid pace.

warehouses,

and

shopping

Many municipal projects, particularly

water and sewage treatment plants, are under construction to accommodate
the population growth in the Southwest.

These projects continue to attract

bids from contractors in other areas of the country.

One municipality

received 52 bids on one project, compared with the usual 6 to 8.
Loans at commercial banks are advancing at an increasing rate,
and

'deposits

nonresidential

are

rising

builders

moderately.

continue

Energy-related

to account

industries

for most

of

and

the growth.

Respondents report the decline in the prime rate has temporarily dampened
loan demands as some borrowers anticipate further reductions in interest
rates.

However, many bankers expect rates to remain high in the fourth

quarter as a result of heavy credit demands by the U.S. Treasury.

Larger

payments resulting from higher interest rates are cited as the primary
factor

in the slow growth in consumer loan demand, but bankers also

indicate they are not actively promoting these loans.

Respondents report

that delinquency rates are lower than expected, but they remain cautious
because the number of bankruptcies is rising in some areas.
is

moderate

certificates.
all

the

funds

institutions.

and

is

concentrated

in

the

higher

Deposit growth
interest-bearing

Bankers indicate NOW accounts continue to grow slowly with
coming

from

demand

or

savings

deposits

at

their

own

New housing starts are declining.

Construction loan rates are a

few points above the level acceptable to most builders.
building is townhouses and condominiums.

Most residential

Lending by S&L's is almost at a

standstill, and these institutions are experiencing continuing slowdowns or
declines in deposits.
assume

some

increasing

of

the

When loans are made, builders often are having to
interest

delinquencies

and

costs.

There

foreclosures.

are

some

indications

of

S&L's expect "all savers"

certificates to be fairly popular but see funds coming only from their own
depositors—passbook savings and 6-month money market CD's.

At best, they

view the new instrument as an aid to reducing deposit drains.
Back-to-school sales were strong at District department stores.
Sales are expected to grow into the fourth quarter despite evidence of a
slowdown in the first two weeks of September.
increasing

rapidly;

furniture

and

appliances

Sales of soft goods are
are

also

selling

well.

Respondents report inventories are near desired levels, and no special
promotions are planned.
Domestic

auto

sales

are up

interest rate financing programs.

In response

and

low

Dealer financing on 48-month contracts

accounts for a high proportion of sales.
sales when these programs end and
introduced.

to rebates

However, dealers expect lower

the higher priced

1982 models are

Respondents report inventory levels are satisfactory.

A Director reports concern is still rising over the ability of
farmers in Southwest Texas and New Mexico to repay their crop loans.
Commodity prices for cotton and the grains grown in that area have fallen
further, and many observers are now beginning to worry that an early freeze
may hurt cotton production.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

Respondents in the Twelfth District report further weakness in the
regional economy and express less optimism that significant improvement will
occur before mid-1982.

Consumer spending is slowing, except for automobiles,

leading to an unwanted buildup of inventory.

Unemployment has been falling

in most District states, but because of a decline in the labor force rather
than growth in jobs.
industries —

In fact, weakness is developing in certain key

such as aerospace —

where employment had been stable.

District hoxnebuilding is in the doldrums, and sales and permit activity point
to a further decline.

Agricultural prices have been dropping, partly due to

slow overseas demand.

Commercial loan demand is increasing, but because of

business cash flow problems rather than improved conditions.

Mortgage

lending activity at financial institutions is virtually nonexistent, with
rates for conventional loans now as high as 19 percent.

Savings and loan

associations continue to experience a sharp decline in deposits, but it is
unknown whether this movement is being offset by a shift to retail repurchase
agreements.
Consumer Spending
Respondents report a further slowdown in retail sales, except for
new automobiles which have been bolstered by dealer rebates and internal
discount-rate financing by manufacturers.

Sales of expensive durable goods,

such as furniture and applicances, are said to be especially slow and to be
running below year-ago levels in real terms.
sales are reported to be slowing.

In some areas, even retail food

Particularly disturbing to retailers is

the fact that the slowdown in volume —
with price discounting.

except for autos —

is occurring even

Reduced final demand is resulting in an unwanted

buildup of inventory which could lead to further cutbacks in production as
retailers try to hold down the cost of inventory financing by cutting back
purchases.
Capital Spending
Respondents report that manufacturers have sharply scaled down their
capital spending programs for 1981 and 1982 relative to plans formulated
early in the year.

These cutbacks have occurred in response to record-high

interest rates, declining profits and reduced operating rates experienced
thus far this year.

Allowing for inflation and cutbacks in planned

expansion, it now appears that most firms will experience little or no growth
in real capital outlays in 1981.

Even with the incentives in the

Administration's tax program, respondents express little optimism that
capital outlays in their region will rise significantly in real cerms in
1982, unless interest rates drop sharply.
Employment
Unemployment rates throughout the region have been declining
recently.

But in many states, improvement has come from a drop in persons

seeking work rather than growth in jobs.

In the Pacific Northwest states

where unemployment rates still range from 9 to 11 percent because of the
heavy dependence of the forest-products industry on national homebuilding
activity —
area.

respondents speculate that discouraged workers are leaving the

Throughout the District, further layoffs are reported in the

construction-related industries where employment already is severely

—

depressed.

Aerospace industry employment is beginning to weaken because of a

further slowdown in commercial orders for electronic equipment and aircraft
and an erosion in defense order backlogs due to delays in the
Administration's new defense program.
Real Estate
Respondents express growing concern over the deepening slump in
Homebuilding and housing sales.

Reports from all areas mention the distress

being experienced by builders, realtors and material suppliers.
not moving, despite reductions in prices.

Homes are

Mortgage loan demand at financial

institutions is widely described as "dead."

With the exception of a

continuing boom in office building, nonresidential construction also is
reported to be slowing.
Agriculture
Conditions in the Twelfth District agricultural sector appear to be
less favorable than last month.

Although crop production is generally

reported to be good to excellent, prices for wheat, cotton, nuts and certain
fruits and vegetables have been declining.

Declining export demand,

resulting from weakness in overseas economies and the strength of the dollar,
has been responsible for the erosion in prices for some products.

In the

case of fruits and vegetables, fears about possible medfly infestation have
caused buyers both here and abroad to be wary of California products.
Financial Institutions
Bankers report a strong increase in short-term business loan demand
to support slow inventory turnover and aging accounts receivable.

Loan

demand for capital spending purposes has been decreasing, however, due to

unused manufacturing capacity.

Mortgage lending has corae to a virtual halt,

apparently not so ouch as a result of a lack of available funds, but rather
the unwillingness of potential home buyers to borrow at current high mortgage
rates.

In California, savings and loan associations are asking 19 percent

interest on fixed rate, 30-year mortgages on single-family residences and
17.75 percent on variable rate loans.

Regional S and L's continue to

experience a decline in deposits, but it is unknown to what extent this
movement reflects a shift to retail repurchase agreements at the same
institutions.

