CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

January 27, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 7
Third District-Philadelphia page 12
Fourth District-Cleveland page 16
Fifth District-Richmond page 20
Sixth District-Atlanta page 23
Seventh District-Chicago page 26
Eighth District-St. Louis page 30
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 33
Tenth District-Kansas City page 36
Eleventh District-Dallas page 39
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 42

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.]

According to this month's district reports, economic activity in the nation
remains very weak. Retail sales, after finishing 1981 with a robust performance, have
sagged again, and prospects for a quick recovery are not widely perceived. Auto sales
are down across the country.

In the manufacturing sector, softness cuts across

geographic and industry lines, as unwanted stock piles up and leads to production
cutbacks.

Financial institutions say business loan demand continues to be strong, but

consumer borrowing is still in the doldrums. Deposit flows are mixed, and response to
IRAs has been disappointing for the most part.

The housing market is universally

acknowledged to be depressed, and will probably remain so until interest rates come
down and the economy picks up, according to builders and brokers. Finally, reports from
the agricultural sector indicate falling commodity prices, with farmland prices dropping
too, as many farmers find it impossible to stay in business.
Retail Trade. Most districts report weak consumer spending in early January,
the result of a combination of factors.

Many retailers feel that the strong sales

experienced in the week before Christmas were basically borrowed from January sales.
That is, consumers simply burned themselves out taking advantage of unusual pre-holiday
markdowns, and simply have no money to spend now. Frigid weather has also played a
part in holding sales down, with a large portion of the country held in the icy grip of one
of the coldest winters on record. Finally, there is some feeling on the part of retail
merchants that the flow of dollars into IRA accounts has also acted to take the wind out
of the consumer's sails. (This is unlikely, given the reports on IRAs. See FINANCE.) The
softeness in retail spending has led to an inventory buildup in some areas.

Atlanta,

Chicago, and St. Louis all report inventory accumulation. On the other hand, stock levels
in Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas are reported to be in reasonable shape.
Looking ahead, retailers around the country do not seem to expect much from
the first half of 1982. Although contacts in Kansas City and Philadelphia are optimistic,
they are exceptions. Most other districts say merchants expect the current sluggishness
to continue at least through the first quarter, and possibly through the first half of the
year.
Auto sales are depressed nationwide. The recession has combined with high
interest rates to give auto dealers their worst year in many. There is some hope for
improvement though, should price reductions follow the General Motors-United Auto
Workers negotiations.

That might be good news for consumers, but, as noted by

St. Louis, could put a squeeze on used car dealers if price cuts in that market follow.
Manufacturing.

Weakness in the manufacturing sector is widespread

according to district reports, and industry still appears to be on a downtrend in many
areas. While the softness spreads across many industries, a few seem to be particularly
hard hit—automotive products, building materials, and steel. Inventory growth has led to
production cutbacks, furloughs, and temporary plant closings in an effort to let
accumulated stock run off. Just where the industrial sector is heading, and how long it
will take to get there, is a matter of diverse opinion. Manufacturers in Philadelphia,
New York, and Richmond seem to think that the trough is near. On the other hand,
reports from St. Louis and Minneapolis point to further deterioration. Contacts that do
see improvement in the situation don't expect it to come until at least the second
quarter, and many expect it to be only slight at that.
Finance. The year-end surge in business loan demand has held over into 1982
in most districts, but some bankers interpret that as a sign of weakness on the part of

borrowers.

Many firms are borrowing to finance unwanted inventory accumulation.

Some cutbacks in credit extension may be anticipated, as banks are becoming more and
more concerned with the creditworthiness of their customers. Consumer lending remains
weak across the board.
Deposit flows are mixed. S & Ls continue to have trouble attracting money in
most areas. The response to IRA plans has been sluggish in most districts, despite heavy
promotion in some parts of the country, and banks that have experienced a strong
demand for IRA deposits have often found very little new money going into them.
Real Estate and Construction. The residential housing market is universally
depressed, with the worst conditions indicated by Philadelphia, Richmond, San Francisco,
and New York. Only houses in the highest price brackets are selling. A retightening of
the mortgage market has held home loan rates in the 17 to 18 percent range and
effectively choked off demand.

Home prices are reported falling in several districts.

Residential construction is at a virtual standstill in many districts, as homebuilders try to
work off inventories.
As for the future, reactions are mixed. While most real estate businesspeople
agree that a large drop in mortgage rates will have to preceed any increase in demand,
there is also some feeling that that alone won't be enough.

Public confidence in the

economy may have to be restored, through general economic improvement, before a
housing recovery is seen.
Commercial construction, while sluggish in some areas, is generally better
than residential, and is even reported to be strong in Dallas.
Agriculture.

Weakness in agriculture rounds out the generally gloomy

economic picture painted by this month's Redbook reports.

Falling commodity prices

combined with rising costs have put a squeeze on many farmers and placed them in a

precarious financial position. Agriculture banks, concerned over the creditworthiness of
many farmers at this time, have been monitoring borrowers closely and tightening
policies on credit extension.

The result has been foreclosures in some areas, and an

increased number of farms on the market.

Farmland markets are thus weak in many

areas, with price declines noted by Chicago, Minneapolis, and Kansas City.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The recession has taken hold in the First District.

Retailers'

reports of the Christmas season were mixed, ranging from "disappointing" to
"strong"; but all made gloomy predictions for the first quarter of 1982.
In the manufacturing sector, orders and backlogs have fallen.
Manufacturers are responding by cutting back on inventories and overhead.
One encouraging development was a report that sales are picking up in
Europe.

Also, despite the problems in retailing and manufacturing, banking

directors report very good earnings in 1981.

Retail
Among retailers contacted, December sales in New England as
compared to December 1980 ranged from a "disappointing" seven-percent
increase to "strong double-digit" growth.

The seven-percent increase was

disappointing because it was well below what was planned and supported;
however, it still compared favorably with a 5 to 6 percent inflation rate
for merchandise.
Last year's timing problems were repeated this year, with
considerable bunching of December sales into the week just before
Christmas.

Because of the soft retail market in October and November, many

stores began holiday promotions and discounting earlier than usual in
December to reduce their inventories.
cut profit margins.

These efforts increased sales but

All respondents commented that consumers bought very

selectively this year, focusing on value.

Customers were said to buy items

that were promoted and discounted, with little spillover to other

merchandise.

No one reported excessive or unusual post-Christmas returns

or exchanges, and sales continued at acceptable levels during the week
after Christmas.

However, stores that did not adjust to the weakness in

November found themselves at the end of December with larger inventories
than they had planned.
Even those who met or exceeded December plans said the momentum
would not carry over.

All expected poor January results, partly because of

the extended bad weather already experienced in most of New England.

One

noted that large increases in the unemployment rate make all consumers more
cautious.

Not believing that the worst of the recession is over, all the

merchants with whom we spoke predicted that their first quarter (February
through April) would continue the pre-December weakness, probably yielding
sales growth below the merchandise inflation rate.

Manufacturing
Economic conditions have deteriorated over the past two months for
First District manufacturers.

In a survey of local purchasing managers

conducted in December, the number

reporting that production and employment

increased during the month fell sharply; fewer than 15 percent reported
increased orders, almost 60 percent experienced order reductions.

Among

firms contacted directly, business ranged from "grim" to "pretty good," but
most reported some falloff in activity.
has been particularly hard hit.

The commercial aircraft business

Financial difficulties have forced the

airlines to postpone purchases of new aircraft and engines, and the lighter
schedules since the controllers' strike have enabled them to cut back on
replacement parts as well.

Increases in defense work have not prevented

substantial layoffs in this industry.

However, defense remains one of the

bright spots for many New England manufacturers.

The problems of the auto

industry are reaching back to their suppliers; several firms reported that
sales of automotive products have fallen in recent months.

A machine tool

plant, heavily dependent on the auto industry, finds business very soft.

A

producer of heavy capital equipment reports that decreases in orders and
backlogs in the automotive area are particularly pronounced; this executive
believes that the auto companies are sharply cutting back their capital
spending.

Electronics is another weak area, although one manufacturer

attributed his difficulties more to price competition from the Japanese
than to the recession.

Business remains poor for consumer electrical

products and for electrical equipment installed in new industrial
buildings.

Because of the declining orders, firms are cutting back on

inventories and overhead.

One firm, on the other side of the inventory

adjustment process, reports that he is getting the same number of orders as
before but the orders are smaller.
The one positive development in the manufacturing sector is an
apparent improvement in European demand.
industrial

Two firms, one a manufacturer of

machinery and the other a supplier of high technology printing

equipment and supplies, have seen a pickup

in European sales.

In both

cases these firms produce in Europe, so that the strong U.S. dollar is not
a disadvantage.

However, the manufacturer of heavy capital equipment had

been operating on a 3 and 4 day workweek in the United Kingdom and has now
returned to a full schedule.

A large manufacturer of electrical equipment

also reports that new export orders are good, but this firm had not
previously seen a downturn.

Of three large manufacturers who were asked about labor strategies
in 1982, one said they would be looking for concessions; one said they were
not altering their bargaining strategy but they expected the settlement to
be more moderate; and the third foresaw no change.
Professors Houthakker, Samuelson, and Tobin were available for
comment this month.

Houthakker believes the relatively low rate of M-1B

growth last year and the relatively low M-l target for 1982 will restrain
real growth in 1982 and 1983 more than is desirable.
attained the bottom of its target in 1981.

M-1B, at best, only

The M-2 target was too low to

be consistent with the M-1B target last year, so Houthakker is not consoled
by M-2's exceeding its 1981 target.

In 1982, Houthakker believes the Fed

should announce a 4 percent to 6 percent range for M-l growth.

He believes

midrange money growth of 4 percent is too low, and he fears that M-l growth
may fall below 3 percent, especially if the Fed once again pays attention
to the inconsistent, relatively tight M-2 target.

Houthakker believes "it

is not unreasonable to expect the inflation rate to decline as much as 2
percentage points a year," but he believes "the announced targets would
require more deceleration in inflation than we can reasonably expect."
Samuelson was not surprised by real GNP's 5.2 percent decline in
the fourth quarter of 1981.

The current data suggest that production may

decline only slightly in the first quarter of 1982 and may "hold its own"
in the second quarter before beginning a recovery in the second half of the
year.

Samuelson believes "there is no reason for the Fed not to adhere to

the upper range of its money growth target in 1982."
Samuelson, Houthakker, and Tobin agree that the Fed should not be
concerned about the large increases in the weekly money stock in early

January.

According to Samuelson:

'money-out-of-control' policy —

"The Fed is not pursuing a
there is poor empirical evidence and no

theoretical basis for believing the short-term variance of money growth is
important.

Domestic money growth has been much more stable and smooth than

money growth in other countries.

Now that money growth is so stable, the

Madison Avenue residents of Wall Street are down to examining every minute
entrail of the goose.

But this preoccupation doesn't apply to Main Street

or to Henry Kaufman and Albert Wojnilower who are capable of handling these
generally offsetting changes in the short-term money stock."
Tobin is astonished by the contention that the demand for
investment goods, housing, and autos could be stimulated by lower interest
rates if only the government would increase taxes and cut spending to
reduce its budget deficit.

Such a restrictive swing in fiscal policy would

lower disposable incomes and would ultimately lower interest rates only by
depressing GNP.

"There is no shortage of capacity in the real economy

today; if there is any crowding out, it is due to a shortage of financial
capital.

The monetary targets are not sufficient to support a prosperous

level of activity no matter whether it is the government or business
seeking financing."

Unless the money growth targets are relaxed,

contractionary fiscal policy would only lower investment because this
policy would lower the demand for business output.

A business replacing

the cash flow lost due to lower sales by increased borrowing —
unchanged interest rates —

even at

suffers a financial setback, and its capital

budget ordinarily is cut back.
Tobin is als& concerned that the Fed was misled by paying close
attention to M-2 growth in 1981.

"M-2 growth reflected the credit market's

shift from the use of long-term financing (bonds) to short-term financing
(bank loans and commercial paper held by banks and money market mutual
funds) which was a reaction to tight money itself and uncertainty about
long-term yields.

Long-term financing is not counted in M-2, but the

liabilities of many institutions providing short-term financing are counted
in M-2.

In the coming recovery, as interest rates rise from already high

levels, M-2 growth probably will overstate 'money' growth in 1982 as the
credit market continues this shift from long-term to short-term financing."

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District remained sluggish through the
end of the year.

Few respondents reported a further decline, but none

believed that an upturn had begun.

For retailers, the Christmas season

ended on a surprisingly strong note, though with the recent bad weather
sales have fallen off substantially.

Manufacturing activity continued

generally weak, with some firms cutting their work forces and capital
spending.

The only industry reporting additional declines in orders,

however, was capital goods manufacturing.

Conditions in the construction

industry remained mixed, with the housing market still depressed and the
nonresidential market buoyant.

Looking to 1982, most business economists

expect a first quarter decline, followed by a consumer-led recovery in the
spring.

On the financial side, the demand for business loans stayed high.

Consumer Spending
After a slow start, the holiday selling season picked up momentum,
with a surprisingly strong surge as Christmas approached, and most
department stores wound up exceeding their December goals.

While merchants

were worried that pre-Christmas promotions and markdowns would cut into
January sales, inclement weather has proved to be a more serious problem,
causing business to drop sharply at most establishments.

According to the

retailers contacted, only a small proportion of these weather-related sales
losses are likely to be recouped.

Nevertheless, inventories are generally

considered to be in satisfactory condition, and respondents have become
less pessimistic about the near future.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing remained depressed, but there was some evidence that the
bottom may be near.

Electronics firms reported that sales had stablized at

a low level or increased slightly, and some other companies recorded small
gains in orders.

A manufacturer of aerospace equipment cited strong demand

from the defense sector again this month.

Only producers of machinery and

machine tools experienced additional deterioration in demand.
Work forces were reduced further by some concerns through attrition or
layoffs.

Despite press reports of widespread moderation of wage demands,

the only respondent engaged in labor negotiations reported aggressive
bargaining by its union.

Other businessmen from upstate New York noted

examples of wage settlements near 10 percent.

Businesses have become more

selective in their capital spending, and a few have trimmed their plans.
Inventories have generally been held to desired levels.

Real Estate Activity
Construction activity continued to be very low in the residential
sector, yet generally strong In the nonresidential sector.

Homebuilders

were still reluctant to begin work without a signed order in hand.

Sales

of existing homes remained stalled, except for those in the very highpriced bracket.

Housing prices were reported to have softened.

As for

nonresidential construction, one major project recently got under way in
New York City and plans for others are apparently proceeding normally.
Also in New York City, conversion of industrial lofts to office uses has
not abated.

In suburban areas, the healthy rate of commercial construction

was maintained, although developers were relying increasingly on joint
ventures among themselves to overcome financing difficulties.

Economic Outlook
Business economists continue to forecast a small decline in real GNP
during the first quarter of 1982.

Most feel that stronger consumer

spending will fuel a modest rebound as early as the spring.

Anticipated

declines in interest rates are expected to spur investment, housing, and
the automobile industry, adding momentum to the recovery.

If interest

rates do not fall, however, the upswing will likely be delayed, according
to the respondents.

Inflation projections have been lowered about a

percentage point, with a 7 to 8 percent rise now predicted for 1982.

Financial Developments
Lending officers at the major New York City banks reported that last
month's moderate to heavy demand for business loans has not subsided.
Commercial and industrial loans booked at international banking facilities
(IBFs) added to the growth.

Although the sluggish economy has restrained

overall credit demand, short-term bank loans are expected to remain strong
as long as long-term bond rates are high.

Corporate mergers have

contributed to the steady activity at some banks.

Financial Panel
This month we have comments from David Jones (Aubrey G. Lanston &
£

Co.), James O'Leary (U.W. Trust), and Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty):

A

Their views, of course, are personal and not institutional.

Jones;

The financial markets are in a highly unsettled state and

near-term conditions are likely to get worse before they get better.
Contributing to this volatile market environment are growing uncertainties
over near-term Federal Reserve policy intentions.

Increases in the Federal

funds rate are serving to destabilize the bond market and to push longer
term rates back up to record levels.

Adding to the market gloom, are

prospects for continued heavy Federal Government borrowing.

At the same

time, short-term business credit demand remains puzzlingly strong—perhaps
reflecting unintended inventory accumulation, liquidity strains, and the
inability to fund already excessive short-term debt in the bond market.
The result could be an intensifying credit crunch for all but the most
creditworthy business borrowers and for state and local governments.
O'Leary:

The national economy is in a "trap" caused by the inflation

of the past sixteen years, with the expectations it has created, and the
Federal deficit.

The huge deficit for this year and apparently for years

to come negates the helpful influence which the financial markets should be
receiving from the promising decline in the core inflation rate.
Volatility in the markets is bound to continue, with long rates on average
remaining very high.

Any recovery is apt to be weak and short lived, and

for the foreseeable future growth is almost certain to be very low, at
best, and unemployment very high.

This spells rising political pressure on

the Fed to pour money Into the economy which would be a disaster.

The only

basic way out is a major change in policy which will offer real assurance
that this year and beyond the Federal deficit will be reduced to more
reasonable levels.

Riefler:

Loan demand has shown some signs of tapering off at Morgan

Guaranty since the peak was reached late in November.

Although we continue

to view the economy as weak, we are reassured by the Fed's relative quick
resistance to excessive monetary growth and believe this will have a
positive effect on longer-term fixed income markets.

We do not believe

that short-term rates are headed back to 1980-81 highs, but are keeping our
fingers crossed.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District indicate that business activity in the month
of January is down, but hold some hope for improvement by July. Manufacturers report
further slippage in the industrial sector, but are optimistic about the future, anticipating
a general upswing in manufacturing activity by summer. Retailers say sales are down
from a year ago, but write off the slowness to the cold weather. Third District bankers
report C<5cl loan volume up from last January, but consumer loans are off substantially.
Contacts in the financial sector are forecasting modest increases in business loan volume
as the economy picks up, but disagree on exactly where interest rates are heading.
Industrial
Manufacturers responding to the January Business Outlook Survey report
further decline in area manufacturing activity, extending the slump in the industrial
sector

to four months.

Thirty-nine percent of the executives polled indicate

deterioration in the business climate while only 13 percent report improvement. In terms
of specific indicators, new orders are off in January but not by as much as in November
and December. Shipments, on the other hand, have held steady following two months of
decline. Inventories have been trimmed slightly again in January. As for labor, payrolls
continue to shrink while manufacturers report a further shortening of the workweek.
The continued slowdown has not put a damper on manufacturers' forecasts,
however, as approximately

three-quarters

of the survey participants

anticipate

improvement in general industrial activity within the next six months. Over two-thirds
of the respondents expect new orders and shipments to take off between now and July,
and, as production picks up, manufacturers foresee increases in payrolls along with longer
working hours. Survey respondents continue to be cautious, however, and many plan to
keep a lid on stock levels.
months as well.

Capital expenditures will be kept to a minimum in coming

On the inflation front, industrial prices are up again in January but price
hikes appear to be softening. Almost two-thirds of the survey participants report stable
input costs in January, and nearly three-quarters say they've kept the prices on their
finished products the same as in December. Prices are expected to climb over the next
six months, though. Close to 8 out of 10 of those polled anticipate paying more for raw
materials by July and about 6 out of 10 plan price hikes for the goods they sell.
Retail
The record cold weather that's been holding the Third District in its grip for
several weeks now has put a freeze on area retail sales as well in January, according to
local merchants. Reports of current sales volume indicate sales running 15 to 25 percent
below year-ago figures, falling far short of retailers' expectations for this month.
Suburban stores appear to be weathering the cold a bit better as sales are said to be off
but to a lesser degree than at downtown facilities. Of the items being sold, weatherrelated goods, particularly heavy winter clothing, are making a better showing this month
than other lines.
Looking ahead, area retailers expect sales to begin gaining momentum by the
end of the second quarter, if a recovery gets underway, as they expect, but shopkeepers
are planning cautiously.

Contacts project sales over the next six months to run only

slightly ahead of last year's levels, about 5 percent. Inventories remain in-line with no
changes in stock levels planned as local retailers may be waiting for stronger signals on
the economy before building inventories.
Finance
Area bankers report mixed loan activity in January. Commercial loan volume
is up 8 to 10 percent over year-ago levels, but activity in the last two months has
dropped off slightly. Consumer loans, on the other hand, are off as much as 20 percent
from January '81 figures as most area bankers continue to shy away from retail

marketing efforts they feel would be fruitless anyway. As for the future, Third District
bankers expect little loan activity through the rest of the first quarter, but anticipate
some pickup in the second, although nothing really robust. Projections are for C<5cl loan
volume to grow by 4 to 10 percent by July, but for consumer loans to remain flat for the
most part, as the recession bottoms out.
Reports of deposit flows indicate that demand deposits are mixed, running 8
percent below to 10 percent above January T81 levels.

Local bankers say depositors

continue to watch the rates closely waiting to shift their deposits to higher yielding
accounts. Time and savings deposits are running 7 percent ahead of year-ago levels and
are expected to continue climbing.
Third District bankers are currently quoting a prime rate of 15 3/4 percent.
Projections of the prime over the next six months are mixed; some bankers predict a hike
in the rate to over 16 percent, while others forecast the rate to drop by 175 to 275 basis
points.
Despite aggressive marketing efforts by banks in the last few weeks, response
to IRA offerings has been sluggish so far in the Third District.

Currently, deposits

average between $1,000 and $1,200 with 30 to 50 percent of the deposits representing
new money. Local bankers are optimistic, anticipating some pickup in IRA deposits over
the next six months with the strongest thrust coming from corporate payroll deductions.
Real Estate
Home sales in the Third District remain weak in January. New residential
sales are virtually at a standstill this month, while resale volumes are off by as much as
50 percent compared to year-ago figures. In efforts to bolster sales, many real estate
brokers report dropping prices, about 5 to 15 percent, but mortgage rates of 17 to 18
percent have pretty much shut down the market in any case.

Mortgage money is

available if, as one contact put it, "you pay the piper." Area brokers say if mortgage

rates drop to under 14 percent consumers would be given a psychological boost, and sales
would improve.
On the construction side, activity appears to be mixed. No new starts on
detached single homes are reported, although contacts say new groundbreakings for
condominiums in the Philadelphia area are picking up.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Most Fourth District respondents expect the economy to reach

its trough near the end of the first quarter, and anticipate recovery in real
GNP by year-end in a 3%-4% zone.

Capital-goods producers are generally pes-

simistic, citing low capacity utilization and high interest rates.

Steel

shipments should begin to rise near the end of the first quarter, as the current
phase of rapid inventory liquidation by steel users about runs its course.

Some

relief from steel imports should also boost shipments in the second quarter.
Department store sales fell sharply in January, and bank installment loans show
weakness.

A little improvement is expected in national car sales but car sales

locally are very weak.

Prospects for house construction, house financing, and

savings and loan associations in the District remain dismal.
Outlook.

Most respondents expect the recession to reach its trough

near the end of the first quarter, as inventory adjustment is largely completed,
although one bank economist expects the trough near the end of the second
quarter.

All respondents expect the recovery to be sluggish by historical

standards with perhaps 3% or 4% (a.r.) growth in real GNP in the fourth quarter.
No respondent looks for either consumer or business spending to surge in 1982.
An economist with a major automobile producer asserts that if the July tax cut
was

cancelled or delayed consumer confidence and auto sales would fall sharply.

He asserts Chrysler and Ford would go bankrupt, and General Motors would have
to sell some non-automotive assets to obtain cash.
Capital Goods.

Capital-goods producers are generally pessimistic,

rejecting the notion that capital goods could lead the recovery.

To the con-

trary, some expect a trough next quarter and cite low capacity utilization,
sluggish sales of consumer goods, and high interest rates as reasons for expecting

a mild second half recovery.

One producer sees no sign of higher business

spending in response to changes in the tax code, and notes that rising interest
rates in the second half could choke off recovery in capital-goods production.
A producer of machine cutting tools notes that his shipments are being supported
by backlogs, but backlogs are falling rapidly because shipments to customers
exceed new orders by a ratio of 3 to 1.

Users of his capital goods are still

laying off workers and he expects it may be 1983 before real spending on
capital goods increases.

Another capital-goods producer reports that the long

decline in his orders seems to have bottomed out in recent months, but he expects a "U" shaped instead of a "V" shaped recovery.
Steel.

An economist for a major steel producer reports that shipments,

new orders, backlogs, and employment at his firm are expected to fall again in
January.

He expects more layoffs and shorter work weeks in the first quarter.

An economist for another major steel producer notes that steel mill inventories
are still high, and the near-term production outlook is dismal.

Steel users

currently are engaged in a very rapid inventory liquidation that he believes
will be largely completed in the first quarter, permitting an upturn in shipments at the end of the first quarter.

He expects some relief from imports in

the second quarter because of anti-dumping and countervailing duty petitions
and he expects some stimulus in the third quarter from an increase in steel
consumption.

He notes some weakness in demand for oil country goods used in

shallow wells, although demand for deep well goods is still firm.
Inventories.

Excess inventories of new autos, auto-related prod-

ucts, steel, and aluminum will hold down operating rates to 60% or lower at.
least this month and next.

A retailer, however, believes sales of department

store-type goods were underestimated in December and that inventories thus were

overstated.
than last.

Consequently, inventory adjustment this quarter should be less
A major appliance producer reports that the sharp production

cutbacks in recent months were associated more with effects of declining
housing starts than with excess retail inventories.
Consumer Spending.

Some respondents believe the trough in real con-

sumer spending occurred in October, although recovery will be sluggish this
half year.

Sales of department store goods apparently fell sharply in January.

One economist notes that price promotions usually held in January were moved to
pre-Christmas, causing December to borrow from January sales.

Another economist

believes January sales were depressed by unusually bad weather.

He expects

growth in real consumer spending this year of about 2% or 2 1/2%.

Some local

bankers report a collapse of demand for installment loans.
Automobiles.

An economist for a major producer looks for slowly

rising sales in 1982, from 7.8 million (a.r.)

(including imports) this quarter,

to 10.0 million (a.r.) in the fourth quarter, assuming no change in the
scheduled tax cut and no price reduction from GM/UAW bargaining.

First quarter

sales should be helped by price promotions (Chrysler and Ford) and introduction
of some new models.
A large domestic automobile dealer notes that his sales in the first
19 days of January were the worst he has ever experienced.

Sales are retarded

by high interest rates and customers waiting for price reductions from GM/UAW
negotiations.

Another dealer of both domestic and foreign automobiles reports

that traffic in his import showroom has slowed as much as in his domestic showroom.
Housing and Thrifts.

Officials associated with the thrift industry

in the District anticipate a very sluggish recovery in housing starts in 1982.
Very little loan business has been transacted because of prevailing mortgage rates.

Some officials believe mortgage rates no higher than 14% will induce
substantial demand, because inflationary psychology is no longer a factor
since prices of houses have stopped increasing.

They are also skeptical that

nonconventional financing will support a recovery, and assert that neither
some lenders nor buyers are yet adjusted to variable rate mortgages or other
kinds of nonconventional financing.

Thrifts are very cautious about commitments

and loans because of uncertainty over deposit flows.

Many aggressively promoted

the new IRA account but one thrift official claims that IRA deposits in January
amounted to only three-fourths of one percent of their deposits.

He also

complains that the new accounts are adding further to their cost of funds,
which in 1981 was about 10.9% and which he expects will rise to 11.8% in 1982.
Some officials are also concerned that cash flow generated from repayments of
existing mortgages has been cut by almost one-half in the past two years.

A

few savings and loan associations that made slight profits last year expect
losses in 1982.

They assert that costs cannot be cut much further because sub-

stantial reduction in employment and salaries has already taken place.

A major

regional builder of houses in the District plans to respond to the bleak outlook by building smaller houses in 1982.

He expects mortgage interest rates

to be higher in the second half of this year than the first, and will build and
market as many new houses as possible this half.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Most available information suggests that business activity in
the Fifth District has not yet bottomed out. Continued deterioration over
the past month is evidenced by further declines in manufacturers' shipments, new orders, employment, and the return to sluggishness of retail
sales activity.

Layoffs continue to spread, involving transportation,

machinery, and government in a widespread pattern of layoffs and falling
employment.

Construction activity seems to have slipped further and the

prospects for a near-term recovery are fading according to Richmond
directors.

On the positive side, growth of inventories has abated, wage

demands have softened, and manufacturers surveyed are decidedly less pessimistic than in recent months.
Manuf ac tur ing
Although the rate of decline may have moderated over the month,
the trend in manufacturing activity is clearly down.

More than half the

manufacturers surveyed report further declines in new orders and order
backlogs over the month.

Employment and the length of the workweek fell

broadly so that despite further cutbacks in shipments, inventory growth
was brought under control, at least temporarily.

Stocks of finished goods

were essentially unchanged over the month while materials on hand fell
slightly.

Inventories fell relative to desired levels but remain substan-

tially in excess.
present needs.

Current plant and equipment capacity also far exceeds

Price increases continued moderately by recent standards.

These signs of weakness remain pervasive.

There are still no apparent

exceptions in the manufacturing sector of the Fifth District other than,
perhaps, some defense contractors.

Several of the District's major

industries-textiles, furniture, and building materials-remain very weak.
Consumer Spending
Most indications are that the Holiday Season brought a respectable, if unspectacular, surge of consumer activity.

More recent information

suggests, however, that the buoyancy was short lived.

Retail sales, partic-

ularly of big ticket items, have fallen further according to our respondents.
One respondent, a major department store, finds customers just waiting for
sales, unwilling to buy

at full price.

There is some feeling that the scope

of pre-Christmas promotional activities, particularly discounting, sapped
the retail sector of some of its late winter potential.

Partially because

of this thinking, District retailers remain basically pessimistic.

There

is little expectation that conditions will improve over the next six months.
In fact, several respondents expect conditions to be worse at mid-year.
Retail respondents managed to hold inventories and prices at previous levels
this month.

Nonetheless, inventories remain above desired levels and the

recent pricing policies are expected to adversely affect profits for the
year.
Housing and Construction
Construction in general, and particularly residential, remains
very weak.

In many areas of the District, housing construction is almost

non-existent.

In addition, there is less optimism regarding the near-term

outlook for housing.

A number of our directors feel that a decline in

mortgage rates, even to the 13% level, will not induce a major turnaround.
They see the situation as now more complex requiring a combination of economic growth, rising employment and incomes, and greater confidence in
addition to lower interest rates before significant improvement will occur.

The Financial Sector
Bankers are apparently continuing to experience positive responses
to market interest rate instruments.

Although it is still too early to

know, they expect significant inflows of funds into IRAs.

Our directors in

banking generally expect anywhere from 40-80% of a large pool of IRA funds
to wind up in banks and thrifts.

They are very much encouraged by this

prospect.
The Outlook
Changes in the outlook were mixed over the month, but in general
there seems to have been a shift toward the positive.
recent segmentation of this outlook picture.

Of interest is the

The generally held outlook

for the manufacturing sector is positive, while for retailing and construction the recovery is thought to be somewhat more remote.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
The Sixth District's economy appears to be slowing.
due to inclement weather and slack labor markets.

Retail sales have stalled

The construction sector continues

to contract as the housing industry grinds to a halt. Unemployment insurance rolls are
expanding; layoffs are mounting. A severe freeze destroyed large portions of citrus and
vegetable crops and hampered livestock production.
Consumer Spending.

Holiday sales were only fair in much of the District,

about the same as last year.

Exceptions are Georgia and Louisiana, where merchants

noted substantial gains over 1980. Weak sales, combined with heavy promotion expenses
and pre-Christmas discounting, continued to erode retailers' profits.

Reports of fewer

return items in the post-Christmas period may confirm that buyers were especially price
and quality conscious.
items.

The recent severe weather has slowed sales of many non-food

Retailers expect softer than normal sales, especially of low-quality goods, early

in the year because of the deepening recession.

In response, they are attempting to

lower inventories.
Auto sales continue at severely depressed levels throughout most of the District.
State auto dealers association representatives in some District states note that sales of
large cars are holding up better than sales of small cars.

Spokesmen attribute this to

the stable-to-lower price of gasoline and to the small additional cost of buying desired
features on larger ears. There are widespread reports that auto dealer bankruptcies and
auto repossessions are trending upwards.
Financial and Construction.
real estate and construction industries.

Interest rates continue to wreak havoc with the
Across the District, December sales of single

family homes fell to half the year-earlier level.

Transferees are declining in number.

The only purchasers are those in high income brackets and/or two-income families with

no children.

Lower and middle-income families have been locked out of the market.

Realtors claim that 85 percent of financing involves assumable mortgages and/or owner
financing. An increasing number of sales come from actual and impending foreclosures.
The apartment market is also severely affected. Many cities are experiencing
severe drops in the apartment vacancy rates as potential home buyers wait out high
interest rates.

In other cities, low vacancy rates and construction cost factors have

caused rent increases which in turn caused drastic increases in the apartment vacancy
rates.

Singles are doubling up or moving back home.

The housing market effect on

apartment vacancy and rental rates has varied considerably from city to city.
Most realtors are pessimistic about 1982. Customers cannot afford high interest
rates and have concerns about job security.

Realtor agencies are closing branch offices

while independents are closing shop.
Employment and Industry. New applications for unemployment insurance soared
in Georgia from November to December as layoffs in the automobile, construction, and
carpet industries mounted. Some 1,500 federal government workers are expected to be
laid off between February and March, bringing to 2,000 the total number of federal
civilian jobs lost in Atlanta since October.

Federal officials are confident, however,

that enough new jobs will be created in defense to place these workers if they are
willing to relocate.
Labor market conditions in Florida are healthy by national and regional
standards.

The inflow of migrants to the state has moderated somewhat due to the

depressed national housing market.
the national recession began.

Florida's jobless rate has risen only slightly since

On the other hand, unemployment rates are well above

the national average in Alabama, Tennessee, Mississippi, and Louisiana.

Unemployment

insurance was extended for 13 additional weeks in Tennessee, with one in ten of the

state's workers unemployed.

Alabama's unemployment rate is around 12 percent and

reports of layoffs suggest that higher rates are in the offing.
Although airlines have recently announced price increases for most domestic
routes, fares to Florida vacation cities remain at cut-rate levels due to slack passenger
traffic.

Hotel managers in South Florida fear that publicity about their recent cold

snap could have further adverse effects. Cruise ship travel is down, with Miami's port
director predicting a dismal year. Corporate travel is also being reduced. The sluggish
economy is affecting theme park attendance as families take trips closer to home.

A

spokesman for Walt Disney World—with the largest volume of visitors of any park in
Florida—notes attendance figures down 8 percent from the same time last year.

New

promotional campaigns aimed at in-state residents have been undertaken.
Agriculture.

In January, the southeast was nipped by severe freezes that

extended well into South Florida. Below-freezing temperatures destroyed about 25 percent
of the orange crop and 55 percent of Florida's winter vegetables, according to preliminary
(and disputed) estimates of a federal agency.

Sugar cane was also damaged, but most

of the crop can be salvaged if it reaches processing plants before deterioration sets in.
Some damaged oranges were also salvaged, but the rapid return of warmer weather
hastened spoilage.
Prices of orange juice have risen sharply since the freeze, but future increases
may be held in cheek by relatively large stocks of juice in storage and the likelihood
of increased imports of Brazilian juice. Retail vegetable prices are expected to rise at
least 15 percent by March, as they did following a similar freeze a year ago.
Widespread snow and ice across most of the southeast increased feed
requirements of livestock and slowed poultry production.
abruptly in January, reversing a decline of several months.

Broiler prices have risen

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

The business recession continued in the Seventh District on a

broad front through the fourth quarter and into January.

Output, new orders,

and employment declined further in most manufacturing industries.

Severe

weather in January caused hardship and hampered business operations in various
areas.

Sales of general merchandise firms improved significantly late in the

Christmas season and in early January, in response to promotions and price
discounts.

(Bad weather depressed sales in some areas later in the month.)

Price discounting also is widespread in wholesale markets for materials and
components.

Housing activity is almost nonexistent.

Agricultural conditions

remain very depressed, but there is hope that December marked the low point
for farm prices.

Farmland prices have softened.

The upturn in interest rates

since late November has depressed credit demands, but business borrowing at
large banks was strong in December.
The Outlook.

While forecasts vary significantly, most analysts in the

region believe the decline in activity will end some time in the spring,
followed by at least a modest uptrend in the second half.
offered.

Several reasons are

The lead role probably will be played by consumers with buying power

augmented by tax cuts starting July 1.

Excess inventories are being

eliminated by price discounting and production cutbacks.

A slower underlying

rate of price inflation, aided by union wage and benefit concessions, will
improve business confidence.

Defense procurement, although not a major factor

in the district, will provide some stimulus.

Backlogs of deferred demand for

housing, consumer durables, and some producer equipment are building up.
Accelerated depreciation under the new tax law will help capital outlays.

Translating backlogs of demand into sales and orders probably will depend on a
reversal of the recent upturn in interest rates, which most analysts
anticipate.
Inflation.

Published price indexes probably do not fully reflect recent

price cutting, for both producer and consumer goods.
in inflation may be temporary.

But the recent slowdown

Electric and gas utilities are seeking large

increases, and many manufacturers and trade firms will raise prices at the
first favorable opportunity.

Inventories of materials and components are at

such low levels that any upturn in demand would spark price increases.
Consumer Purchases.

Sales of vehicles, furniture, and appliances remain

very weak, but most general merchandise stores reported significant strength
in sales just before and after Christmas.

Although consumers responded to

bargain prices, inventories remain somewhat excessive.
improvement in traffic starting in December.

Airlines report

Some analysts fear that vigorous

promotion of IRA accounts will draw away consumer dollars.
Employment.
the nation.

Employment has been declining faster in the district than in

In November, wage and salary employment in district states was 3

percent below November 1978 and manufacturing was off 13 percent.
Iowa, and Michigan have suffered the largest job losses.

Indiana,

Layoffs in the motor

industry and construction have been most significant, but layoffs also have
been mounting in capital goods industries.
increasingly.

White collar jobs are affected

Some state and local governments are reducing employment,

reversing a steady rapid rise in the 1960'sand 1970*s, mainly because of cuts
in federal programs.
Plant Closing.

Many industrial plants have been closed in recent weeks

to cut finished goods inventories, and many others are on short workweeks.
Hopefully, most temporary closings will end as scheduled later this month or

in February.

Some plants have already reopened.

However, certain freight car

plants have been closed with no schedule for reopening.

Several plants in the

meat packing, motor and cement industries have been closed permanently.
Packaging Materials.

Orders for steel and plastic strapping, and

paperboard for boxes, were very weak in late 1981, and apparently in January
as well.

Demand for these products parallels manufacturing activity in a

broad range of industries.

Inventories of paperboard rose suddenly as demand

dropped off.
Labor Negotiations.

Management and unions in various hard-pressed

industries are engaged in negotiations to scale down compensation, or at least
to slow increases.

Restrictive work rules are under review.

So far,

confirmed concessions have been most significant in the auto, meat packing,
and airline industries.
away" demands.

A bitter struggle lies ahead over industry "take

The most important discussions are in the bellwether motor

industry where management is seeking drastic modifications of the existing
contract.
Capital Goods.

Contracts for new industrial buildings, and new orders

for capital goods, suggest a sharper decline in capital spending in the
district than the 0.5 percent decline indicated by the recent government
survey.

Faster depreciation and other new investment incentives will have an

impact, but only after confidence improves and margins of excess capacity are
narrowed.

Capital spending programs are dominated by projects intended to cut

energy costs, e.g. continuous casting installations in the steel industry.
Motor Vehicles.
levels.

Sales of cars and trucks continue at severely depressed

The first quarter auto output schedule of only 1.4 million, may be

cut again.

Inventories are at an all time high in terms of days supply.

Steel.

After showing strength last spring, steel demand slowed in the

second half of 1981, and December marked the low for the year.

A pickup in

demand expected for January has not materialized, and no improvement is now
seen before March.

User inventories of steel are low and would have to be

replenished if durable goods sales revived.
Construction.

After a slight easing in availability of mortgage funds in

November and early December, the market tightened again.

Very few new loans

are being negotiated at quoted terms of 17-18 percent or more, plus three
points, with 20 percent down.
standstill.

New home construction is at a virtual

Nonresidential construction prospects also are bleak, but permits

have been approved recently for several additional large office buildings in
Chicago's Loop area.
Agriculture.

Two years of depressed farm earnings, with little hope of a

near-term recovery, has led to weakness in district farmland markets.
from many areas indicate little buyer interest at current prices.

Reports

Our latest

survey of agricultural banks shows an average decline of 3 percent in district
farmland values during the fourth quarter, with weakness most apparent in
Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa.

However, with farmland prices in the region four

times the level of 10 years ago, equity in land provides a basis for coping
with a prolonged period of depressed earnings for most farmers.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District has continued to decline
since Christmas.

The relatively severe winter weather has combined with a

soft economy in contributing to the weakness.

Retail sales have been slow,

and orders for new merchandise have been reduced further in an attempt to
avoid large inventory build-ups.

Manufacturing firms also report a

reduction in new orders, and as a result a number of concerns have pared
production schedules and reduced employment.

Many farmers in the District

are in serious financial difficulties due to the high and rising operating
costs and relatively low selling prices.

Reports on the number of new IRA

accounts established at banks and savings and loans are mixed.
Consumer spending has declined more than usual for the
post-Christmas period.

Price concessions and other promotions at department

stores in late November and early December reportedly left potential
customers with fewer funds than usual in early January.

One store reported

that the flow of savings into the new IRAs is hurting sales of big ticket
items.
home.

In addition, the unusually cold weather has kept potential shoppers
Because of weak sales, department stores have been reducing their

orders for new merchandise, and inventories have risen.
Automobile sales generally continued at a low level in early
January.

However, one auto dealer and one auto supplier reported slight

sales improvements, and another dealer had sold 72 cars in the four days
preceding the survey—the best four days in 1-1/2 years.

One agency

expressed concern with the negotiations between the automobile manufacturers
and the unions regarding sizable reductions in new car prices.

If the

prices of new cars are lowered suddenly, it was feared that used car prices
would decline proportionately, causing substantial losses to dealers with
large inventories of used cars.
Manufacturing activity in the District has weakened further since
mid-December.

Orders declined at seven of the eight larger manufacturing

firms contacted, including chemical, agricultural supply, consumer durable
and industrial machinery.

Moreover, two medium-sized firms—an electrical

company and an automobile supplier—cut back operations substantially.

A

trucking firm in Arkansas reported that freight volume is 21 percent below
the year-ago level.

On the other hand, it was reported that defense, oil

drilling equipment, process control machinery and food sales continued at a
high level.
Reflecting the decline in orders, inventories at most manufacturing
firms inched up.

In order to avoid excessive inventories, production was

cut back and more employees were laid off.

Additional workers would have

been furloughed except for the fact that several plants were forced to close
several days because of bad weather.

One firm went to a four-day week, and

another firm reduced weekly hours from 40 to 36.

In view of the prolonged

economic weakness, one large firm has stretched out its future capital
spending plans.
Construction remains generally unchanged from late-1981 levels.
However, builders report some increase in traffic through model homes and
express some optimism that the decline has bottomed out.

To attract

customers, some builders are now offering zero interest rate loans on new

homes.

In this plan,the customer must pay 1/3 down and the remainder over 5

years.

This makes the payments large, but the attraction of no explicit

interest has increased home sales.
Many farmers in the District have experienced reductions in real
income and are in financial difficulty.

Crops were generally large last

fall, but prices have declined, and interest and other costs have continued
to rise.

Particularly hard hit are those farmers who purchased a farm three

years ago, financed by a 10 percent three-year mortgage, and who now face
refinancing at a 16 percent or higher rate.
Commercial banks reported a moderate increase in savings balances
in the past four weeks, and outstanding loans have inched up.

Deposits at

savings and loan associations declined on balance, as flows to money market
funds continued.

Experience with the new IRAs is uneven.

Those

institutions that have aggressively priced and promoted them report a large
inflow of funds; other firms report little IRA activity.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Despite

a

few

bright

spots,

the

Ninth

fairly depressed in December and early January.

District

economy

remained

Spending on general merchan-

dise, autos, and homes was still weak; most manufacturing orders and production declined further-, the forest products and iron mining industries remained
depressed; and farm income was hurt once again try falling prices.

Reflecting

these weaknesses in economic activity was bank lending, which was still very
slow.

The district had only three positive signs:

the winter sports industry

was still thriving, high technology manufacturing seemed to be expanding, and
the iron mining industry, although still depressed, resumed some operations.
Consumer Spending
The

slump

in general merchandise

persisted into early January.
December,
month.

but

not

enough

sales, which began

last

summer,

Sales improved some around the holidays in late

to

compensate

for

the

weakness

earlier

in

the

Major Minneapolis-St. Paul retailers and our Bank's directors indi-

cated that overall, in December as in November, poor sales of large durable
goods

depressed

general merchandise

sales.

sales rally did not last into January.

Furthermore, the late December

One major Minneapolis-St. Paul re-

tailer said his firm's sales declined more than seasonally in early January,
partly because of abnormally cold weekend weather.

The late December rally

apparently was strong enough to reduce the early December inventory buildup,
however. Retailers

did not

report

any unusual

inventory problems

in early

January.
Sales of autos and homes remained weak too.

According to regional

sales managers for two of the largest selling domestic automobiles, new car
sales

were

January.

depressed

throughout

1981,

and

they

did

not

revive

in

early

The two managers said their new car sales dropped 16 and 21 percent

in 1981.

Also, Bank directors reported that home sales in the district re-

mained very weak in December and early January.
Spending

on winter

sports, however,

continued

to be very

strong.

Snow conditions at both the western and the eastern ends of the district have
been excellent this winter, and ski area operators indicated that their business was quite a bit better than usual.
Minnesota,

for

example,

reported

that

One large ski lodge in northern

in December

its business was up 21

percent from a year ago.
Industrial Activity
One

manufacturing

industry

also

seemed

to

be

fairly

strong this

winter, but manufacturing generally was weak and getting weaker.
industry was high technology

The strong

manufacturing; orders at a large Twin Cities

computer manufacturer recently increased more than seasonally.
turing activity remained essentially unchanged.

Some manufac-

Production at a major food

products manufacturer increased only slightly in December and early January,
and

a big

steady.

manufacturer

of packaging

equipment

said

business

was

holding

Most manufacturers continued to experience declines, though,

stemming especially from weak demand for building supplies, consumer durables,
and automobiles.

New orders and production at a large Minneapolis-St. Paul

manufacturer of windows, for example, decreased in December and early January,
and

its inventories were reportedly higher than desired.

New orders at a

large Wisconsin manufacturer of consumer durables recently declined too, and
the district's one auto assembly plant was shut down during the first two
weeks of January.
The forest products and iron mining industries remained depressed as
well, but iron mining recently showed signs of improvement.

Directors from

Montana, northern Minnesota, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan reported that

the forest products industry was still very depressed in December and early
January.

During this period, production at taconite

down considerably from earlier years.
several plants that were closed

(iron ore) plants was

According to Bank directors, however,

in November and December

recently

resumed

operations.
The recent weakening in most industrial activity has been accompanied
by an increase in initial claims for unemployment insurance.
for

example,

these

claims,

seasonally

adjusted,

rose

T

In Minnesota,

percent

between

November and December and another 5 percent in early January.
Agricultural Conditions
The

farm sector was also still depressed at year-end.

The prices

farmers receive for their products have been falling since late 1980, and they
fell again in December 1981.

In Minneapolis, cash prices for soybeans, corn,

and wheat declined 2, 3, and k percent, respectively, between November and
December.

At the same time, in south St. Paul, cash prices for slaughter

steers, feeder cattle, and hogs dropped

1, 5, and 7 percent, respectively.

As a result of the price declines, farm income was hurting in the district:
87 percent of the rural bankers responding to our latest Agricultural Credit
Conditions

Survey

said the income of farmers in their areas in the fourth

quarter was less than the year before.
Financial Conditions
The weaknesses in the district econony continued to be reflected in
bank lending.

Outstanding loans at Minneapolis-St. Paul banks in December and

early January remained at November's very low level, and Bank directors from
outside the Twin Cities reported weak loan demand in their areas.

Because of

this weakness, a North Dakota director said, loan-to-deposit ratios at banks
in his area were at their lowest level since the early 1970s.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

The Tenth District economy continues to show softness,

apart from local areas benefitting from strength in the energy sector.
Recent strength in sales has left District retailers satisfied with inventory
levels.

Auto sales continue to be sluggish, however.

Residential construc-

tion remains depressed, but commercial construction activity is strong where
the energy industry is important.
somewhat.

Farmland prices appear to be softening

Loan demand ranges from weak in agricultural areas to strong in

areas serving the energy industry.
Retail Trade.

Retailers in the Tenth District reported that nominal

sales gains were in the 8-15 percent range in 1981 compared to 1980.

While

sales in October and November of last year were relatively weak, December
sales in the District were equal to or greater than the ye.ar-over-year
increase.

Sales of apparel and electronic games were particularly strong

during December 1981.

The recent strength in sales left most District

retailers satisfied with inventory levels at the end of 1981.

Strong sales

also firmed up profit margins for most retailers, who report merchandise
cost increases in the 5-6 percent range.

Those cost increases are still

being passed on to the consumer as most retailers continue to maintain their
inventory markups.

However, all retailers indicate that consumers are still

very price conscious and, if necessary, retailers will cut prices to maintain
sales levels.

Most District retailers expect sales to be about 10 percent

greater in the first half of 1982 than in the first half of 1981.
Automobile Sales.

District Automobile Dealers' Associations report

generally sluggish sales, with the exception of Oklahoma which boasts a

6 percent increase over last year.

High interest rates are dampening demand

and increasing the cost of floor planning to nearly prohibitive levels,
prompting dealers to trim inventories as much as possible.

In addition to

high interest rates, banks are resorting to higher down payments and longer
residency requirements to ration credit to auto buyers.

The depressed credit

conditions are discouraging primarily small-and medium-sized car sales.
Dealers hold a bleak short-term outlook, but most predict an upswing during
the summer contingent upon lower interest rates.
Industry Activity.

Most purchasing agents contacted report that

input prices have increased 8 to 12 percent in the last year, with similar
increases expected during 1982.

Materials are readily available, although

some lead times have been extended due to adjustments in production and in
the work force.

Inventory levels are satisfactory for most of the firms

contacted, and will remain at or below current levels until the economy
exhibits signs of recovery.
Residential construction activity remains weak in most parts of the
Tenth District.

Commercial construction activity is strong in areas where

the energy industry is important.

Although energy activity continues to grow,

there are some indications of a slight slowing—particularly in gas well
drilling in Oklahoma and in Colorado's oil shale industry.
Agriculture.

Tenth District farmers may be holding slightly larger

amounts of grain off the market than in a normal year, due mainly to the
unfavorable price situation.
farmer-owned reserve program.

As a result, more stored grain is entering the
Agricultural banks in the Tenth District are

carrying over into 1982 more 1981 farm loans than is seasonally true.

Bankers

are continuing to maintain lines of credit for long-standing farm and ranch
customers, although many bankers are not comfortable with this situation
given the less-than-optimistic outlook for agriculture in 1982.

In some

instances, farmers are being asked to liquidate a portion of their assets to
keep their farm businesses solvent.

Fund availability remains adequate but

the creditworthiness of farm borrowers continues to deteriorate.

In some

areas of Oklahoma, non bank agricultural lenders are increasing loan restrictions, which has forced the foreclosure of several farming operations.
Declines in farmland prices have occurred in some parts of the District, but
agricultural bankers generally report that land prices are holding steady.
Banking Developments.

Reported loan demand at Tenth District banks

ranges from weak in rural areas to strong in those areas serving the energy
industry.

Commercial and industrial lending continues to be the only source

of strength Districtwide.

A number of bankers report still further weakness

in the balance sheet situation in agriculture.

Prime rates range from 15 3/4

to 16 1/4 percent, unchanged from last month's survey.

Several bankers express

concern over a reduction in loan quality and indicate tighter lending restrictions.

While deposit growth was generally stronger than last month, much of

the growth was seasonal in nature.
continue to rely on large CDs

Banks in areas with sizable loan demand

to fund these loans.

Some of the growth in

transactions accounts and passbook savings accounts is attributed to precautionary motives. Despite the very heavy promotion of IRA/Keough programs, most
banks report smaller-than-expected activity in these accounts.

Several

bankers indicate that the bulk of the funds being transferred into these
accounts is coming from passbook savings and from thrift institutions.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The
softness.

economy

the Eleventh

District

shows

further

signs

of

Department store sales rose sharply before Christmas, but auto

sales remain weak.
indicate

of

further

The pace of drilling is slackening, and manufacturers
declines

in new

orders.

Nonresidential

construction

remains at a high level, while interest rates remain a major obstacle to
recovery in residential construction.
consumer loans.

Business loans continue to outpace

Declining commodity prices are squeezing farm incomes.

Department store executives report that sales surged in the last
two weeks of December, as they did a year earlier.

But profit margins were

much lower than expected because of heavy advertising and price cutting.
Ladies' and children's apparel sold especially well.

Retail inventories

are

consumers

at

desired

levels,

and

respondents

anticipate

will

be

cautious in the next few months.
Auto sales remain low, and there is little hope they will recover
soon.
car

Imported models are selling slightly better than domestics.

sales

are

described

as

good.

Dealers

report

low

inventories

Used
of

imported models and moderately high inventories of domestic models.
Drilling

has

been

hampered

indications activity is slowing.
some idle units are being stacked.

by

winter

weather,

there

are

New orders for rigs are declining, and
Currently the lead time from date of

order to delivery of a new rig is less than three months.
the lead time was 12 to 18 months.

and

Four months ago,

Manufacturing

output

is

declining

slowly.

The high

level of

commercial and industrial construction in the District is holding up steel
production, but excess capacity is increasing.
able

to

pass

on

cost

increases.

Steel

Steel manufacturers are not

fabricators

from

outside

the

District are bidding on projects here, and work is being let at close to
cost.

Output of highway construction equipment is low.

Manufacturers of

electronics report increased sales to the Federal Government and a slowdown
in sales to the commercial sector.
Labor markets are still fairly strong.

Despite some layoffs and

temporary plant shutdowns in manufacturing, the unemployment rate in Texas
declined to 4.5 percent in December.
The
expected

pace

of

to moderate

commercial
this year.

construction
There

remains

high

and

is

not

is mounting concern the boom in

office building will lead to an overhang in available space.

As a result,

some developers are finding it difficult to secure permanent financing for
announced projects.

Housing sales are up slightly.

Starts of new houses

will remain low until builders work off current inventories, which are in
much better shape than in the 1973-75 recession.
The
homes

worth

mortgages.

small

volume

but

lending

$300,000 or more.
Lenders

Mortgage delinquencies
usual

of

are

report

at S&L's

These

there

are

loans
some

and foreclosures

considerably

below

the

are

is

for

condominiums

usually

variable

takebacks

on

builder

or

rate
loans.

are running a little higher than
national

declining, as outflows to the money market continue.

rate.

Deposits

are

The small volume of

new money deposited in IRA accounts is being used to increase liquidity.

The major strength in commercial bank loans continues to be in
energy and related

industries, but borrowing by many other businesses is

also on the rise.

The small gains in consumer loans continue to lag well

behind the increase in business loan demands.
are

not

considered

restrictions
slowly.

on the

to

be

issuance

a
of

major
credit

Delinquencies are rising but

problem.

Banks

cards.

Deposits

Activity in the new IRA accounts

are
are

tightening
increasing

is fairly strong, but most of

these balances are being transferred from existing accounts.
The outlook for farm incomes remains bleak.
foreign)

give

farmers

little

hope

for

Bumper crops (both

domestic

and

higher

commodity

prices.

Cattle prices also continue to fall, but ranchers are optimistic

prices will strengthen as marketings are reduced to build up herds.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy appears to have weakened further
in the past month.

A late burst of spending pushed December retail sales

moderately ahead of the year-ago level in nominal terms, but sales still
failed to keep up with inflation.

Moreover, in January, sales apparently

have dropped below the year-ago level in nominal terms.

In the manufacturing

and mining sectors, further production cutbacks and layoffs are evident
among a broad spectrum of industries.

Residential construction rose in

December, but builders are skeptical that the improvement will be sustained,
given the recent rise in mortgage interest rates.

Apparently the region's

supply of unsold homes actually has increased recently, contrary to the
pattern elsewhere.

Farmers are experiencing a continuing decline in commodity

prices and are finding it increasingly difficult to obtain credit.

Commercial

loan demand at banks increased in December but not because of increased
confidence but to finance excess inventory.

Regional banks are becoming

increasingly worried about the creditworthiness of borrowers.

At regional

S&Ls, mortgage lending continues to be very slow, with no significant
improvement in savings flows to the industry.
Consumer Spending
A spending flurry late in the Christmas season pushed December
retail sales in various Twelfth District states about 1-5 percent above
the year-earlier pace in nominal terms.
real terms, however.

This represented a decline in

Moreover, since early January, sales have slowed,

dropping below the year-ago level in nominal terms and widening the yearto-year real decline.

Retailers believe that the pre-Christmas burst

in sales was "borrowed" from later periods.

Indeed, they expect sales

to remain sluggish through the early months of 1982 due to an expected
further increase in unemployment and the cautious spending behavior being
exhibited by consumers.

As evidence of consumer caution, retailers point

out that they achieved the pre-Christmas flurry only by offering severe
price markdowns and that consumers stayed away from durable goods and
focused on apparel and other necessities.
a squeeze in profit margins.

The retail sector is experiencing

Collections also are slowing.

Unlike the

1974-75 recession, inventories are not excessive relative to sales, however,
in that retailers have tried to hold down short-term borrowing.

The exception

is at automobile dealerships, where new car sales early in 1982 have dropped
even further below year-ago levels.
Mining and Manufacturing
Respondents report further cutbacks in production and employment
among a wide number of industries.

In the forest products industry, weakness

in the paper segment of the market is offsetting slight gains in lumber
employment, resulting in continued net layoffs.

In the metals industries,

further price weakness is forcing additional closures and curtailments
in January.

Many of these cutbacks can be traced to weak demand from

the national automobile, housing, appliance and aircraft manufacturing
industries.

Copper producers in Arizona and Utah are extending Christmas

holiday shutdowns, indefinitely in some cases, until prices recover.

Employment

also is being cut back at silver-lead-zinc mining facilities in Idaho,
at steelmaking facilities in California and in the Pacific Northwest aluminum
industry.

In the automobile industry, General Motors Corporation plans

to close temporarily
excess inventory.

its Fremont, California plant on February 1 to reduce

In the aerospace industry, lagging orders for commercial

jet aircraft and electronic products are forcing further layoffs, with

the Lockheed Corporation actually phasing out production of its L-1011
transport.
Real Estate
Twelfth District respondents report no sign of the pick-up in
new home sales reported elsewhere.

On the contrary, they contend that

the region's inventory of unsold homes is still increasing.

Moreover,

the value of residential real estate is depreciating 5-10 percent annually,
both as a result of actual price reductions and seller-financed transactions
at less than market interest rates.

Failures and bankruptcies in the

real estate and homebuilding industries are mounting.

Although Western

homebuilding activity picked up in December, builders tend to downplay
the improvement, stressing that Western homebuilding remains further below
the 1978 peak than is true nationally.

Moreover, they are concerned that the

recent increase in mortgage rates will arrest the homebuilding recovery.
Nonresidential construction activity has shown little change recently
and is running at approximately the year-ago pace.
Agriculture
Twelfth District farmers and ranchers experienced further deterioration
in their financial situation in December as a result of a further decline
in commodity prices.

Price weakness continued to reflect bountiful supplies

and weak export demand.

In January, regional farmers have been benefiting

from higher prices for citrus fruits as a result of the Florida freeze.
Cattle prices also have been rising.
in serious financial difficulty.

Nevertheless, the farm sector is

Many farmers need to extend debt acquired

during past periods of drought but are finding it difficult
to qualify for loans because of decreasing creditworthiness.
number of farms are for sale, especially in California.

A growing

Financial Institutions
Credit extended by Twelfth District banks rose substantially
in December, with lending to businesses and consumers accounting for most
of the increase.

Bankers regarded this increased demand for loans as

a sign of further economic weakness,however.

Involuntary inventory accumulation

and inadequate generation of working capital were the most frequently
cited reasons for the increased business loan demand.

Banks are becoming

increasingly concerned about the creditworthiness of their borrowers,
and have generally tightened their credit standards.

Loans to the forest

products, agriculture, automobile and farm equipment industries are being
subjected to particular scrutiny.

In December, real estate lending continued

sluggish throughout the District, particularly for residential construction.

