CONFIDENTIAL

(FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

May 12, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY
page i --Boston
First
District
page
I-1
Second
District
New
York
page
II-1
Third
District
page
III-1
Fourth
District-Philadelphia
Cleveland
page
IV-1
Fifth
District
Richmond
page
V-1
Sixth
District
Atlanta
page
VI-1
Seventh
District
Chicago
page
VII-1
Eighth
District
St.
Louis
page
VIII-1
Ninth
District
Minneapolis
page
IX-1
Tenth
District
Kansas
City
page
X-1
EleventhDistrict
District--San
Dallas
page XI-1
Twelfth
Francisco
page XII-1

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
Overview;

Economic activity in most sectors slackened

further in April and early May, according to District reports.

Con-

sumer spending was generally lackluster although automobile sales
picked up in a few Districts.

The weakness in manufacturing became

more pervasive, spreading to energy-related and high technology fields.
Layoffs did not appear to slow, and capital spending continued to decline.

New residential construction remained depressed, but some very

modest improvements were noted in a few local housing markets.

In

the agricultural sector, liquidations and bankruptcies rose as farm
incomes and land values continued to fall.

Consumer borrowing was

sluggish although commercial lending varied somewhat among Districts.
In contrast to last month, none of the District reports expressed any
optimism that a turnaround was at hand.
Consumer Spending:

Retail sales were lackluster in most

areas of the country although automobile
Districts.

sales picked up in a few

Despite the general weakness among department stores,

merchants in Boston, Philadelphia and Dallas experienced moderate
gains in their overall sales.

In many Districts, increased reliance

on markdowns and promotional activity spurred lagging sales but put
considerable pressure on profit margins.

Only retailers in Cleveland,

St. Louis and Kansas City reported excessive inventories.

As for

automobile sales, strong response to rebates and special financing plans
was noted in St. Louis and Minneapolis but such measures did little to
stimulate sales in San Francisco.

Manufacturing Activity:

Throughout most of the country,

conditions worsened in the manufacturing sector, with weakness spreading
even to industries which had been weathering the recession well.

In

many Districts, already distressed industries deteriorated further, including steel, machine tools, building materials, and textiles.

The

weakness spread to other, previously strong industries which had bolstered
the economies of several Districts.

Conditions softened in such high

technology industries as computers and telecommunications equipment,
according to the Boston, Atlanta, and Minneapolis reports.

Orders for

oil production equipment dropped sharply in Dallas, Atlanta, and Chicago.
Cutbacks in state and local government dampened purchases by the public
sector.

Layoffs and reduced hours were widespread, and many Districts

reported several plant shutdowns, both temporary and permanent.
spending was being postponed or cancelled.

Capital

Inventories were generally

lean, although manufacturers in Richmond still viewed stocks as excessive.
Construction:

New residential construction was uniformly

described as depressed, although modest improvements were noted in a
few local housing markets.

Demand for luxury cooperative apartments

remained high in Manhattan and housing sales showed some strength in
other parts of New York City.

In Dallas, housing sales and new starts

regained year-ago levels, but the slight upturn in new housing starts
in San Francisco—February had marked a post-World War II l o w — w a s
offset by further declines in the sales of new homes.

Creative

financing was cited as providing some support to sales in a number of
Districts.

In the nonresidential sector, construction activity remained

strong in a few urban centers, but San Francisco reported the cancellations
of several commercial projects. Some softening was evident in New York's
previously buoyant office rental market.

Agriculture:

Conditions in the agricultural sector remain

generally grim, especially in the midwest and California.

In California,

heavy rains impeded the Spring plantings, according to the San Francisco
report.

With crop prices having fallen to low levels, crop farmers

throughout the country are caught in a squeeze of high interest charges
and low income.

As a result, land prices have fallen sharply, and

farmers have had difficulty in paying their bills.
and "bankruptcies have increased sharply.

Farm foreclosures

Livestock producers, however,

have benefited from the recent rise in livestock prices which, in combination with the low crop prices, have widened their profit margins.
Nevertheless, the generally bleak conditions in agriculture have strained
the solvency of such related businesses as farm machinery, seed and fertilizer
sales, and elevator operations according to reports from Cleveland and
Minneapolis.
Finance:

Consumer borrowing was generally weak, while com-

mercial lending varied somewhat among Districts.

In Philadelphia,

business borrowing was slightly ahead of last year, but bankers expected
loan demand to soften.

Slackening in the energy sector had divergent

effects on loan demand, increasing lending activity in Dallas and decreasing it in Kansas City.

Flat loan demand was reported in Cleveland,

St. Louis, and Minneapolis.

San Francisco banks experienced a sharp

rise in problem and delinquent loans as-bankruptcies increased among
forest products- and construction industries and small firms in
general'.
Outlook:

In contrast to last month none of the District

reports expressed any optimism that a turnaround was at hand.
stead, conditions appear to have worsened and forecasts of a

In-

recovery have been postponed, until later in the year.

Economists in

Boston felt an upturn, albeit an "anemic" or "modest" one, would begin
in the second half of the year despite deteriorating conditions in
April and early May.

Among manufacturers, some were looking for a

pickup in business activity within the next six months, while others
were less sanguine.

Retailers, too, were divided with some expecting

an upturn to follow the July tax cut while others, such as those in
Richmond and in Kansas City, did not see any imminent upturn in sales.
As for the price outlook, there was little feel for whether
the recent slowdown was cyclical or permanent.

In Chicago, price

discounting is more common than at any time since the 1930's and is
especially prevalent in steel, nonferrous metals, building materials,
paper, and transportation, though a large surge in these prices is
anticipated with recovery.

Similarly, in Kansas City, prices for

new materials were down between 5 and 18 percent from last year but
are expected to be stable or rise slightly for the rest of the year.
Wage settlements not far below those of a year ago were reported
by several Districts.

For example some Chicago firms in depressed

industries recently negotiated contracts calling for 8 to 10
percent first year wage increases.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic conditions in the First District vary considerably from
sector to sector.

Retail sales have been stronger than expected.

Department

stores cite an Increase in the importance of promotional activities as the
most important effect of the recession.

Manufacturers, on the other hand,

report a pronounced decline in economic activity since the first of the year.
Although the rate of decline seems to have slowed, signs of an upturn are few
and far between.

As production and employment levels have been cut back, a

number of firms have adopted work-sharing arrangements.

Reports from the

banking sector range from "an excellent year" to very poor.
Retail
Retail conditions in the First District appear to be stronger than the
retailers themselves expected.

Although sales are not booming, dollar sales

are running above last year and in some cases, ahead of department store
prices.

Promotional activities are reported to be Increasingly important in

generating sales.
Several retailers expressed surprise that the slack in the national
and local economies was not having a larger effect on their sales figures.
This was mentioned both by merchants with a predominance of high income
t

customers and by those serving primarily low income consumers.

A

representative of a New England department store with a nationwide parent
company reported that the New England sales increase was second highest of all
the parent's stores.

Seasonal factors, such as the timing of Easter, distort

comparisons with last year; but among those reporting, first quarter (February
through April) sales were up 4 to 12 percent over the first quarter of last
year.
All those contacted described inventory management as especially
difficult under current business conditions, but all reported success in their
ongoing inventory control efforts.

Promotional activities have been an

important inventory reduction tool, and several mentioned a heightened
consumer response to well-advertised specials.

Price reductions, they noted,

increase profits proportionally less than sales.
Price increases from suppliers have not moderated as much as the CPI;
but some retailers report fewer or slower increases.

This slowdown will

appear in retail prices with a lag, since the goods being purchased now will
be sold in the fall.
Manufacturing
Signs of continuing weakness far outnumber signs of an upturn,
according to First District manufacturers.

In an April survey of local

purchasing managers, substantially more firms reported decreases over the
month than increases for production, employment, new orders and backlogs.
There have been order cancellations for aircraft equipment; the airlines'
financial position has suffered as the recession has reduced business travel.
A manufacturer of household products, for whom the rehabilitation and
remodelling business had sustained sales through 1981, has seen a sharp
downturn since the first of the year; sales, are not falling as rapidly as
earlier in 1982 but they are still falling.

A producer of energy saving

capital equipment reports that firms have been postponing projects since the

first of the year; in a number of cases, firms have the resources to proceed
but they are uneasy about the future.

Orders for heavy capital equipment for

the petro-chemical and auto industries remain depressed.

The problems of the

auto industry are also causing production cutbacks and layoffs among the
region's machine tool makers.

Some of the region's fastest growing high

technology firms have begun to feel the recession; revenue growth has slowed,
profit growth even more so and several of the largest have curtailed hiring.
Among the more encouraging reports was the observation by two firms
that business at European plants has picked up.

However, one firm described

the strength in Europe as uneven, while a manufacturer of specialized
industrial equipment said most of the increased demand at its European plants
was from the developing nations, not Europe itself.

Also encouraging were

reports from a manufacturer of semi-conductors and a supplier to the
semi-conductor industry that bookings have picked up in that industry.
Many firms which have reduced production and employment levels have
adopted work-sharing arrangements.
down whole plants for several weeks.

The most common approach has been to shut
A number of firms have also introduced

four-day workweeks; in others, employees work for four weeks and are off the
fifth.

The firms which have adopted four-day weeks and rotating schedules say

they have done so in order to hold onto their workforces.

It is not clear

whether such practices are more common now than in other recessions of
comparable severity; they are certainly more common than in 1980.
Banking
Reports from the banking sector are mixed.

One bank contacted was

enjoying an excellent year, while another reports that loan losses are up

sharply and first quarter earnings were very disappointing.

One banker noted

that passbook savings deposits seem to have stabilized; while his bank was
continuing to lose accounts to the money market funds, this outflow was being
offset by funds from the thrifts.

He did not think his was an isolated

situation.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, Solow and Tobin were available for
comment this month.

Eckstein believes that the risks associated with

continued high interest rates have become uncomfortably high.

If rates do not

decline soon on their own, the Fed will have to ease up on the monetary brake
to insure that a series of cascading bankruptcies do not drag the economy into
a deeper, more prolonged recession.

With respect to inflation, he anticipates

a reversal of food and fuel prices will soon end the days of a declining CPI.
He foresees no budget agreement until after the November election, although
the recent unity among Republicans is an encouraging development.

Eckstein

envisions a final budget including $20-j>30 billion in tax increases and
$30-$35 billion in expenditure reductions, yielding a 1983 deficit of about
$125 billion.
Solow expects an anemic recovery in the second half and notes that
most risks are on the downside.

Interest rate declines due either to a weak

economy or a resolution of the budget stalemate cannot be interpreted as an
easier monetary policy or as enhancing the prospects for recovery.

In fact,

if current monetary policy is appropriate for the current stance of fiscal
policy, a move to fiscal restraint surely implies an easier monetary policy is
needed.

Solow argues that a budget compromise would be the most advantageous

occasion to adopt a more lenient monetary policy without raising inflationary

expectations.

He believes continued progress in reducing the Federal deficit

would be facilitated if monetary policy were to offset the effects of fiscal
restraint.

He fears that, after three years of no economic growth, a stagnant

economy will bring "semi-permanent" damage to the economy's productive
capacity, and preclude strong capital formation and productivity growth.
Tobin also favors a shift in policy mix.

Given the likelihood of high

unemployment this year and next, he doubts that monetary ease would set off an
economic boom that would raise inflation.

Even when inflation has receded, he

fears that the Fed may not tolerate a healthy recovery for fear of throwing
away its victory won at such great cost.
Samuelson believes that given the prevalence of "monetarist
monomania," the Fed should not respond to a budget compromise by violating its
targets only slightly.

The amount of stimulus gained would not be

commensurate with the credibility lost.

Nevertheless, he strongly urges the

Fed not to abandon its role of lender of last resort if unemployment is still
10 percent by the end of the year and the economy Is in real danger of a
depression.

He believes that high interest rates will come down sufficiently

to permit a modest, if delayed, recovery in the second half of the year.

SECOND D I S T R I C T — N E W YORK

Economic activity in the Second District remained
during April.

lackluster

Major retailers reported that consumer spending was weaker

than expected.

New residential construction continued to languish

although some brokers noted a few signs of modest

improvement.

Nonresidential building was still brisk but there was softening in the
office rental market.

Widespread layoffs were noted in the manufacturing

sector. Except for the defense industry, few firms experienced any
increase in new orders.

While the region's unemployment rate remained

below the nation's, business leaders expressed growing concern that the
recession would spread to more sectors of the region's economy.

Consumer Spending
Retail activity in the Second District was weak during April",
as most department stores failed to meet plans which had been considered
to be conservative.
retailers.

Business appears to be getting tougher for many

One symptom is the increasingly widespread use of markdowns

and promotional activity; another symptom is the greater difficulty we
have had in getting retailers to return our phone calls.

One retailer

who works for a department store in New York City which caters to a
well-to-do clientele told us that this was the "most difficult period in
his memory."

While apparel, housewares, and other nondurable goods were

reportedly doing all right, such things as sporting goods, horticultural
items, and big-ticket products were selling poorly.

Despite lagging

sales, inventories at most stores were at acceptable

levels.

Retailers—perennial optimists that they a r e — r e m a i n hopeful about their
prospects for the second half of the year, expecting their sales to
improve in response to the July tax cut.

Construction and Real Estate Activity
Residential construction remained depressed, but there were
a few signs of modest improvement in the housing market.

In New York

City, a broker reported that sales of existing homes in Queens increased
markedly; he attributed the gains to wider acceptance of high but
renegotiable interest rates.

In Manhattan, a continued influx of very

wealthy buyers, frequently paying cash, maintained high demand for luxury
cooperative apartments.

In suburban areas, a better understanding of

"buy downs" was helping to bolster sales.
Nonresidential construction activity remained strong with work
continuing on many new office buildings.

At the same time, however, the

rental market for office space has softened throughout the District,
perhaps foreshadowing a future fall-off in new construction projects.
New York City, for example, landlords granted more concessions to
prospective tenants, including slower escalation of rents and more
structural improvements.

Space available for subleasing rose

significantly as firms which had been holding the space deferred
expansion plans.

One just-completed building had been entirely

pre-leased a year ago, but almost a third of its space was again
available.

Outside of New York City, rents also stabilized, and in

In

western Connecticut, leasing during the first quarter was the lowest in
five years.

Respondents believed, however, that the slowdown was only

temporary.
Business Activity
The District continues to weather the recession relatively well,
with the region's unemployment rate holding steady in April at a level
below the nation's.

The manufacturing sector, however, has been deeply

affected by the recession.
recalls.

Layoffs were widespread with only scattered

Except for the defense industry, few firms reported any pickup

in orders.

Indeed, capital goods producers in western New York

experienced further cancellations.

A producer of traffic and airport

lights shortened its workweek apparently because cuts in state and local
spending dampened public sector demand.

A list of new capital projects

compiled by the New York State Department of Commerce indicated that
fewer major projects are being undertaken this year than last.
Outlook
As we found last month, few respondents outside of retailing
expect a general economic recovery to begin soon.

Most expressed growing

concern that the recession would spread to more sectors of the region's
economy, including business services.

The gloomiest assessment came from

a business leader in western New York

who did not foresee any turnaround

there for another two years.

Many observers were disturbed by talk of

further bankruptcies in the manufacturing sector if conditions did not
improve soon.

Almost all respondents believed that a fall in interest

rates was essential for a recovery.

However, one Port Authority official

did point to a recent increase in piggyback rail traffic as a possible
sign of an incipient upturn.
As for the price outlook, there was little feel for whether the
recent price slowdown was cyclical or permanent.

A number of respondents

echoed the sentiment that, "We'd prefer to go back to the good old days
when the economy was expanding even if that meant higher inflation."
Wage settlements are now lower than a year ago; for example, central New
York firms are projecting overall increases 1 1 / 2 percentage points below
last year's average of 9 percent.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty
Trust Co.), Francis Schott (Equitable Life Assurance Society) and Alfred
Wojnilower (First BostonCorp.):[Asterisk:Theirviewsofcoursearepersonal,

not institutional.]
Riefler;

The Fed should being to modify its monetarist approach

because of the poor correlation between Ml as currently defined and
nominal growth in the economy.

An acceptable range of "real" interest

rates should be developed as a policy guide in addition to monetary
targets.

Federal Reserve credibility would not suffer from this

adjustment.
Schott:

Institutional cash flow remains severely constrained by

high interest rates.

Improvement in Federal budget prospects is

essential, although a modest decline in rates is widely anticipated
anyway because of the recession and favorable inflation figures.

Federal Reserve policy continues to be appropriate.

Despite

much carping over the level of interest rates and over technical points
of monetary policy, responsible executives see no credible alternative to
moderate restraint on the aggregates.
Wojnilower:
near a bottom.

The contraction in business activity appears to be

Capital spending is being cut sharply but the decline in

other final demand has probably ended.
Far too much is being made of the near term impact of the Budget
on interest rates.

The behavior of longer term interest rates over the

next few months will be mainly governed by perceptions of the business
outlook.

It is unlikely that these perceptions will be significantly

influenced by the Budget debate.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District in May continue to point to a bottoming out
of the slump, but hard signs of a pickup are scarce. Manufacturers say industrial activity
is flat in May, compared to a month ago, and industrial prices reflect that softness. This
is the third straight month in which manufacturing activity has remained unchanged.
Retail business, on the other hand, is showing some signs of life after an illness that
lasted through the winter and early spring.

An announcement of total recovery for the

retail sector, however, is still premature. Bankers say business is mixed.
As

for the

outlook,

Third District

contacts

are reasonably

optimistic.

Manufacturers are predicting an upturn within six months, and retail merchants expect
sales to continue at their current pace through summer.

Bankers are forecasting falling

interest rates through the third quarter, but weakness in commercial borrowing.
MANUFACTURING
Stagnation is the keyword for Third District manufacturers in May, according
to preliminary results from the most recent Business Outlook Survey.

Those results

agree with earlier indications that the downward slide in the local industrial sector has
stopped. There are no signs yet, however, of an upturn. Two-thirds of the manufacturing
executives polled this month say general business activity is unchanged from April.
Specific indicators such as new orders and shipments are also flat, but producers'
backlogs and delivery times have slipped marginally.

Liquidation of manufacturing

inventories also continues in May, especially in the durables industries. And, while twothirds of the survey respondents say payrolls are at the same level they were a month
ago, a significant number report further cuts in employment.

Workings hours have been

shortened fractionally as well.
Looking ahead, Outlook Survey participants

continue to forecast gains.

Nearly 70 percent of the respondents say the general business climate will improve

within six months; climbing new orders and shipments are projected by a similar
portion.

Concomitant with the expected expansion are plans to hire more workers and

lengthen the workweek.

Only marginal inventory building is in the picture, though, and

capital spending plans are very weak for the second consecutive month.
Industrial prices in the Third District remain generally stable in May.

Prices

paid by manufacturers for raw materials are up only very marginally over last month, and
prices received for finished goods are virtually flat.
both categories.

There are reports of price cuts in

As for the future, survey participants think prices will pick up with the

projected recovery.

About half expect input costs to be higher six months from now,

while a third are planning price hikes for the goods they sell.
RETAIL
Department store sales in the Philadelphia area are stronger in early May
than in recent weeks.

Current dollar sales volumes are reported to be running four to

five percent ahead of year-ago figures, compared to only a one-to-two-percent gain for
the three months ending April 30.

While such a gain was expected, a good portion of it

comes from aggressive promotions and price reductions, which has put continued pressure
on profit margins. Area retailers say the real strength in sales comes from nondurables,
especially popularly priced apparel, while hard goods continue to lag.

Sluggishness in

durables is attributed to consumer uncertainty about future employment and income,
given the current economic environment.
Local merchants remain cautious about the coming months.

There is some

feeling that both the July 1 tax cut and the July Social Security increase will be used by
consumers to restore liquidity and will therefore be of little help to retailers. Sales are
expected to continue at about their current pace at least through midsummer.

A tight

rein will still be held on inventories, however, and they'll be kept at their current trim
levels.

FINANCE
Third District banking business is mixed this month, according to current
Redbook information.

Consumer borrowing is still off substantially, by design, while

reports of commercial loan activity put current business borrowing three-to-four percent
ahead of the corresponding period in 1981.

Business in both categories has improved

from last month, when compared on a year-over-year basis. The outlook for C&I loans,
though, is not optimistic.
loans based on:

Area bankers are forecasting softening demand for business

1) lower inventory financing requirements in coming months; 2) low

levels of capacity utilization and capital spending; and 3) an expected drop in interest
rates over the summer which may bring long-term corporate debt offerings off the
shelf. Just how much further interest rates will have to drop to make the bond calendar
perk up is open to question. At least one contact thinks they are within 100 basis points
of that level.
Local bankers are currently quoting a prime rate of 16 percent, and see
further cuts on the horizon.

Most contacts anticipate a trough between 14 and 15.5

percent in the prime sometime in the third quarter. After that, they say, they expect a
continuing hard line policy by the Fed to put upward pressure on rates again.
Deposit flows at Third District banks have pretty much worked through the
usual April seasonal problems, and are now showing firmness which some bankers have
termed "surprising."

Demand deposits are slightly higher than they were a year ago, and

savings are up sharply. Neither the new 91-day money market certificate nor the new 3
1/2 year certificate can be credited with that strength, however.
both of those instruments has been very weak.

Consumer response to

Bankers feel that savers still prefer

, money market funds to the 91-day certificate, and that 3 1/2 years is too long-term for
most depositors at this point.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary. Retail sales have flattened but retailers are reluctant
to indicate the timing of recovery.
declines,

Demand for capital goods continues to

Demand for steel may have bottomed at a very low level.

facturers expect inventories to decline again in May.
have become more burdensome.
continue.

Manu-

Retail inventories

Unemployment is rising as plant closings

Ohio farmers are in great financial difficulty.

Business loans

and NOW accounts were flat in early May.
Consumer Spending. Retailers generally believe that declines in
sales have flattened but are reluctant to indicate the timing of recovery.
Several retailers report deferring or cancelling plans to build and open new
outlets over the next few years because of high interest rates and uncertain
profit margins.
in April.

One major retailer places the trough in consumer spending

He points out that declines in spending in March and April offset

nearly one-half of the increase in spending that occurred between last October
and February.

Auto producers are not optimistic that sales will improve much

until well after the scheduled tax decreases in July.
Capital Goods. Capital goods producers continue to face declining
demand for their products.

A manufacturer of machine tools, continuing to

experience lower orders and falling backlogs, is "gearing operations down to
the lower level of business anticipated in 1983."

Another machine tool manu-

facturer recently laid off another 250 employees because of weak orders and
declining backlogs.

A bearing manufacturer expects second quarter orders to

be 8% below first quarter, and backlogs to fall further.

He anticipates some

upturn in demand from auto and farm machinery producers in the second half but

no recovery before yearend in demand from railroad car and machine tool manufacturers.

A major supplier of heavy-duty truck equipment reports that sales

continued to decline in April and expects no recovery in heavy-duty trucks
before yearend.
Steel. There are some indications that demand for steel may have
stopped declining.

One major producer says orders have stabilized at a very

low level but expects industry shipments for the year may be as low as 70 to
75 million tons.

That firms notes that "low volume and very weak prices are

putting the steel industry under great financial pressure.
probably will not survive."

Marginal producers

Another major producer, operating at 48% of

capacity, says "the order book is flat."

The firm expects second quarter

shipments to be no better than in the first quarter, which had the lowest nonstrike level of shipments in 40 years.
Inventories. A sample of manufacturers report that their inventories
fell in April and will fall again in May.

Most producers of primary metals

and industrial machinery expect to continue to cut inventories.

A producer

of paint and a paper manufacturer expect to add to inventories.

A petroleum

company expects crude oil inventories to continue the decline that began in
mid-February.

Petroleum product inventories dropped sharply in the first

quarter and should, on balance, decline slightly in second quarter.

Bearing

inventories held by producers and customers fell in first quarter, but little
change is expected in the second quarter.

Inventories of heavy-duty trucks

were reduced substantially in March but the further decline in sales in April
has deferred the completion of the inventory liquidation.

Automobile producers

are no longer concerned about new car inventories, except on a spot basis.

Retail inventories of department-store-type goods have become more
burdensome because of declines in sales in March and April.
Unemployment and Plant Closings. The effects of recession continue
to spread and deepen throughout the Fourth District.

The April SA unemploy-

ment rate was 12.4% in Ohio and 10.7% in Pennsylvania, well above the nation's
9.4%.
Plant closings continue in the District although some have been
avoided or rescinded because of worker concessions.

National Steel wants to

sell or close its 11,500 employee steel plant in Weirton, West Virginia and
Colt Industries wants to sell or close its 4,300 employee Crucible Steel
Division plant in Midland, Pennsylvania.

AM International wants to close

or sell its 500 employee duplicating machine parts plant in Cleveland.

B.

F. Goodrich recently agreed to continue operating its 2,000 employee Akron
industrial products plant for 3 years in exchange for union contract concessions.
GMC is closing a 1,200 employee stamping plant in Cleveland but has rescinded
the planned closing of a 1,400 employee trim plant in Cleveland in exchange
for union concessions.
Agriculture. The widespread nature of the recession is illustrated
by the increasing plight of farmers, especially those in southwest Ohio.
Many are finding it hard to obtain credit.

The Ohio Department of Agriculture

expects four times the usual number of Ohio farmer bankruptcies this year and
expects nearly one-fourth of the state's farm machinery dealers to close or be
sold.

The Department also notes that a number of grain elevator operations

are in financial difficulty.
Financial Institutions. Business loans and NOW accounts were flat
in early May, and one banker reported more switching of deposits out of

S&L's.

Two major banks report C and I loans declined during the last

two weeks of April, were flat in the first few days of May, and are expected
to be flat for the month.

Another large bank reports that C and I loans

have remained strong in recent weeks but a definite slowing in commitments
will show up in reduced loans in the months ahead.

Some bankers characterize

much C and I activity as "distress borrowing" and "not for expansion but just
to pay bills".
NOW accounts at two large commercial banks declined in the last two
weeks of April and were flat or down a bit in the first week of May.

One

banker reports that the silent run on S&L's has been augmented in the last
month by frequent instances of early withdrawal of small CD's by depositors
who accept the penalty and shift funds to sometimes lower yielding
in commercial banks.

certificates

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Fifth District economic and business activity continues almost uniformly weak.
improve.

There is virtually no evidence that conditions have begun to

District manufacturers report further declines in shipments and

new orders over the past month.

In addition, order backlogs, inventories,

and employment are said to have fallen broadly.

Retail sales activity has

been essentially flat in recent weeks and remains moderately weak.
tivity is pervasively weak.

Business lending, as well as mortgage activity, is

said to be generally soft, nil in some areas.
stronger.

Housing ac-

Consumer lending is somewhat

Most of the manufacturers surveyed expect business conditions to

improve over the next two quarters.

Few Richmond directors, however, expect

the recession to end before fall.
The Manufacturing

Sector

District manufacturers report further declines in shipments, new
orders, and order backlogs since the last survey period.
also fell while stocks of finished goods were stable.

Materials

inventories

Employment and the

length of the average workweek were also said to be down sharply.

Reductions

in manufacturing employment have spread across the District and along with
the construction sector have resulted in unemployment
in some Fifth District states.
in 1975.

rates above the national

In some cases current rates were topped only

Construction and automobile related industries are among the most

severely affected.

Layoffs and plant closings in such industries as textiles,

tires, furniture, glass, building materials, and others have contributed significantly.

Despite the decline the inventories, manufacturers still view stocks
as excessive and nearly half our respondents find current plant and equipment
exceeding present needs.

The survey further suggests that prices, including

wages, have fallen, on balance, in recent weeks.

Furthermore, respondents

are considerably more optimistic than in recent months.

Over half the manu-

facturers expect the level of business activity nationally, as well as in
their respective markets and firms, to improve over the next six months.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales also remain generally soft.

There are few signs of any

pickup in activity and little expectation that any will develop over the next
few months.

Responses from our directors and our survey of retailers suggest

that some recovery in housing is essential to a general recovery in the consumption sector.

Our contacts in the financial sector indicate that although

installment lending has shown some signs of life, consumers generally are paying down debt and increasing savings.
Housing and Construction
Housing remains uniformly weak and other construction sectors seem
to have lost some of the buoyancy of recent months.

There remains little

optimism concerning the short term prospects in this sector.

Richmond

directors, for instance, do not now expect stronger new housing activity
any time this year.
Agriculture
Farm credit conditions in the District generally remain depressed.
Foreclosures on farm borrowers at the end of 1981 were reported by more than
one-fifth of our banker respondents.

The number of foreclosures represented

a relatively small share of all farm borrowers at the respective banks, however.

In general, requests for refinancing farm loans to avoid default were greater
than usual.
Credit conditions during the quarter ending March 31, 1982 were
characterized by soft farm loan demand,

further deterioration in the quality

of farm loans, and a modest rise in interest rates.

Bank

funds available for

lending to farmers remained at a high l e v e l — u p from both the previous quarter
and a year a g o — b u t collateral requirements jumped sharply.

Loan-to-deposit

ratios of banks reporting averaged slightly higher than in the previous quarter
but were still fractionally below a year ago.
The Outlook
The outlook can only be described as mixed.
more and more optimistic in recent months.
to have improved by late fall.

Manufacturers have become

As noted, most expect conditions

Retailers on the other hand, do not seem to

feel that any recovery is imminent.

Richmond directors clearly believe that

any recovery is still several months away, probably not before fall.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA

Business conditions in the Sixth District are somewhat mixed at this time.
Limited signs of recovery are evident in tourism and construction, but other sectors
remain depressed and firms are hesitant to expand employment and inventories.

Heavy

industries are more depressed than in years, and industry spokespersons are not optimistic
about any near-term upturn.

Higher prices for calves and hogs have improved cash

flow for farmers, but a high level of debt remains difficult to carry.
Consumer Spending.
ticket

appliance sales

are

Reports on retail sales in the District are mixed.

up noticeably

in

Miami

and New

Orleans,

entertainment products are showing widespread strength in the District.

Big-

and home
There are

reports that Easter buying of clothing was lower than last year, and wholesale buyers
say consumers are very quality- and bargain-conscious.
remains slow and the floor-covering business is poor.

Traffic in furniture stores
Retailers continue to keep a

tight rein on inventories, and wholesale clothes buyers are even delaying purchases for
the fall season.
Auto sales remain poor.

Domestic car sales in most of the District are

below year-ago levels but are stronger than foreign car sales.

High interest rates still

limit sales and squeeze profit margins, but dealers are hanging on.

Dealer closings do

not appear to be accelerating.
Financial and Construction.

The behavior of loan demand is generally

consistent with geographic differences in the severity of the recession.

Bankers in the

more depressed areas of the District told of weak demand for both consumer and
business lending.

By contrast, lenders in Georgia and Florida, where unemployment

rates are well below the national rate, spoke of strong loan demand.

A few bankers

expressed concern that strong lending may be an indication of poor sales.

Residential construction is showing some sign of improvement.

Permits

issued to build single-family houses are up in April and early May in many areas of
the District.
to build.

Permits are being issued to home purchasers with cash in hand, ready

Realtors report a slight pickup in sales.

Atlanta's "mini-boom" in sales is

being supported by relocation of employees of Georgia-Pacific.

Throughout the District,

homes have been moved primarily with innovative financing; conventional rates are
reported still too high for home buyers.
over but remain cautious.

Realtors feel the worst of the recession is

Homebuilders remain very pessimistic, since sales are almost

entirely existing homes and new home inventories remain high.

Throughout the District,

vacancy rates for both residential and commercial dwellings have increased.
Employment and Industry.

Unemployment rates continued to drift upward

in the District in March as employment contracted and the labor force continued to
expand.

The six-state average jobless rate reached 9.9 percent in March, 0.7 percent

higher than the February rate and 0.8 percent higher than the national rate in March.
Except for services and paper, job declines are still prevalent in many industries.
Alabama has been particularly hard hit, with an unemployment rate of 13.6
percent.

The situation there may deteriorate even more as U. S. Steel Corporation is

considering a temporary shutdown of its operations near Birmingham because of declining
orders and competition from imported steel.

The plant, Birmingham's largest, has 3,200

people currently at work with close to 7,000 of its May 1980 work force on layoff.
The state's important textile and forest product firms have hundreds of workers on
layoff due to the weakness in construction and auto sales.
Layoffs have surfaced even in industries thought to be insulated from the
recession.

In Louisiana, orders for oil-field structures and drilling rigs, in particular,

have taken a nose dive, prompting layoffs in the oil rig and equipment fabricating
business.

Phosphate mining has slowed noticeably in central Florida.

Recent closing of

a phosphate-based fertilizer plant in Savannah, Georgia, is indicative of weakness in
the farming area. The region's largest manufacturer of satellite and telecommunications
equipment has laid off workers for the first time in years.
continues to be foreign trade.

For Florida, a bright spot

A new record was set in 1981 as the actual value of

goods exported increased $1 billion over the previous year. South Florida has contributed
heavily to these exports.
The tourism industry appears to be reviving in Florida, following what was
characterized as a ho-hum start to the season.

Low hotel/motel occupancy rates for

the month of February were reversed during March and April.
and discount air fares have stimulated travel to the state.

Lower gasoline prices

Traffic counts are up and

reports of heavy summer bookings at lodging places suggest a healthy summer for
tourism.

Attendance at the World's Fair in Knoxville, Tennessee, has not kept pace

with projections in spite of heavy promotion.
school is out.

Officials predict a surge of visitors when

The fair is scheduled to run for six months.

Agriculture.

Rising prices of calves and hogs have somewhat brightened the

agricultural picture in the Southeast; however, crop prices are not yet offering much
encouragement to farmers who need increasing profits to repay large debt overhangs
from prior unfavorable seasons.
in current markets.

Many farmers owe more than their assets are worth

However, lenders are continuing to work with borrowers if there

is any hope of recovery from current financial straits.

Foreclosure sales of farm

property have produced few bidders for either land or machinery.

In most cases, lenders

have purchased property at the loan value in order to prevent losses of loan principle.
There have been few actual sales of farmland, and a representative market value is
difficult to establish.

Estimates of the decline in land value from year-ago levels

range from zero to as much as 20 percent.

District Economists.

District bank and business economists polled this month

agree that the FOMC is on the right track and should stick to its announced policies.
They believe these policies will soon result in reduced inflationary expectations and
help to lower interest rates.

The panel is concerned that projected budget deficits

will keep interest rates high in the coming expansion and, consequently, limit private
sector growth.

Some panelists argue that the relatively high current interest rates for

this stage of the recession are causing more severe liquidations and pressure on profit
margins than usual.
inflation relief.

They say the liquidations are, in turn, providing earlier-than-usual

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

Seventh District economic activity remains very weak.

expected, or hoped for, spring upturn has not developed.

At best the decline

is leveling off, but further softening is evident in producer goods.
is no evidence that a significant pickup will occur soon.
cautious.

The

There

Consumers are very

Deepening financial problems are causing corporate executives to

push austerity programs.

Purchasing managers reported continuing declines in

output, employment, inventories, and orders in April, but the rate of decline
apparently moderated.
further.

Inventories are said to be low, but are being reduced

Price cutting is widespread.

aiding foreign competitors.
postwar low this year.

The high value of the dollar is

Construction activity probably will set a

Farmers are encouraged by the rise in livestock

prices, but income prospects, overall, remain poor and farmland values have
been declining since last fall.
A Dismal Profile.

The region of the Seventh District has been in a

depressed state for three years.

In March, total payroll employment in the

five-state area was 7 percent below March 19-79.
recent decline, it was still up 2 percent.

Nationally, despite the

Manufacturing employment was down

19 percent in the district, compared to a decline of 8 percent for the
nation.

The situation appears to have worsened somewhat since March, with

further layoffs in a wide variety of activities.

Weakness is pervasive, not

only in manufacturing, but in construction, transportation, trade, agriculture, and state and local government.

Michigan has the most serious employ-

ment problem, but all district states compare unfavorably with the nation.

Austerity Programs.

With hopes fading for an early recovery, many

individuals, businesses, farmers, and state and local governments are retrenching on-new outlays and commitments.

Businesses are cutting staff,

reducing compensation (when possible), paring inventories, and postponing or
cancelling capital expenditure projects.

Less essential outlays on travel,

public relations, market research, advertising and sales promotion are under
very close scrutiny.

Under the circumstances, the danger of a cumulative

downturn is greater than at any time since World War II.
Bankruptcies and Closings.

Financial stress is reflected in a wave of

bankruptcies and closings of factories and retail establishments.
filings have shot up.

Chapter 11

In one jurisdiction there were more Chapter 11 cases

in March than in all of 1981.

Bankruptcies of smaller manufacturers, re-

tailers, truckers, real estate companies, and farm-related enterprises are
most frequent.

Some larger firms, technically insolvent, are operating under

special arrangements with creditors or are being kept afloat by parent
companies.

Many stores have been closed either because of bankruptcy or

unprofitable results.

Permanent plant closings are also frequent, especially

manufacturers who have lost supplier contracts with OEM's.

One result of

shutdowns is the large volume of forced sales of relatively new vehicles and
other equipment.
Inflation.

A dramatic shift in the inflation picture has occurred since

the start of the year.

Price discounting is more common that at any time

since the 1930's, and is especially prevalent in steel, nonferrous metals,
building materials, paper, and transportation—rail, truck, and air.

Many

observers believe that discounted prices will surge once sales improve.
drop in petroleum prices is believed to have ended.

The

Prices of medical and

utility services, and many manufactured goods, continue to rise at a rapid
pace.

Nevertheless, assumptions on the long-term inflation rate have been

scaled back from 10 percent to 8 percent or less.
Employment.

Layoffs, either temporary, indefinite, or permanent con-

tinue not only in manufacturing but also in trade, transportation, real
estate, and finance—particularly S & L's.
offices are hard pressed.
Labor Concessions.
continue.

Facilities of state employment

Many workers are exhausting unemployment benefits.
Negotiations for concessions on labor contracts

In the main, these agreements have merely slowed increases in

total compensation.

Some new labor agreements call for first-year wage

boosts in the 8-10 percent range, even in depressed industries.

The auto

industry seems to have reconciled itself to high domestic labor costs, now
$21 per hour, with a view to substantially increasing foreign sourcing of
major components, including engines.
Motor Vehicles.

Small truck sales rose sharply in the first quarter,

partly reflecting a favorable reception for new domestic compact trucks.
Demand for heavy trucks remains very weak.

Total car sales slipped back in

April after major rebate programs expired.

Nevertheless, output of cars will

rise substantially in the second quarter because inventories were reduced in
the first quarter.

Truck output is above last year.

Capital Expenditures.
deteriorate.

The outlook for producer durables continues to

Various manufacturers report orders off 30 to 60 percent from

last year's mediocre levels, with backlogs "evaporating".
harbor" leasing is very strong.

Support for "safe

Among the weakest lines are equipment for

railroads, trucklines, construction, and agriculture.

Machine tools and oil

and gas field items are declining rapidly.

The largest locomotive plant,

scheduled to close, will remain open due to orders booked recently.
Steel.

Demand for steel has been much weaker than expected, especially

for heavy products.

Estimates for 1982 shipments have been reduced further.

Some facilities are being closed.
State and Local Governments.

Virtually all state and local governments

are seeking to prevent or reduce large prospective budget deficits.

Efforts

to reduce employee compensation, or moderate increases, are meeting strong
union opposition.

Various programs are being scaled down and facilities are

being closed.
Construction.
low ebb.

Home sales and residential construction remain at a very

Housing permits in the Chicago area were under 800 in the first

quarter, compared to 2,300 a year ago, and over 7,000 in the first quarter of
1978.

Creative financing is helping to move some existing properties but is

not boosting new construction.
Agriculture.

Although the district agricultural picture remains bleak,

livestock producers are enjoying modest profits due to higher prices and low
feed costs.

Capital expenditures by farmers remain weak overall, especially

for machinery, but orders for grain storage facilities have improved recently.

Our latest quarterly survey of agricultural banks shows district

land values down 4.5 percent since the beginning of the year, and down 7.5
percent since last September.

The number of real estate transactions is down

and foreclosures and forced sales account for a small, but much higherthan-normal, share of the total.
has progressed rapidly.

Field work, after a somewhat late start,

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

During April and early May, business activity In the St. Louis
District was virtually unchanged.

Most respondents feel that the economy

is at or near the trough of the recession.

Retailers and most

manufacturers continue to experience weak sales.

Although respondents

anticipate a recovery beginning within the next few months, they expect
that the early upswing will be sluggish.

Yet, with a gradual acceleration

of economic activity and with the pace of inflation receding, they expect
the expansion to be sustained for a relatively long period.
Major department stores in St. Louis and smaller merchants
scattered across the District report continued weak sales in April and
early May, particularly for durable goods.

Farm equipment dealers have

made few sales, although farmers continue to buy large amounts of
herbicides.

Retail sales picked up temporarily following the severe

winter, and some store managers, anticipating a prolonged upswing in
activity, increased orders from suppliers.

Since sales soon fell again,

these excessive inventories must now be worked off.

Some retailers noted

that consumers are saving at a greater rate than in the past several years,
reflecting the high interest rates available to savers and a lower expected
rate of inflation.
One bright spot is that automobile dealers have increased car
sales in the past two m o n t h s — a continuation of the uptrend reported in the
last redbook.
depressed.

Despite the gains, automobile sales remain relatively

In St. Louis, the demand for mid-sized cars has strengthened,

whereas in some smaller cities, the greatest improvement has been in
larger- and smaller-sized rather than medium-sized cars.

Financing

purchases with below-market 12.8 percent loans and the granting of direct
rebates have helped car sales.
Industrial activity has been unchanged on balance since March.
Defense procurement remains vigorous, while sales by food producers were
about normal.

Orders remain at relatively depressed levels at firms

producing consumer durables, chemicals, aluminum, wood products, industrial
equipment and refined oil products.

Because of the continued economic

weakness and expectations of only a gradual recovery, several
medium-to-large producers have trimmed capital spending plans in the past
two months.
Most manufacturers have held inventories at or near desired
levels.

In order to avoid inventory accumulation, they have maintained

production at relatively low levels.

A major chemical company operated at

67 percent of capacity in April, about the same rate as in the first
quarter.

One specialty food processor closed down its operations for two

days to avoid inventory e x p a n s i o n — a n unusual development in this industry.
Employment has remained relatively stable since March.

Several

firms, however, have imposed a "freeze" on new hiring, allowing employment
to decline with attrition.

On the other hand, a few smaller firms,

especially in the service industries, have increased their work forces.
Several firms noted that employee dedication had improved, and absenteeism
had declined

recently.

Throughout the region, residential home sales continue to be
weak.

Some dealers claim that the market is virtually dead; one real

estate agency that had been reporting to us went out of business in April
According to most respondents, high interest rates, high home prices and
low level of economic activity are major factors contributing to the lack
of sales.
Commercial banks, both large and small, have experienced only
minor changes in loans and deposits since March.

Deposits and loans at

most savings and loan associations have also changed little.

Most saving

and loans are still operating at a loss, estimated at an annual rate of 1
to 2 percent of total mortgage loans outstanding.
rapidly eating into their capital.

This negative margin i

Five associations located in the St.

Louis area are currently being liquidated.
Weather conditions have been favorable for land preparation and
planting in the District.

Also, relatively wide feeding margins are

benefiting most livestock producers.

Farmers, however, are registering

complaints about high interest rates and low grain prices.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Whatever

the

harbingers

national level, we see scant

of economic

recovery

are

indicating

at

the

evidence of a turn-around in the Ninth District

so far.

Instead of recovering this spring as we had earlier hoped, the Ninth

District

economy

has

continued

sisted, and this has hurt
ues.

High

technology

strength until

poor

in April.

bank

lending.

started

which

had

been an

land

important

slowing, and other industrial activity

only

these

bright

weaknesses

spots

was

the

in the District

continuing
this

val-

source

In addition, general merchandise and home sales

Reflecting
The

The decline in farm income per-

farm-related businesses and agricultural

manufacturing,

recently,

tinued to decline.

to atrophy.

con-

remained

softness

spring were

signs that agricultural conditions may be improving, and a continued

of

in

some

strength-

ening in motor vehicle sales.

Agricultural Conditions
Agricultural

income

slipped

further

this

spring.

For

the

third

consecutive year, over 50 percent of district bankers responding to our spring
Agricultural Credit Conditions Survey indicated that their areas' farm incomes
were down from a year ago.

During each of the last three years this percent-

age has increased, and this spring 9*+ percent reported falling farm incomes.
The
businesses.

persistent

decline

Rural bankers and

in

farm

income

farm suppliers

has

strained

farm-related

indicate that many farmers are

having difficulty paying their bills which, in turn, has hurt the liquidity of
farm-related
reduced

businesses.

Consequently, many of these businesses

credit to farmers or eliminated

it.

have

either

Also, with incomes so low, many

farmers
and

have

cut

machinery,

back

which

sharply
could

on their purchases

reduce

falling sales and a liquidity
of business.
Dakota

output

next

of feed, seed,
fall.

This

in March,

An SBA official attributes

combination

squeeze has driven some farm-related

The number of Small Business Administration

liquidated

fertilizer,

firms out

(SRA) loans in South

for example, was up 50 percent
a substantial part

of

from a year

ago.

of the increase to failures of

farm implement dealers.
Reduced
the

farm

income

has also,

farmer's principal a s s e t — l a n d .

not

suprisingly,

eroded

the value

of

Conversation with bankers, Federal Land

Bank officials, and real estate agents indicate that farm land values throughout the district are down, or at best unchanged from a year ago.
survey

of

farm

real

indicated that area's
year.

estate

agents

in west

central

Minnesota,

An informal
for

example,

farm land prices were down 5 to 10 percent in the last

This is in marked contrast to the previous five years when the average

annual increase in Minnesota
may be having trouble

farm land values was about 13 percent.

getting

even the currently

asked prices,

Farmers

for our con-

tacts indicate that very little farm land is actually changing hands.
Despite these poor conditions, area bankers expect that most

farmers

will survive, and there are some indications that the situation may be improving,

at

least

for livestock

boost

livestock prices

tinue

to

prices

rise

producers.

A

reduction

in hog

output

began

to

late last year, and these prices are e j e c t e d to con-

into the

should provide at

summer.
least

Combined with
some temporary

low

feed

relief.

costs,

these

higher

Also, the possibility

of a rapid cut in dairy price supports, which according to some Minnesota and
Wisconsin bankers would have caught many dairy farmers unprepared,
has been postponed.

apparently

Glimmerings

of

near-term

Despite recent strengthening

optimism

are fainter

for crop

growers.

in grain and soybean prices due to seasonal

factors and concern over Argentina's ability to export, these prices remain
low.

The best that can be said is that grain export shipments have recently

firmed a bit and that the sign-up for the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
set-aside acreage program was high, with farmers at least contemplating reduced seeding on 80 percent of the eligible acreage.
will probably not reduce grain output much.

The set-aside program

However, farmers who continue to

participate in the program will be able to receive government loans in return
for storing their crop next fall, thereby guaranteeing their cash-flow and
strengthening fall prices.

Industrial Activity
High
district

technology

econony

manufacturing

has

been

during the past three years when

Very recently, this group began to wobble too.
and peripheral
area
A

equipment

workers)

for

states

another
that

his

computer
firm's

important

prop

farm income was

business

has

the

shrinking.

in the Minneapolis/St.

its employees to take unpaid

manufacturer

to

Declining orders for computers

caused one manufacturer

(2lt,000 employees) to encourage

spokesman

an

in

the

recently

Twin

vacations.

Cities

"stalled."

Paul

(10,500
Also,

a

local manufacturer of super computers recently cut the number of computers it
plans to ship this year from l6 to lH.
Along with

the very

recent

let-up

in high technology

the decline in other manufacturing, as reported
tinued.

in recent

manufacturing,

Redbooks, has con-

Firms producing temperature controls, packaging materials,

filters, and mobile homes have all recently

reported

reduced

industrial

orders and pro-

duction.

Confirming

these

declines,

a

spokesperson

apolis/St.

Paul trucking firm states that recent

for

shipments

a

large

Minne-

from manufacturers

have been falling.
Mining and forest products also continue
iron

mining

except

operations

are

for paper mills,

going

to

be

forest product

in the doldrums.

resumed

later

operations

than

Shutdown

expected;

have been cut back

and,

farther

at both ends of the district.

Consumer Spending
Consumer
Paul

retailers

Also,

after

spending

report

home

weak

sales

March, the president

has continued to slip.
sales

showed

in April as

some

signs

Two

they

have

of reviving

of the Greater Minneapolis

large

Board

Minneapolis/St.

for several

in February
of Realtors

months.

and

early

indicates

that they leveled off in April and were down k2 percent from a year ago.
In contrast to home sales, motor vehicle sales have continued
earlier improvement
tic

motor

vehicle

truck sales.
up

about

15

sufficiency

into April.

their

Regional sales managers for two large domes-

manufacturers

attribute

this

improvement

to

rising

light

Their companies' small truck sales in the district in April were
percent

from a year

of current

ago,

inventories.

and

Auto

they

are

sales, they

even

worried

about

report, have been

the
sub-

stantially less strong.

Financial Developments
The slippage in the district's real economy is reflected in continued
weakness
demand

in bank

at

Twin

lending.
Cities

According

banks

remained

to a Minneapolis/St. Paul banker,
sluggish

in April.

Outside

the

loan
Twin

Cities, hf percent of the bankers responding to our spring Agricultural Credit
Conditions Survey
sired."

termed their

loan-to-deposit

ratios as "lower than de-

This was the highest percentage of respondents expressing this view

in the 17-year history of the survey.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Business conditions remain generally weak in the Tenth

District, although pockets of optimism and strength do exist.

Recent

weakness in retail sales is expected to continue into the fourth quarter,
although automobile dealers evince some guarded optimism.

Industrial

materials prices are still falling, but are expected to stabilize soon.
Manufacturers are attempting to trim their inventories further, and retail
inventories are also viewed as somewhat excessive.

Although there are some

signs of improved profitability in livestock production, agricultural loans
are being put under increasing scrutiny.

Total loan demand at commercial

banks remains flat, with some weakness evident in energy sector loans.
Retail Trade.

Except in the energy producing areas of the Tenth

District, retailers report small declines in nominal sales in the first four
months of 1982 relative to the same time period in 1981.

In the areas where

energy development has spurred the economy, sales were reported as 10-20
percent higher than last year.
and April.

Throughout the District, sales slowed in March

Weakness was apparent in appliance, lawn and garden, and home

improvement merchandise.

Due to recent slack sales, most retailers have

excess inventory which has put some downward pressure on profit margins.
Retailers, however, report merchandise, utility, and labor costs have stabilized
so profits may be down less than might have been expected.

Most retailers

indicate that they expect the weakness in sales to continue through the
first two months of the fourth quarter.

In those areas where energy production

is important, however, retailers expect sales to continue to be well over 1981
levels.

Automobile Dealers Associations.

Automobile dealers in the Tenth

District are more optimistic than they were six weeks ago, in'spite of
continued slow sales and high interest rates.

With the exception of

Oklahoma's 9 percent increase, Tenth District automobile sales remain
depressed, in some areas down 5 to 10 percent from a year ago.
have now stabilized at low levels.

Inventories

Dealers intimate a sense of guarded

optimism, convinced of the existence of pent-up demand.
Purchasing Agents.

Almost all purchasing agents report prices for

major new materials ranging from 5 percent to 18 percent lower than a year
ago.

Stable or slightly increasing prices are expected for the remainder of

the year.

Input availability is not a problem within the Tenth District,

with the exception of the heavy metal industries where 2-3 weeks lead times
are being experienced.

Most of the companies contacted are continuing to

trim inventories.
Agriculture.

Many Tenth District bankers are currently increasing

their loan loss provisions.

It is estimated that an average of 30 percent

of agricultural loans and 20 percent of nonagricultural loans are receiving
careful scrutiny on a monthly basis by commercial bankers within the District.
Some of the more careful monitoring by bankers is due to increased numbers of
customers with adequate cash flow but insufficient collateral.

Banks and

Production Credit Associations report a slight increase in voluntary business
liquidations as a last resort method of preserving remaining assets prior to
forced bankruptcy.
District bankers report some damage to the winter wheat crop as a
result of the recent freeze, but not nearly as severe as last year's frost

damage.

Recent improvement in cattle prices has had a significant impact

on the profitability of cattle producers in the first quarter of 1982.

Hog

production likewise is showing signs of improved profitability.
Banking Developments.

Reported loan demand is generally

as flat throughout the Tenth District.

characterized

The energy sector, previously a

source of strength, continues to weaken resulting in slower demand for commercial and industrial loans and commercial construction financing.

The

recently announced shutdown of the Exxon shale oil project is seen as having
an adverse effect on the economy and financial institutions in western
Colorado.

More generally, several bankers express concern over the profit-

ability of energy loans in light of the decline in world oil prices.

Consumer,

residential construction, and agricultural lending activity continue to be
depressed.
Much of the deposit activity in recent weeks is seen as tax-related
or seasonal in nature.

However, some banks report an increase in receiv-

ables and inventory financing.

In addition, several banks indicate that

customers are continuing to transfer funds out of thrift institutions into
small time and savings deposits at banks.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The repercussions
the Eleventh District
markets

and

a

few

of the drop

economy

other

despite

sectors.

in crude oil prices have weakened

encouraging
Housing

signs

sales

and

from

the

starts

increasing, as are business loans and department store sales.
the April

decline

in U.S. auto

remained at March

levels.

sales, District

Nevertheless,

housing

are

And, despite

auto sales appear

declines

still

in oil and gas

to have
drilling

and low production at oil refineries and petrochemical plants have reduced
orders

in the steel,

fabricated metal, and

oil well

servicing

industries.

Total employment is declining and the unemployment rate is on the rise.
Oil

field

related

activity

continues

to

decline

evidence

that crude oil prices are beginning to rise again.

drilling

rigs

operating

in

the

District

since the peak in mid-December.
units

less

than

a year

ago.

states

has

despite

some

The number of

fallen

22.5

percent

At 2,305 rigs, the count is currently 200
Oil

well

completions

have

fallen

as well.

Hence, oil well servicing contracts are also down.
The
industry

slow

downward

suppliers.

While

stagnated,

the

industries

fell.

industries,

saw demand

dried

up.

industry,
risen

due

production
Steel

Demand
however,
to

semiconductors.

trend

drop

oil
of

refining

machinery

and
and

equipment

already

further

as new orders

steel

held

firm.

products
Orders

defense

hurt

by
in

the
the

spending

output

spread

petrochemical

firms,

for

increased

in manufacturing

by

oil

production

used

in

these

declines

in

other

for oil

field

commercial

electronics
and

to

greater

Apparel production remains at low levels.

equipment

construction
industry

have

demand

for

Residential
New housing

Construction

starts and

continues

to

show

sales are up to roughly

minor

the same levels as a year

ago, when the housing industry entered the current slump.
mortgage

commitments

at Texas

still below year-ago
starts

are

levels.

approximately

S & L's

are

Condominium

the

same

as

improvement.

increasing,

In addition, new
although

sales are slowing.

they

were

in

they

are

Condominium

March.

Apartment

construction appears to be picking up from the slow growth of last fall.
The
rate.

The

pace

of

majority

construction where
started

to

commercial
of

the

construction

activity

it is estimated

sustain

the

industry

that
for

is

remains
still

steady

in

at

office

a high
building

there are enough projects

two

years.

already

Announcements

of

new

projects, however, remain below last year's heady pace.
Domestic auto sales have not changed much, but their product mix
has.

GMAC financing

of other

domestic

(12.8 percent) has

and

imported

autos.

increased GM sales at the expense
Large model

domestics

continue

to

sell well even though gasoline prices are showing

signs of reversing their

decline.

in response

sales

Inventories have

at non-GM dealers.

begun
No

to creep upward

significant

change

in sales

to

slipping

is expected

for

the remainder of the month.
Lending

activity

percentage

increase

well

of the average

ahead

petrochemical

at

commercial

in the dollar value of

and refining

banks
loans

increase of the past
industries

show major

has

picked

for the year

five years.
increases

up.

The

to date

Loans
since

is

to the

January.

Real estate loans are trending upward.
not

yet

abated.

Construction

The decline

loans,

while

January, are well ahead of last year.

in consumer

showing

a net

loans has

decline

since

Total deposits have increased

since

March as a result of strong growth in time deposits.
Department store sales have increased moderately.
lines have sold below expectations
ticket

items

continue

to move

due to unseasonally

slowly.

Retail

sales

However, soft

cool weather.
along

the

Big

Mexican

border still suffer from the peso's February devaluation, and probably will
for some time.

Department

stores there are scaling down

future purchases

and trying to work off their swollen inventories.
The unemployment rate for Texas rose to a seasonally adjusted 6.5
percent

in April,

employment

since

from

5.9

February

percent

was

to

layoffs

March.

overshadowed

number of people looking for work.
mainly

in

by

A
a

moderate
large

increase

increase

in

in
the

The rise in unemployment is attributed

in manufacturing,

although

in-migration

of

unemployed

workers from the industrial Midwest was also a clear contributor.
Farm

liquidations

are numerous

with low prices, keep farm incomes down.
inflation in land values have slowed.
values are deflating.

The result

as high operating

costs,

coupled

Increases in farmers' equity from

In some parts of the District, land

is that

to borrow to finance current production.

farmers are increasingly unable

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economic recession does not appear to have ended.
The general pattern of economic activity since the last report has
continued to be downward.

Consumer spending during the Easter season was

disappointing, with sales in April just about matching the year-ago pace,
representing a decline in real terms.

In the manufacturing and mining

sectors, a number of industries are undergoing a new wave of production
cutbacks.
equipment.

The only notable improvement in sales has occurred in electronic
Homebuilding has picked up recently, but the continued decline

in home sales suggests the recovery may not be sustained.

Storms have

inflicted serious damage on the California agriculture industry, and crop
prices generally remain below the level of a year ago.

Bank credit growth

at Twelfth District banks has slowed considerably since February, as the
weakness in the regional economy and the heavy debt burden of borrowers has
stifled business loan demand.
Consumer Spending
Respondants report that retail sales throughout the Twelfth District
continue to be slow.

Department store sales in April apparently just about

matched the dollar volume of a year-ago, representing a decline in real
terms.

Easter business picked up seasonally but was disappointing relative

to the level of a year-earlier.

Not even price discounts and heavy

advertising campaigns were effective in significantly spurring sales.
Sales of durable goods, such as furniture and appliances, continue to be
particularly weak, due both to the housing slump and the reluctance of
consumers to incur new debt.

Sales of nondurable goods have been holding

up better, but even grocery stores have been feeling the effects of
recession.

An increasing number of small retail outlets are going out of

business.

Sales of new automobiles declined in April, despite offers of

below-market financing and free warranty programs.
Manufacturing and Mining
Twelfth District manufacturing and mining industries have been
undergoing a new wave of layoffs and production cutbacks in recent weeks.
While employment in the lumber segment of the forest products industry has
stabilized, the paper industry continues to cut back production.

Layoffs

also continue in the construction, commercial aircraft, and metals
industries.

Due to numerous commercial aircraft order cancellations, the

Boeing Company in Seattle now plans to layoff at least 8,000 workers by
year-end, instead of the 5,000 announced earlier.

Partly as a result of

these cutbacks, Pacific Northwest aluminum producers also are cutting
production further.

Other regional metals industries are sinking deeper

into recession as a result of depressed demand from the national
automobile, appliance and construction industries.

In mid-April, Phelps

Dodge Corporation closed nearly all of its copper mines and smelters in
Arizona and New Mexico for an extended period, laying off 3,800 workers.
Declining world oil prices also are forcing cutbacks in such energy
programs as oil drilling, oil shale development and coal production.

The

only significant improvement in sales is occurring in the electronic
equipment manufacturing industry, both as a result of a pickup in
commercial orders and continued strength in defense business.
Construction and Real Estate
The Twelfth District is finally experiencing a pickup in homebuilding.
But regional housing starts had dropped to a post-World War II low in
February, so residential construction remains extremely depressed.
Moreover, sales of new homes have continued to drop, and since inventories
of unsold homes are still high, it is doubtful the recovery can be

sustained until those inventories are worked off.

California realtors are

concerned that the Supreme Court may rule that home buyers in the state may
no longer assume existing low-interest loans.
reduce sales of older homes.

Such a ruling would further

Meanwhile, the slump in sales is further

eroding selling prices for both new and older single-family homes and
condominiums.

Nonresidential construction activity also is slowing

substantially.

Developers are cancelling some planned commercial projects,

such as shopping centers and office buildings.

Due to soaring costs,

utilities in Washington have been forced to terminate construction of three
nuclear plants.
Agriculture
Recent storms in California have inflicted serious damage on the
agriculture industry.

Heavy rains and flooding prevented planting of an

entire strawberry crop, delayed planting of such important crops as cotton,
rice and tomatoes, and drowned much of the State's asparagus crop.

Experts

fear that the roots of a wide variety of fruit and nut trees may rot due to
flooding.

Thus, even if crop prices rise this year, California farmers

could experience a decline in receipts.

In other Twelfth District

agricultural areas, crop prospects are favorable.

The increase in

livestock prices in recent months also is a welcome improvement.
Nevertheless, district bankers express growing concern over the heavy debt
position of the agricultural sector generally.
Financial Institutions
Bank credit growth in the Twelfth District has slowed considerably
since February.

In particular, the pace of business lending has levelled

off, as the weakness in the region's economy and the heavy debt position of
borrowers has stifled loan demand across nearly all industries.

Twelfth

District banks report a sharp increase in business loan delinquencies over

the past few months and expect loan losses to be double those reported in
the last normal year of 1980.

Bankruptcies are up in the forest products

and construction industries, as well as for small firms generally.
Furthermore, cash-flow problems that are generated by firms' inability to
collect receivables on time are becoming much more widespread
the business community.

throughout

Because of this increase in delinquencies and

problem loans, as well as continued pressure on net interest margins, many
banks in this region are undertaking programs to bolster earnings by
cutting noninterest

costs.

