CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 23, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District-Boston page 1
Second District-New York page 6
Third District-Philadelphia page 10
Fourth District-Cleveland page 14
Fifth District-Richmond page 18
Sixth District-Atlanta page 21
Seventh District-Chicago page 25
Eighth District-St. Louis page 29
Ninth District-Minneapolis page 32
Tenth District-Kansas City page 36
Eleventh District-Dallas page 39
Twelfth District-San Francisco page 42

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.]
Introduction.

While economic conditions remain very depressed

throughout the nation, there is a widespread view that a bottom was reached
in the first quarter, possibly in January when severe weather hampered
activity over a large portion of the nation.

Allowing for weather effects,

retail sales, manufacturing, employment, and construction have been about
level since late last year.

Despite deep pessimism, panic has been avoided

Sluggishness is expected to continue in the second quarter with some
improvement about midyear, hopefully aided by lower interest rates.
inflation continues to slow.

Price

With a downturn developing in oil and gas

development, defense procurement becomes the principal expanding sector.
Finished goods inventories are too high in some sectors, but most purchased
materials are under close control.
being reduced.

Capital spending plans generally are

Auto and appliance sales remain weak.

Extreme caution hold

back decisions on consumption and investment, especially on major items.
Housing remains severely depressed everywhere, but some districts report
incipient improvement.
some large centers.

Office building construction is still vigorous in

Crop prices remain low partly because of large harvest

projected for this year, but livestock prices have increased.

Several

districts report increased bankruptcies and more problem credits for
consumers, business, and agriculture.

The financial condition of S&Ls continues to deteriorate and they probably
will not be able to finance a resurgence in housing.

Several districts

report business loan demand as "flat," but outstandings are buoyed up by
expanding energy loans, and loans that are not being paid on schedule because
of financial problems afflicting various borrowers.
Regional differences.

All of the district reports follow, in

general, the outline described above, but there are noticeable difference's.
The Chicago and Cleveland districts with their emphasis on hard goods continue to present the blackest pictures.

New York, on the other hand, finds

that the Second District is "weathering the recession quite well."
delphia may be "on the verge of a turnaround."

Phila-

Minneapolis sees "hints of

recovery."

Dallas reports autos and housing "showing initial signs of

recovery."

At the other extreme, San Francisco (in the past one of the most

vigorous growth regions)

has "slipped deeper into recession," with hone-

building at the lowest level since World War II, and distress in housing
replacing the fabulous boom of the late 1970s.
Inflation.
some lines.

Price increases clearly have slowed, with exceptions in

Philadelphia reported, however, that increases in industrial

prices were more prevalent in March.

Cleveland and Chicago note substantial

pressure by producers on labor and suppliers to cut costs.

Goods and

services are readily available, and price discounting is widespread.

Chicago

noted far-reaching ramifications of the declines in crude oil and oil product
prices, as a result of the world-wide excess supply of oil.
Employment.

Additional layoffs and reduced hours, affecting

full-time and part-time workers in a wide variety of lines of business, were

reported by most districts.

New York characterized overall labor market

conditions there as relatively strong.

Dallas noted deterioration since

December, due to layoffs and inmigration of the unemployed from other
districts, but reported an unemployment rate in February of only 5.8%.
Layoffs in the Fourth District included workers from the last auto passenger
tire plant in Akron.

San Francisco indicated that most of the boost to

employment from rising defense spending will occur in 1983-1984, not this
year. In response to widespread layoffs and reduced job opportunities,
unionized workers have been increasingly willing to grant concessions.
Consumption.

Retail sales reports are mixed, but generally indicate

sluggish or weak spending.

Lack of confidence and negative expectations were

noted as restraining outlays.

Those who commented on the outlook project a

rise in consumer expenditures in the second half of this year.

Minneapolis

and Dallas noted signs of recovery in auto sales in response to rebates.
Evidence of financial strains—consumer loan delinquencies, rising personal
bankruptcies, and closing of retail stores—was reported.
Inventories.

Reports on inventories are difficult to characterize

because of a highly mixed picture by industry, by stage of fabrication and
distribution, and by region.

In general, raw materials and purchased com-

ponents are low, while finished goods have become excessive when sales
sagged.

San Francisco tells of "involuntary" accumulation.

reports retail inventories "pretty clean", in general.
in manufacturing inventories.

Richmond notes a rise

Boston finds stocks generally too high, but

packaging materials "very low."
being cut, but not crude oil.

Philadelphia

Cleveland says oil product inventories are

Aluminum is high at the producer level, and

"extremely low" at the fabricator level.

To sum up, except for particular

imbalances, inventories are low relative to normal standards because of heavy
finance charges and uncertain sales prospects.

Chicago and Kansas City warn

that a rise in final sales could quickly bring longer lead times and higher
prices.
Capital spending.
capital spending in 1982.

District reports suggest a significant decline in
Low business confidence is a major factor.

San

Francisco and Boston are affected by layoffs related to reduced demand for
commercial aircraft.

The drop in oil prices has brought a reduction in

drilling in all producing regions.

Demand for related equipment has dropped,

and a proposed oil pipe mill has been canceled.

New York and Cleveland

report cancellations of orders for machine tools.
struction on three nuclear plants.

The TVA has halted con-

Commercial construction is weak except

for large office building in centers such as New York, Chicago, Cleveland,
and Dallas.
Manufacturing.

Defense procurement is vigorous, but these activi-

ties are most significant in a few districts:
Louis, and Boston.

San Francisco, Dallas, St.

Steel and motor vehicle output are down sharply, but

there are signs of improvement.

Appliance output also is down currently.

Textiles are down in Atlanta and apparel in Dallas.
off in several districts.

Petrochemical output is

Richmond reports a rise in demand for cigarettes.

Overall, manufacturing output remains depressed but may be past its low
point.
Housing.
the nation.

The housing picture varies from bad to worse throughout

Dallas and Minneapolis report a recent rise in home sales, but

Richmond, San Francisco, St. Louis, Chicago and most other districts have
observed no improvement in starts from an extremely low level.

A backlog of

demand for housing is building up with few unsold units, as reported by
Kansas City.

Lower interest rates are the only hope for home building this

year and time is running out, at least for the northern states.
builders and subcontractors are leaving the field.

More

"Creative financing" has

not proved of much help.
Agriculture.

Large crops are forecast for the South, the Midwest,

and the Great Plains—especially wheat, soybeans, and corn.

Production plans

indicate large plantings, and subsoil moisture conditions are excellent.
Large crops suggest further downward pressure on prices.

Livestock prices

have been rising, but most experts project a further decline in net farm
income.

Farm land prices are declining and delinquencies and bankruptcies

are rising.

Heavy debts at high interest rates, combined with lower income,

could cause further deterioration in the financial condition of agriculture.
Finance.
markets.
tricts.

Uncertainty continues to characterize the financial

Business loan demand is described as weak or flat in most disBusiness credit ratings are being downgraded, and more loans require

special attention.

New York experts say business liquidity continues to

deteriorate, and more ratings will be downgraded soon.
very tight, both for housing and commercial projects.

Mortgage credit is
Usury rates are

impeding credit use in some states, especially for credit cards and auto
loans.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

There is no upturn yet in the First District.

Retailers report

that sales have been slow, although not much slower than expected.

While a

few manufacturers see signs of a pickup, the majority report no improvement
or further declines.

In both retailing and manufacturing, inventories have

increased relative to desired levels.

A lack of confidence in the future

is depressing capital spending, even by firms with adequate funds for
investment.
Retail
Retailing continues to be slow in the First District; but merchants
reported no serious disappointments relative to plan, since they expected
sales to be slow.

The first quarter is traditionally weak for retailers,

and weaker still so far this year.

Those contacted reported February

transactions were below last year; while dollar sales were slightly up for
some retailers, others' sales were down as much as five percent in some
New England states.

Inventories are slightly above desired levels.

Several retailers mentioned considerable geographic variation in
sales performance.

Results for individual product lines were also mixed.

One merchant said increasing fabric sales signaled that consumers are
economizing through home sewing; another said better women's sportswear and
"designer" housewares had moved strongly; another's declines were storewide.
All the retailers contacted are taking a "conservative" approach to
the first half of the year, expecting the current slowness to continue.
Several said promotional activity will remain at its usual seasonal

levels.

Ordering and buying for the second half of the year were said to

anticipate an upturn.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the First District has fallen since the
end of last year; and while a few firms report that recent business has
been better than expected, most see no signs of improvement.

For three

consecutive months now, surveys of local purchasing managers have found
more firms in which production and orders have fallen in the month than
firms with increases.
The problems of the auto industry and the commercial airlines were
of particular concern to this month's respondents.

The commercial airlines

continue to cut back orders for new engines and parts, causing substantial
employment losses in the First District's aircraft industry.

This decline

has also affected manufacturers of electronic components and communications
equipment.

Among the areas recently affected by difficulties in the auto

industry are tires and capital equipment.
conditions will deteriorate further.

Again, there is concern that

Not all the products in which demand

has softened are tied to particular problem industries.

The demand for

specialty industrial chemicals has weakened; the paper industry has seen a
downturn.
Among the few positive developments was a report of a definite
pickup in orders for packaging for consumer products and medical supplies;
the demand for industrial packaging has not improved.
continues to be a source of strength.

The defense business

Firms which were not previously

active in defense work are now competing for contracts.

In a few cases,

bottlenecks have developed because inexperienced subcontractors and

suppliers are having difficulty meeting defense specifications.
With respect to labor negotiations, manufacturers expect
settlements to be more moderate than in the past; labor is more likely to
be flexible on fringes than on take-home pay.
Inventories
Inventories have recently become higher than desired, according to
several First District manufacturers; unless sales pick up in the next few
weeks it will be necessary to make further production cuts.

However, the

manufacturer of packaging materials reports that both his inventories and
those of his customers are very low; if demand were to improve quickly, he
would have difficulty responding.
Capital Goods Spending
A December survey of the capital spending plans of New England
manufacturers was just released.

New England firms plan on increasing

capital spending in 1982 by 12 percent; this is the same as the actual 1981
increase but less than originally planned.
for most of the increase.
encouraging, however.

High technology firms account

Comments by industrial manufacturers are less

While few admit to actively cutting back capital

spending, most are looking at projects more closely.

According to one

producer of capital goods, there are a lot of companies which should be
investing and which have funds available for investment but which are not
investing because they lack confidence that the economy will turn around
any time soon.
Professors Eckstein, Houthakker, Samuelson, Solow, and Tobin were
available for comment this month.

Pointing to sharp declines in consumer

and business confidence, Eckstein fears the economic upturn will be delayed
and weak.

He notes pervasive fear of a financial disaster and urges the

Fed to give some weight to that contingency.

He views widespread

bankruptcies of the thrifts "not as a risk but a certainty" and calls for a
public explanation of "the safety net against financial collapse."
Whatever the long-run validity of monetarism, there is no present danger of
overliquidity and lower interest rates are needed to mitigate financial
distress and to help restore confidence.
Professor Houthakker feels monetary policy is "on the right track"
and recommends moving back toward the top of the Ml range over the next few
months.

He fears the large Federal deficit but, like Eckstein, expects

only token spending reduction and tax increases.

With monetary growth of 5

percent, Houthakker sees the chances of a Depression as "very small."
Professor Samuelson notes that high nominal interest rates are
partly due to less rationing of credit.

With apprehension about

prospective deficits and "hysteria" about the money growth targets,
Samuelson speculates that macroeconomic policy may not be able to contrive
a recovery.

Fiscal stimulus creates fears of future deficits which

discourages investment and monetary growth in excess of the targets creates
credibility problems.

Nevertheless, more years of stagnation are not

satisfactory and will increase the "natural" unemployment rate.

The

crusade against inflation may not be consistent with the need to absorb the
resources freed from the long-term decline of the auto industry and basic
manufacturing due to changes in comparative costs.

Professor Solow sees the point of a tight monetary policy to
encourage a shift toward a tighter fiscal policy but feels continuation of a
tight policy now would "overdo it."

He finds it implausible that the

Congress will enact major spending cuts or tax increases with the
unemployment rate above 9 percent.

He rejects the notion of a "permanent

monetary policy" that can be set once and for all.

There is a clear need

for a shift in the policy mix with a net move toward expansion.

An

expansionary policy in the early stages of an upturn would leave plenty of
time to react to any excess demand pressures.

A focus on the past three

years of no growth, not a few months of an upturn, suggests that the
marginal anti-inflation payoff of further restraint will be small relative
to its costs.
Professor Tobin advocates "the Accord of 1982" —

a deal between

the Fed, the Congress, and the Administration to reduce the Federal deficit
and encourage economic recovery.

The Congress would suspend the 1983 tax

cut and indexing of spending programs and cut spending enough to hold the
deficit to $80 billion in 1983 and 1984.

The Fed would abandon its current

procedure and follow instead a nominal GNP goal that would ensure a strong
recovery.

The nominal GNP goal would be reduced in succeeding years.

This

plan would allow the Fed to back away from an untenable monetarist policy
that is losing credibility with the people that matter —

the business

community that is so disenchanted with the current policy mix.

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Economic activity in the Second District remained sluggish during
February and early March.

Among retailers, sales activity was uneven.

Residential construction continued to be depressed, but nonresidential
activity was still thriving.
generally lackluster.

Conditions in the manufacturing sector were

Reports from upstate New York indicate that a number

of small companies have abandoned their expansion plans while some machine
tool companies have been hit by cancellations in backlogged orders.

High

technology firms, however, were the exception to the prevailing weakness in
manufacturing, proving relatively resistant to the national downturn.
Overall, labor market conditions were comparatively strong.

New York State's

unemployment rate has been less than the nation's and its unemployment
insurance claims have been below those of a year ago.

Looking ahead, res-

pondents saw neither a turnaround nor a further decline in the nation's
economy as imminent.
Consumer Spending
Retail activity in the Second District was uneven during February
and the first half of March.

Sales at both department stores and discount

chains ranged from below plan to at or above plan.

In upstate New York,

there have been some store closings and earlier weather-related losses have
not been recouped.

Inventory levels were comfortable at most stores.

Most

of the merchants, even those who have had below-plan sales in recent months,
tended to be cautiously optimistic in their outlook for spring.

Real Estate and Construction Activity
Conditions varied widely in the construction sector.

Activity in

the residential market continued to be minimal, as high financing costs and
economic uncertainty discouraged potential buyers.
done little to stimulate sales.

Creative financing has

Homebuilders noted that demand for high

density housing remains strong, though zoning obstacles are preventing such
construction in many areas.

The building of high-priced homes by prior

contract accounted for virtually all activity.
In contrast, the nonresidential construction boom has not abated and
is expected to continue into 1983.

In Manhattan, a shortage of office space

has pushed vacancy rates to record lows, although office rental prices are
now rising much more slowly than a few months ago.

In suburban areas,

earlier industrial and corporate growth has fueled a similar expansion in
office space.

Hotel and motel construction in the District was also strong,

although, in Manhattan, this construction has been tapering off.
Labor Markets and Business Activity
The consensus of business leaders and government officials around
the region was that New York State was weathering the recession quite well.
All those contacted expressed surprise at how well the regional economy has
held up, and mentioned the diversification in the state economy into high
technology industries as one of the primary contributing factors.

Despite

some pockets of extreme joblessness, the unemployment rate was less that the
nation's and unemployment insurance claims were below those of a year ago.
According to a state labor official, much of the increase in unemployment
which has occurred is the result of the difficulties which new entrants and
reentrants to the labor force have had finding jobs rather than from what is

commonly expected during a recession—increased separations of experienced
workers.
Nevertheless, some industries have been deeply affected by the
recession.

As in the nation, layoffs and reduced hours are widespread among

steel, automobile, automobile supply, and machine tool firms.

As an example

of the problems facing the machine tool industry, one upstate company was hit
by a large number of cancellations of backlogged orders.

In addition, a

number of smaller firms were reported to have abandoned their spring
expansion plans.
As for the future, local business leaders and government officials
saw no imminent signs of an economic turnaround but neither did they think
that conditions were going to get much worse.

Respondents were uncertain

about the direction of interest rates, the impact of personal income tax
cuts, and the effects of safe-harbor leasing provisions.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Henry Kaufman (Solomon Bros.),
Donald Maude (Merrill Lynch) and Robert Stone (Irving Trust):
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Kaufman:

The economy will begin to experience real economic growth

sometime this spring but the recovery will be of sub-cyclical proportion.
The financial backdrop will not support a strong and sustained business
recovery.

Business liquidity continues to deteriorate; profits will remain

under extreme pressure, while no balance sheet restructuring has materialized
during this recession.

Many additional downgradings of business credit

ratings are likely to be announced in the forthcoming months.
will continue to be highly volatile.

Interest rates

The long-term bond markets in particu-

lar will be challenged by a lack of liquidity in business, the huge Treasury
cash needs, and a firm monetary policy.
Maude:

Most likely developments over the spring and early summer

months should place renewed severe upward pressure on interest rates with
long-term yields retesting their 1981 highs in a financial crisis type
environment.

These developments should manifest themselves in the form of a

highly anemic economic recovery, some modest pick-up in private credit
demands, a cash flow squeeze in the nonfinancial corporate sector, continued
strains on financial intermediaries, credit quality concerns and a reluctance
on the part of investors to make long-term fixed income commitments.

The

underlying causes of these difficulties should be an April and July surge in
money growth, a resulting monetary tightening, huge actual Treasury financing
(especially during the third quarter) and continued apprehension over the
out-year budgetary deficits.
Stone:

It is our view that the economy has probably touched bottom

and that a few months of relatively slow growth lies ahead.

While lower

interest rates are urgently needed, it would be a mistake for the System to
take overt action to reduce them until MI has remained within the target
range for several weeks.

Accordingly, it seems to me that in the period

ahead the Fed should continue to provide non-borrowed reserves such that
"basic borrowings" (borrowings net of seasonal and extended credit) come out
in the general range of $800 to $1200 million.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District in March are that the economic slump is
bottoming out for some industries, and that the economy may be on the verge of a
turnaround. District manufacturers say the pace of industrial activity held steady this
month, bolstered mainly by nondurables. Retail merchants say things are just about
where they were a year ago as well, but hope for a push as they enter the Spring selling
season. Bankers report that business borrowing is flat. The only real sour note comes
from the homebuilding industry where things are simply described as "worse—not better".
Third District businessmen are reasonably optimistic, but not overly so.
Manufacturers predict a pickup soon, but are a little less enthusiastic than they were a
month ago. Retailers, likewise see some strength, but not a lot. Bankers anticipate
little in the way of loan growth, but are forecasting healthy deposit flows and lower
interest rates, at least for the near term.
CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE
Area homebuilders continue to suffer as high mortgage rates and other
factors are keeping away buyers in droves. "Other factors," according to one contact in
New Jersey, include uncertainty about interest rates, inflation, and jobs. Although
traffic is up slightly through new homes, few people are buying. If January and February
are any indication of things to come, New Jersey housing starts may fall below 10,000 in
1982, or less than half of the 1973-75 recession level. There is some feeling that unless
there is some improvement within 30 to 60 days, many subcontractors will have to fold.
MANUFACTURING
Respondents to the most recent Business Outlook Survey say the six month
slump in area industrial activity seems to be bottoming out. Although business in the
durable goods industries continues to sag, a pickup in nondurables has given a rosier
complexion to the overall industrial outlook. Specific indications of a levelling off of the

downturn include higher levels of new orders and shipments, both of which have
rebounded from their winter trough, and less prevalent reports of payroll cuts.
Inventories, on the other hand, are still being drawn down, paced by sharp reductions in
the durables sector.
Looking ahead, manufacturing executives polled this month are still
optimistic, but, in spite of the apparent turnaround, their outlook has softened. While
general business conditions are expected to improve by September at over 50 percent of
the firms sampled, a small but significant number of respondents now foresee a drop in
activity. Strong growth in new orders and shipments is still widely expected, although
not as widely as in recent surveys. Producers remain very cautious, and are planning
little expansion of either inventories or capital expenditures before late summer. Any
increased demand for their goods will be satisfied by hiring new workers and lengthening
hours.
Industrial price hikes are more prevalent in March. Over one-third of the
manufacturers responding to the survey this month report higher costs, and nearly onefourth say they are charging more for the goods they sell. There are widespread
expectations of further price inflation over the next six months as well. More than 75
percent of those polled are predicting higher prices for raw materials by September, and
over 50 percent are planning to raise the price of their finished goods.
RETAIL
March department store sales are looking fairly grim at this point, especially
so as they come on the heels of a disasterous January and barely adequate February.
Sales volume is running just about even with year-ago levels. Sales analysts say
consumers are now receiving their winter fuel bills, and are spending their money on oil,
gas, and electricity rather than spring clothing. An early Easter this year should give a
boost to sales in late March though, and the month could turn in an overall performance 6

to 7 percent better than a year ago. Retail inventories are a little heavy at some stores,
but, in general, are pretty clean.
Looking ahead to the next six months, retailers seem to be planning for a
fairly tough second quarter and only a modest third quarter. Summer sales are expected
to run 2 to 5 percent ahead of year-earlier volume. Many merchants are less than
optimistic simply because they see nothing in the near term to turn the consumer around.
FINANCIAL
Third District banking contacts says business loan volume is up between 3 and
10 percent from a year ago, but has flattened out in recent months. Consumer loans are
off substantially, but mostly by design. As for the future, area bankers foresee continued
steadiness for C&I loans, now that inventories have been worked off in many industries.
A change in the mix of funding over the next six months, away from bank loans and into
bonds, could also keep the lid on business borrowing at banks. The outlook for consumer
loans is actually a little brighter this month. Many Philadelphia banks are setting up card
operations in Delaware, where usury laws were abolished last year. Those banks hope to
pick up new retail business later this year, thereby giving consumer borrowing in this
area a shot in the arm.
Third District bankers are in agreement that a weak economy, dropping
inflation, and a moderation of private credit demands will continue to draw interest rates
down, with the prime rate, currently at 16 1/2 percent, dropping another 200 to 250 basis
points. Estimates of the timing of a trough in interest rates range from June to
September. As the economy turns the corner, rates are expected to start climbing again,
unless a solution to the Federal budget dilemma becomes apparent. The recent bulge in
Ml is expected to work itself out with little permanent effect on interest rates.
Deposit flows at area banks have held up surprisingly well in 1982, despite
weakness in the economy and market rates still running well above passbook and

statement savings yields. Demand deposits have dropped only slightly from high year-end
levels, while total time and savings have grown. The only explanation offered for the
apparent insensitivity of savings to interest rates has been that the precautionary
demand for money has increased in the last few months.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.
activity for 1982.
and strong imports.

Economists have scaled down their forecasts of economic
The steel industry is being squeezed between weak demand
Business construction is mixed.

product inventories are falling.

Steel and petroleum

Home appliance production has been curtailed.

Bankers are lending cautiously as their customers' financial positions weaken.
Usury laws are limiting bank automobile financing.
suppliers for cost reductions are substantial.

Pressures on labor and parts

Unemployment rates are high and

rising amidst a rapid pace of plant shutdowns.
Outlook.

Economists who attended the Fourth District Roundtable Meeting

on March 12 at this Bank scaled down their forecasts of economic activity for
1982 from their late-October forecasts.

The median of 33 forecasts now shows a

3.3% annual rate of decline in real GNP this quarter, a small upturn next
quarter, and growth rates between 4 and 4 1/2% (a.r.) in the final two quarters.
All but three forecasters expect positive growth in the second quarter.

The

median forecast shows the GNP implicit price deflator rising at a 6.6% rate in
the first half and a 7.0% rate in the second half.

The unemployment rate is

expected to peak at 9.2% next quarter and ease to 8.7% in the fourth quarter.
Capital Goods.

A major steel company reports "the first glimmers" of

improvement in orders for a few products, but total orders are still damped by
users' inventory liquidation.

That firm's profit margins are being squeezed

between rising costs and the decline in product prices that was aggravated by
the January jump in steel imports.

Another steel firm reports that imports are

"demoralizing" markets, and prices are "extremely weak and unstable."
expect their inventories and employment to decline again in March.

Both firms

Another

steel firm reports orders have recovered almost to their December level following a decline prompted by the early-year increase in interest rates.

Three

major steel firms' forecasts of 1982 domestic steel shipments range from 82.5
to 89.0 million tons, compared to 87.0 million in 1981.
A major producer of machine tools reports order cancellation rates are
high and sales of consumable cutting tools and supplies are down.

He has fur-

loughed workers in the last month, expects to lay-off more, and foresees no -upturn
this year.
Construction.

A fabricator of aluminum cans and a producer of polymers

both recently announced major expansions of their production facilities.
Cleveland and Pittsburgh are experiencing booms in office building construction.
Oil and gas drilling activity in southern Ohio is down 12% from "a fantastic
level" in 1981.

A petroleum company economist expects no increase in total

domestic drilling this year.

A major steel firm announced deferral of plans to

double its capacity to produce pipe for the oil and gas drilling industry.
Inventories.

A petroleum industry economist reports that petroleum

product inventories are being liquidated but crude inventories are not being
liquidated.

Two major steel firms report their inventories fell in February

and will fall again in March.

An aluminum producer reports that fabricator

inventories are extremely low while producer inventories are high.
Durable Consumer Goods.

A major manufacturer of home appliances reports

appliance production has been sharply curtailed in the last three months in a
lagged response to the decline in house construction.

He expects more layoffs

of appliance workers and notes these may be permanent because appliances are no
longer a growth industry.

Nevertheless, he expects retail sales of appliances

to be better in the second half.

Commercial Bank Lending.

A banker in a small city expects many failures

in agriculture, construction, and automobile agencies and sees weak markets for
resale of property acquired from bankrupt clients.

His bank will have to cur-

tail loans to firms whose net equity has disappeared.

Banks will no longer

extend credit to tenant farmers without a signature from the land owner.
farmers are selling their cattle to finance their spring planting.

Some

A Pittsburgh

banker reports that Ford and Chrysler captive credit companies are no longer
extending credit in Pittsburgh.

Local bankers do not want to make automobile

loans because the state usury law ceiling is too low, so the automobile dealers
are having great difficulty financing sales.

An auto producer estimates that

with a prime rate of 16.5%, usury laws make bank lending for automobile loans
unattractive in 21 states accounting for 37% of the U.S. car market.
Cost of Production.

A petroleum company economist expects the cost of

drilling oil and gas wells to rise by 10% this year after rising between 20%
and 30% annually in the last two years.

A food industry economist expects size-

able commodity price increases in 1982.
Pressures on labor and parts suppliers for cost reductions are substantial.

A meat packer in Cincinnati is threatening to move unless labor

concessions are granted.

An auto industry economist reports that because of

recent union concessions, his firm's labor costs will rise by 15%-18% instead
of 25%-30% over the life of the contract.

A truck parts manufacturer has

eliminated COLA for all non-union employees.
COLA for white collar workers.

A tire manufacturer has eliminated

A Pittsburgh electrical contractor reports

electricians' union acquiesence to time and one-half pay for overtime instead
of the area tradition of double time.

A bearing manufacturer has received de-

mands from six Fortune 100 customers in the last 30 days for price reductions

ranging from 2% to 7 1/2%, and believes his competitor is yielding to similar
demands.
Unemployment and Plant Closings.
deepened throughout the Fourth District.
Fourth District than national average.

Recession effects have spread and
Unemployment rates are higher in the

For the top 11 SMSAs in this District,

the January NSA unemployment rates range from 8.8% in Columbus to 13.8% in
Toledo and 15.7% in Youngstown.
The rapid pace of plant shutdowns continues in the District.

The most

recent is the closing of a 65 year old rubber plant in Akron that will result
in a permanent job loss for nearly 1,300 salaried and hourly workers.

The plant

was the sole surviving producer of auto passenger tires in Akron, once the tireproducing capital of the U.S.

(Since 1979, 14 tire plants in U.S. have closed.)

Also, in mid-February, GMC announced the closing of a stamping plant in Cleveland
that employs 1,200 workers.

The announcement that a second Cleveland plant,

employing 1,700 workers, would be closed apparently will be rescinded as part
of the recent GM-UAW agreement.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Pessimism pervades recent reports on Fifth District business activity
and there appear to be very few bright spots to help this outlook.

Other than

the tobacco industries and some energy related activities such as coal mining
and gas drilling, economic and business activity seems almost uniformly weak.
Manufacturers report further declines in shipments, new orders, and order
backlogs in the past month.

Retailers report little change from the low

levels of sales in recent months.
signs of recovery.

Residential construction has shown no

Automobiles and other consumer durables are not moving.

As a result,large segments of some industries; stone, clay, and glass; textiles; and major appliances; are operating at severely reduced levels.
The Manufacturing Sector
Although the rate of decline may have moderated over the past month,
District manufacturers report continued weakness in most measures of activity.
New orders and order backlogs were down broadly and over half our respondents
report reductions in employment and in the length of the average work week
since last month.

Inventories are generally higher with stocks of finished

goods up substantially.

Current plant

excessive by most respondents.

and equipment capacity is considered

Over one-third of the manufacturers surveyed

report declines in prices received and several report paying lower prices than
last month.

Employee compensation, on balance, appears unchanged recently.

Consumer Spending
Retail trade has shown few signs of any recovery.

Automobiles and

other big ticket items, in particular, are not moving at all and large inventories are causing trouble among dealers.

Furniture and major appliances are

in a holding pattern awaiting some pickup in housing construction and sales,
but there is little expectation of any significant improvement over the next
few months.

There are scattered reports that we may be seeing some stirrings

in the general merchandise lines, but the evidence is far from conclusive.
There is a widely held view that negative expectations are, and will continue
to be, a severely depressing factor with consumers.
Housing and Construction
The construction industry continues spotty with the housing sector
almost uniformly weak.
seem non-existent.

At this point

even pockets of strength in housing

Commercial and industrial construction continues to lend

some strength, but even here the situation seems to have deteriorated in
recent weeks.

Projects already underway are continuing, but there are few

indications that much new activity is appearing.
is little more positive than current conditions.

The outlook for construction
Despite a generally perceived

backlog of demand for housing units financing terms and uncertainty about the
prospects for long term

financing have created a block against any turnaround

in construction activity.
Agriculture
Comments of Richmond directors suggest that prospects for agricultural
output are generally favorable around the District.
areas are reported to be the best in four years.

Moisture conditions in some

With cigarette production at

current high levels tobacco prices have been favorable to farmers.

Other farm

prices are generally weak and several of our directors see serious problems
for District farmers under the circumstances.
The Financial Sector
Business loan demand is very weak but generally stable according to
our directors in the financial sector.

Mortgage lending is also soft across

the District.

Response to the expanded IRA eligibility has apparently been

somewhat weaker than expected, at least to date.
The Outlook
The outlook of manufacturers surveyed continued to improve over the
past several weeks.

Nearly a third of the respondents expect the level of

activity nationally to improve over the next six months and almost half expect
improvement

for their respective firms.

Retailers are even less pessimistic.

As noted above, the outlook for housing remains very uncertain.

There is some

concern that home buyers must adapt to the new types of financing and that this
factor will further delay a full blown recovery.
log of housing demand is expected by some
to a decline in interest rates.

On the other hand, the back-

to mate activity extremely responsive

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Business conditions remain weak throughout the Sixth District, with no significant
evidence of recovery. However, there is a general feeling of optimism that business
conditions will improve around mid-year. Retail and home sales are sluggish.
Unemployment is a major problem and additional layoffs are occurring in many
southeastern industries. Tourism is behind last year's level in the region's major tourist
areas.
Consumer Spending. Retail sales have exceeded expectations in many parts of
the District. Sales of high-quality merchandise showed relative strength, with home
appliances and home improvement products showing increases over last year. However,
retailers expect nondurable goods sales to remain soft until about mid-year, when
economic recovery is expected. In the meantime, merchants are holding a tight rein
on inventories.
Auto sales continue to be poor in the District. Reports of weakness have surfaced
even in Florida, where sales, income and employment have held up well compared to
other parts of the region. Large cars are selling more briskly, due in part to falling
gasoline prices; however, high interest rates continue to limit sales and squeeze profit
margins. Unless rates stabilize at lower levels soon, more dealer closings can be
expected. Even so, auto dealers are cautiously optimistic for a mid-year turnaround.
Financial and Construction: Throughout the region, residential home sales continue
to be weak. The value of single and multi-family permits has been running 50 percent
below last year's level. Construction is most depressed in northern areas of Alabama
and Mississippi. The halting of construction on three of TVA's nuclear power plants
will compound this area's employment and income problems.

Lending activity at savings and loan associations continues to decline. However,
net deposit flow has improved slightly since year-end.
Employment and Industry. Unemployment continues to spread across the region.
Four of the six states in our District now have jobless rates above the national average.
Conditions are most serious in Alabama, where the statewide unemployment rate is
nearly 14 percent. There are also reports of unemployment rates as high as 22 percent
in some rural counties in the region. Although Georgia's rate remained below that of
the U. S., an 8.2 percent rate in January marks a six-year high.
Textile employment has perhaps been affected most severely. A large North
Georgia carpet manufacturer recently went bankrupt, eliminating 1,200 jobs. More
plant closings are predicted due to the industry's linkages to the stagnant new housing
market.
Energy and related industries have been the primary sources of strength to the
Mississippi and Louisiana economies over the past year. However, declining oil prices
and reduced exploration are now affecting these areas adversely. Oil refineries and
offshore drilling rigs are operating at rates well below those of last year, forcing
temporary layoffs. Drilling permits in Louisiana are down 6 percent from a year ago.
There are as many as 2,000 workers on temporary layoffs in the petro-chemical industry
around Baton Rouge. Industry experts predict that this number will more than double
in the next month.
Repercussions of the recession on the region's important tourism industry vary
widely among major resort areas. Although activity is slow in South Florida, there
are signs of improvement in Central Florida. Attendance at Disney World has been

affected little by the recession. So far in 1982, occupancy rates at lodging places
have been up as compared to last year.
By contrast, Atlanta and New Orleans are experiencing lower hotel occupancy
rates, declining convention business activity, and lower visitors' expenditures. While
tourist activity in South Florida is expected to improve by mid-year, industry analysts
in Atlanta and New Orleans are concerned that recovery may take longer than previously
expected.
Agriculture. Low farm product prices and high costs continue to weaken farm
financial conditions in the region. Indebtedness exceeds assets for many farmers in
the Southeast, but few lenders are foreclosing. Land prices are soft and lenders feel
that a rash of foreclosure sales would probably drop prices to the extent that they
would have to buy farms to protect their interests. In most cases, lenders feel that
their chances of recovering on loans are much better if the property remains in the
hands of current owners.
Views of Outside Experts. Several widely respected economists addressed a
conference in Atlanta last week. Remarks by Milton Friedman, Lawrence R. Klein,
and Martin Feldstein are of particular interest.
Friedman warned of 25 percent inflation in three years if the Administration
yields to growing pressure to support an increase in federal taxes or delay scheduled
reductions in personal income tax rates. On the other hand, he predicted that inflation
could drop as low as 3-5 percent within three years if President Reagan sticks by his
supply-side policies of lower taxes and reduced spending. He warned that reducing the
size of government is absolutely essential if the economy's ills are to be cured. This,
Friedman emphasized, is even more important than reducing the budget deficit.

Klein favors incomes-based policies if the fight against inflation is not successful
and labeled Friedman and others "a lot of sob sisters blaming the Federal Reserve" for
the nation's economic distress. He argued that economic events of 1981 provide
extraordinary evidence that certain popular renditions of supply-side economics are false.
Martin Feldstein warned that the hardships of the current recession, particularly
rising unemployment, could scuttle the administration's effort to achieve fundamental
economic reform. He also said that "if Congress focuses on rising unemployment and
falling profits, it could revert to its old ways and call for a Keynesian stimulus to
demand." In Feldstein's view, this would mean increases in government spending and
would pressure the Federal Reserve to expand the growth of credit. The result would be
a return to higher inflation rates and an even harder time controlling inflation in the
future.
A panel of bank and business economists within the region is in general agreement
that monetary policy is correct provided the Fed adheres to its announced monetary
growth targets. The consensus view concerning the prospective 1982 deficit is that it
will limit, but not abort, economic growth after mid-year; however, some "crowding
out" of housing and business investment will occur.
Early signs of economic recovery in the region are not yet visible to any of the
respondents on the panel, but most expect recovery to begin sometime this summer.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.
depressed.

Seventh District economic activity continues very

However, better weather conditions after mid-February aided a

revival in some sectors.

Retail trade continues slow.

occurred in a wide variety of employment categories.
report further weakness in orders.
deteriorated further.

Further layoffs have
Equipment manufacturers

Construction industry prospects have

High interest rates, heavy debt burdens, and reduced

cash flow have placed many business and financial enterprises in precarious
positions.
spending.

State and local governments are budgeting severe restrictions on
It appears that the general economic decline has moderated.

A few

sectors report gains in recent weeks, including steel, light trucks, office
equipment, and airline travel.

All types of goods and services are readily

available, and price discounting is widespread.
production costs, especially labor costs.

Pressures are strong to cut

Agriculture faces another year of

depressed income, especially if crops are as large as expected.

Bank loans to

business remain strong, but more doubtful credits are requiring special
attention.
Confidence Weakens.

Recent surveys of business and consumer

attitudes in district centers show a further erosion of confidence.

The

region has been plagued by a three-year recession which has seriously
depressed morale, especially for those who have never experienced an extended
period of trouble.

For the general public the main concern is loss of income

and scarce job opportunities.

Executives, in addition to worrying over their

own companies' problems, are disturbed over huge prospective federal deficits
and high interest rates.

Low morale, even fear, is deep and widespread.

The Oil Glut.

Price declines for crude oil and most oil products,

especially gasoline, have surprised many analysts.
profound.

Ramifications have been

Pressures to develop alternative fuels have subsided.

refineries are being closed.
field equipment.

More

A growing surplus is noted for line pipe and oil

Demand for diesel-powered vehicles has eased, EPA-MPG may be

deemphasized, and the RV industry's prospects have improved.
Employment.

In January, payroll employment was 3 percent below a

year earlier in the district, while the nation was about even.

Compared with

January 1979, when this region was relatively prosperous, district employment
was down 5 percent, while employment in the nation was u£ 3 percent.

All the

district states compare unfavorably with the nation, but the hardest hit are
Michigan, Indiana, and Iowa.

The principal sectors accounting for the plight

of district states are motor vehicles and agriculture.

State jobless pay

funds in Michigan and Illinois are heavily indebted to the federal government.
Wisconsin borrowed recently and Iowa expects to do so.
Job Opportunities.

Demand for workers is very soft.

that a company is hiring brings a flood of applicants.

Information

State unemployment

compensation offices open to long lines and operate at capacity.

Help-wanted

ad lineage in Chicago papers is running about 25 percent below last year, and
more than 50 percent below two years ago.

State and local governments are

cutting staff, including employment service offices.

Labor management

negotiations similar to those publicized in the auto and trucking industries
are widespread.

Various companies have reduced compensation for white collar

workers and executives, hoping to achieve the same changes in union contracts
in upcoming negotiations.

Inflation.

Price inflation has slowed significantly.

Trucking

rates have been reduced, and the advance in rail rates has slowed.

Auto

companies have demanded 2 percent, across-the-board price reductions from
suppliers who, in turn, passed similar demands on to their suppliers.
Purchasing managers are asking price concessions and threatening to change
sources, instead of accepting price increases passively.

However, costs of

shoes, medical care, tuition, and utility services have continued to rise at a
very rapid pace.
Inventories.

Inventories of oil, paper, general merchandise (at

retail), farm and construction equipment, and some autos are excessive because
of poor sales.

Holdings of steel, nonferrous metals, building materials, and

components are quite low.
recent years.

Buying is hand-to-mouth, to a degree unknown in

A pickup in final demand could quickly tighten the lines of

supply, increase orders to factories, and moderate intense competition.
Capital Spending.

Construction contracts, orders for producer

goods, and announcements by various companies suggest a sharper reduction in
capital spending than the one percent drop projected by the government survey.
Various projects have been shelved in the steel, vehicle, and utility
industries.

Producers of pipelayers and bulldozers are protesting the ban on

sales to Russia.
Motor Vehicles.
rebates.

Auto sales were very weak in recent weeks, despite

Light truck sales responded to rebates and were up 20 percent in

February, but heavy truck sales were down 17 percent.

Production of vehicles

has declined more than sales and schedules appear somewhat firmer.
quarter schedule is above last year's.

The third

Steel.

March saw a slight improvement in steel shipments from the

very depressed level of February.

April is expected to continue this trend.

Inventories of steel users are very low relative to usage.

Normal lead times

of 6-10 weeks are down to one week in some cases.
Retail Sales.

Consumers have been holding back on spending, either

because of reduced income or increased caution as to future income.
Instalment credit use is below normal.

Among the few lines selling well are

video games, video recorders, auto supplies, and children's merchandise.
Construction.
zero.

Permits for new residential units have been close to

There is much concern over problems of rolling over short-term home

mortgage financing.

While nonresidential prospects also are generally poor,

at least three large new office buildings have been cleared for construction
in downtown Chicago.
benefits.

Rehab work on older buildings has been stimulated by tax

The public sector outlook is very bleak, for two years ahead.
Agriculture.

Pessimism in the farm sector is deep and widespread.

This year's rise in farm production costs will be modest, but net farm income
probably will decline significantly from the depressed levels of the past two
years.

Farmers are holding back on all types of outlays.

Most farm lenders

are confronted with loan collection problems, but these are generally
considered to be manageable.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

During February and early March, economic activity in the Eighth
District changed little from its earlier depressed level.

Retailers and

most manufacturers report that sales continue to be disappointing; and
housing sales declined even further.

Production schedules at a number of

manufacturing firms were trimmed again to avoid an inventory build-up, and
employment declined slightly.

Farm land prices also weakened.

There were,

however, bright spots, most notably in auto sales.
Consumer spending has remained weak since January, in part as a
result of heavy snows which hindered shopping in February.

Seasonally

adjusted sales at several major District department stores have been
unchanged since January.

Retail volume at several smaller Arkansas stores

also has remained flat.

Apparel, furniture and appliance sales declined in

both St. Louis and Memphis, and farm equipment dealers report few sales.
On the other hand, many smaller retailers, such as food processors,
repair shops and professional services, continue to thrive.

Reports from

seven auto dealers indicate an improvement in sales during February and
early March.

One large Ford dealer sold 25 percent more cars and trucks in

February than in the corresponding month a year ago and has added 16
employees since January.

A distributor of earth-moving equipment states

that business remains good, reflecting both continued road construction and
increased coal mining.

A major brewer reports rising beer sales.

Manufacturing activity in the District also has been mixed since
January.

Orders continued to decrease at oil refineries and at firms

producing consumer durables, aluminum, and industrial machinery.

On the

other hand, the demand for defense goods, replacement parts for autos, farm
equipment, and fibers has strengthened.

A manufacturer of valves, fittings,

boilers and heat exchangers stated that production remains at a high level.
Inventories at most manufacturers and retailers are at or near
desired levels.

In order to avoid excessive inventories, production has

been trimmed further at several plants since January.

A few companies

report that additional employees were laid off, and one large apparel firm
closed a plant for a week in February.
reduced the length of work schedules.

Several firms report that they have
In Arkansas, the unemployment rate

rose to 12 percent in February.
Construction activity generally remains unchanged from the
late-1981 level, with residential construction^particularly depressed.

Some

builders, however, report heavier traffic through their subdivisions, and
one builder has had a sales pickup.

According to the St. Louis Home

Builder's Association, there were 36 housing starts in the area this
February compared with 81 in February last year and 280 in a "normal"
February.

The Association estimates that there will be 150 housing starts

in March compared with 500 for a typical March.

Commercial and other

nonresidential construction continues to be stronger than residential.
Depressed farm income, which will probably continue in the near
term, combined with large farm debt and high interest rates, is causing
weakness in District farmland prices.

Although prices in some locations

have declined only slightly, they reportedly have fallen }>250 per acre in
parts of northern Mississippi.

Farm debt is larger than usual for March,

and agricultural banks have renewed a number of farm loans, though at times
reluctantly.

In some instances, farmers have liquidated a portion of their

assets to obtain working capital and it is anticipated that there will be
few big purchases of farm equipment this year.
Commercial banks report a moderate increase in both outstanding
loans and savings deposits since the end of January.

Savings and loan

associations, on the other hand, are continuing to experience an outflow of
deposits, and most are operating at a loss.

The new IRA accounts have drawn

funds into financial intermediaries, but in most cases the amounts are
relatively small.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Economic conditions in the Ninth District looked generally the same
in February and early March as they have for quite a while:
tors hinted at recovery, but most remained weak.

several indica-

This time the positive hints

came from spending on cars and homes, which picked up a little; spending on
winter sports, which remained strong; the costs of manufacturing, which seemed
to

have

eased;

creased.

and

the

The negative

prices

farmers

indicators

receive

for

still dominated

Spending on general merchandise was still sluggish.
production

declined

pressed again.

further.

The

forestry

livestock,

which

in-

the positives, however.
Manufacturing orders and

and mining industries were

And low grain prices did not improve.

de-

Reflecting the econo-

my's general weakness was the continued weakness in bank lending.

Consumer Spending
General merchandise sales have been depressed in the district since
last summer, and they did not recover this winter.

Three large Minneapolis-

St. Paul retailers reported that their sales did increase between January and
February, but this increase was only temporary.

It merely represented spend-

ing which consumers had postponed in January because of bad weather.
March, sales slumped again.

In early

Because of their long sales slump, these metro-

politan area retailers said they have been watching their inventories very
closely, and lately they have been cutting back on their part-time help, both
the number of workers and the hours they work.

Outside the Minneapolis-St.

Paul metropolitan area, meanwhile, retail sales continued to be very weak,
according to this Bank's directors.

Home and auto sales also continued to be very weak this winter, but
they showed some signs of recovery.

The president of the Greater Minneapolis-

St. Paul Area Board of Retailers said that home sales climbed steadily from
125 in the last week of January to 29^ in the first week of March—they more
than

doubled

manufacturers

in about a month.
said

their

sales

Regional sales managers for domestic auto
improved

between January

and February

too,

partly because of rebate programs.
Spending on winter sports in the district has been strong this season, and it generally remained so in February and early March.
end of the district, unusually

At the eastern

cold weather in January and early February

disrupted the good business that ski operators had enjoyed in November and
December.

However, according to one large Minnesota operator, business picked

up again in late February, and he expected his March business to be 50 percent
better than a year ago.

At the western end of the district, ski area opera-

tors enjoyed uninterrupted good business.

Industrial Activity
Manufacturers were not in such good shape this winter:
and production continued to decline.

their orders

As many as 50 percent of the manufac-

turers responding to a University of Minnesota survey said their new orders
declined

in the three months ending in February, and nearly that many, !+7

percent, said their production declined.
the 37 and 2k

percent that had

reported

These were larger percentages than
declines

in the previous

survey.

These surveys confirm the declines we have reported in the last few Redbooks
as well as Bank directors' comments about current weak manufacturing activity
in their areas.

Directors said the general weakness stemmed mostly from poor

demand for building supplies, consumer durables, and automobiles.

The University's

surveys do reveal two developments which indicate

that manufacturers' costs may have eased lately and so firms may be better
able to recover lost orders and production.

One is that the prices manufac-

turers pay for raw materials and intermediate goods don't seem to have been
increasing as fast as they were; the number of manufacturers reporting such
price

increases

decreased between

surveys.

The other

development

is that

manufacturers appear to have brought their inventories of these inputs (and so
the costs of holding them) under better control; in the latest survey, only 25
percent

of the

respondents

said

their

inventories

of purchased

goods

had

increased, whereas 37 percent had said that in the previous survey.
Activity

in 'the

district's

mining

industries

also

declined

winter, while the forest products industry simply remained depressed.
mining, which had showed
weakened again.
workers

in

this
Iron

some signs of recovery in early January, recently

Although one large iron mining company recalled about 1,800

early

March,

another

laid

off

2,100 workers

for

eight

weeks.

Besides that, energy production, which had long been a source of strength for
the district, weakened recently.

Due to the glut in petroleum supplies, oil

exploration slowed at the western end of the district.

A Montana director

said that in early March 100 oil rigs were idle in eastern Montana and western
North Dakota.

Directors also said that the forest products industry at both

ends of the district remained very depressed.

Agricultural Conditions
Recent

changes

in

the

prices

of

farm products

indicate possible

recovery for about half the district's farmers—those who produce livestock—
but not

for the other half.

Between January and early March, the prices

farmers receive for hogs and cattle at South St. Paul rose about 7 percent.
One director attributed part of the rise to unusually harsh winter weather
restricting the flow of livestock to market.

But the price rise may not be as

temporary as that explanation would indicate:

an economist associated with

the livestock industry attributed part of the rise to livestock herds being
smaller than anticipated.

Crop farmers haven't had to face this ambiguity

about their price situation.

Cash crop prices at Minneapolis were essentially

unchanged between January and early March, and they were considerably below
their year-earlier

levels.

Weak

demand

seemed to be keeping these prices

down, for the largest railroad in the district reported that its grain shipments so far this year were 20 percent behind those a year ago.

Financial Conditions
Bank lending continued to reflect the lack of any significant recovery in the district economy.

Loan demand at banks in the Minneapolis-St.

Paul metropolitan area was weak in late 1981, and it apparently remained so in
early

1982.

Loans outstanding at these banks did not change much between

January and early March.

Loan demand was also weak at banks outside the Twin

Cities area, according to Bank directors.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Generally weak business conditions in the Tenth District

are reflected in generally flat loan demand at commercial banks.
show little real growth.

Retail sales

Inventories remain at low but satisfactory levels.

Depressed conditions in the housing sector are reflected in continued weakness
in the savings and loan industry.

A large winter wheat crop is anticipated,

but farmers continue to experience financial difficulties.

Deposit growth at

commercial banks varies widely across the District, with loan demand being
funded primarily through the sale of large CD's.
Retail Trade.

Retailers in the Tenth District report that current

dollar sales in the first two months of 1982 about equalled sales in the first
two months of last year.

They also expect sales in the second quarter of 1982

to be about unchanged from the second quarter of 1981, but anticipate a
slight pick-up in sales in the fall.

Despite some levelling of merchandise

costs, profit margins remain slim because of low volume, clearance sales, and
the rising costs of utilities and labor.

Store executives are satisfied with

their current stocks of goods.
Industry Activity.

The majority of purchasing agents contacted in the

Tenth District report input prices have increased from 5 to 10 percent over
the past year.
materials.

Most firms are experiencing normal lead times in obtaining

Rising prices and lengthening lead times are expected when business

conditions improve.

But inventories continue to be maintained at low levels

because of uncertainties regarding the economic outlook and the level of
interest rates.

Housing and Housing Finance.
tinuation of depressed conditions.

Homebuilders' Associations report a conInventories of unsold houses are very low.

Among Tenth District homebuilders, the consensus is that the demand for new
houses won't increase significantly until late this year, at which time
shortages of materials could develop quickly.
Savings and loan association officers express increasing dismay over the
rising cost of funds and the dismal growth of savings inflows.

Most foresee no

long-run relief, but many expect a short-lived drop in interest rates to bolster
deposits temporarily.

Few are making mortgage loans at market rates of 17 per-

cent to 18 percent, and even "blended rate" mortgages ranging from 12 percent
to 16 percent are up only marginally over last year.
Agriculture.

Winter wheat throughout the Tenth District is currently

in excellent shape, and a large crop is anticipated.

Many farmers are waiting

to decide whether to comply with the 1982 Farm Program acreage limitations,
necessary if farmers wish to be eligible for price support loans and deficiency
payments.

That decision must be made before the April deadline.

To comply,

many farmers will have to plow under a portion of their crop or use it for
pasture.

Banks and Production Credit Associations report more difficulties in

qualifying farm and ranch borrowers for credit this spring.

In some cases,

borrowers are having to sell some assets to improve their cash flow situation
or to reduce debt loads.

Established farmers are using their own cash reserves

to keep their businesses in operation, and some borrowers are turning to the
Farmers Home Administration for financing.

Bankruptcies have not increased

drastically this year according to District bankers.

More farm real estate is

being offered for sale this spring, than a year ago.

However, very little land

is being sold.

Banking Developments.

Reported loan demand at Tenth District banks is

generally flat with the exception of some strength in those areas serving the
energy industry.

Commercial and industrial lending is the only source of

strength in loan demand Districtwide.

Prime rates range from 16 to 16 1/2

percent, up slightly from the previous survey.
widely across the District.

Deposit growth varies

Loan demand continues to be funded primarily

through the sale of large CD's, as most banks report little growth in other
deposit categories with the exception of some seasonal strength in transactions
deposits.
Tenth District banks are moving cautiously in the area of deposit
sweeping arrangements.

Although a few of the banks contacted are considering

offering deposit sweeps in the future, none are presently offering these
arrangements.

Most plans presently under consideration involve a tie-in

arrangement with a mutual fund, while one bank indicates that excess balances
might be placed in the RP markets.

While no automated deposit sweeping

arrangements are being offered, some cash management arrangements have been
made on an individual basis for corporate customers.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

There is some indication that the recession is bottoming out in
the Eleventh District, but the decline in crude oil prices has begun to
dampen

oil

housing

field

starts

related

are

activities.

showing

the

Auto

initial

and

signs of

housing

sales

recovery.

and

new

Commercial

construction remains strong, but builders are becoming more cautious.

A

slowdown in new orders for drilling equipment may work against a revival of
manufacturing

output.

Department

store

sales

are

keeping

up

with

inflation, and business loans continue to outpace slumping consumer loans.
Low commodity prices continue to depress farm incomes.
Domestic auto sales have increased significantly since January in
response

to manufacturers

rebates.

Dealers

expect

continue to sell as long as rebates are in effect.

domestic

models

to

In addition, gasoline

prices, which have fallen as much as 15 cents per gallon since the first of
the year, have helped improve sales of larger models.
unit sales of imports have shown no growth.

On the other hand,

Inventories are down from the

record highs of December and January, and additions to current stocks will
closely follow sales in coming months.
Residential construction has perked up over the past two months
with

most

of

condominiums.

the

increase

centered

on

starts

of

apartments

and

Sales of both new and existing homes are rising but remain

well below year-ago levels.
Commercial construction is still robust, although the number of
announcements

of

new

projects

is

on

the

decline.

The

recession

has

tempered the demand for office space somewhat, and there is growing concern

that

many

areas

may

become

overbuilt.

Securing

permanent

financing

continues to be a problem, and lenders are demanding an equity share of a
project as part of the lending agreement.
The drop in crude oil prices is contributing to declines in oil
field related activities.
in

the District

At last count 2,596 drilling rigs were operating

states.

That

is down from

a

December, and 201 units fewer than a year ago.
this

time of year, but

expected.

the

current

setback

peak

of

2,976

rigs

in

A decline is normal for

is

greater

than

had

been

Nevertheless, industry analysts predict a turnaround this spring

and the average number of active rigs this year will exceed

the average

count for last year.
Manufacturing output continued to trend downward slowly.
for

oil

field

petrochemical

equipment

plants

have

are

slipping.

shut

down, and

A

number

those

of

still

Orders

refineries

and

in operation

are

running at near record low levels.

Downtimes for annual maintenance are

being

closings

extended,

and

further

plant

are

contemplated.

Other

manufacturers with national markets face weak demand for their products.
Cutbacks in apparel manufacturing are causing many smaller contract plants
to close down.
defense

However, the strength in commercial construction and the

industry

is

holding

up

output

in

the

steel

and

electronics

industries.
The
Increased
workers

District

layoffs,
are

labor

plant

contributing

market

shutdowns,
to

the

has
and

rise

deteriorated
the
in

since

in-migration
unemployment.

unemployment rate in Texas was only 5.8 percent for February.

of

December.
unemployed
Still,

the

Department store sales show no real gains.

Sales of soft goods,

especially men's wear and cosmetics, are doing better than sales of "big
ticket"

items.

Tighter

controls

have

reduced

inventory

levels

since

January.

Credit sales are about even with last year, although payments are

slower.

The devaluation of the Mexican peso sharply reduced sales along

the Border.

Retailers expect higher sales in the second half of the year.

The dollar value of loans by commercial banks is increasing at a
moderate rate.

Energy production and exploration account for much of the

gain.

Both consumer and construction loans show net declines so far this

year.

Demand deposits have fallen since January, but time deposits have

risen.

IRA deposits have not grown as fast as expected, and respondents

suspect

that

funds

transferred

portion of the increase.

from

other

accounts

are

a

significant

Restrictions on the issuance of bank credit cards

continue to be tightened, and bankers are considering instituting variable
rates on these cards.
Mortgage lending at S&L's has picked up with the small gains in
housing sales.

"Builder buydowns" are helping to reduce interest rates on

mortgage contracts.
to

prices

for

Lower prices for apartments and condominiums relative

single-family

homes

has

also

stimulated

loan

demand.

Delinquencies are up but are not considered high enough to be a problem.
Farm incomes continue to be plagued by depressed grain and cotton
prices.

Beef prices, however, are rising since the supply of feeder cattle

has been cut to rebuild herds.
dramatically

high

levels,

Delinquencies on farm loans have climbed to

and

farm

liquidations

are

above

average.

Set-aside programs have begun, but little near-term relief for farmers is
foreseen.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy has slipped deeper into recession since
the last report.

Consumer spending has remained at the slow post-Christmas

holiday level reached in January and is running below the year-ago level in
real terms.

In the manufacturing and mining industries, further cutbacks and

layoffs are occurring in a number of industries, although the pace of the
overall decline appears to be decelerating.

Homebuilding activity has dropped

recently, in contrast to the national pattern, and nonresidential construction
also is slowing.

Agricultural commodity prices have risen slightly during the

past month but remain well below the level of a year ago.

Respondants expect

little or no improvement in net farm income in 1982, following 1981's decline.
Bank credit at Twelfth District banks rose sharply in February, but as a result
of weakness rather than strength in the regional economy.
Consumer Spending
Respondants report little change in retail sales from the slow postChristmas holiday pace reached in January.
below the level of a year ago in real terms.

Spending remains weak, running
Consumers continue to exhibit

cautious spending behavior, staying away from costly durable goods such as
furniture and appliances and confining their purchases to apparel and other
necessities.

Large department stores are doing better than smaller retail

outlets which are reported to be going out of business in increasing number,
especially in rural communities.

While most retail outlets are no longer

liquidating excess inventory, they are reported to be holding stocks at
"bare-bone" levels, buying much less spring and summer merchandise than a year
ago.

This conservative inventory pattern reflects not only high interest rates

but their belief that consumer spending probably will remain sluggish for the

next few months.

Automobile sales did pick up somewhat in February, in

response to the domestic car rebate program, but still remained depressed
relative to a year ago.

Moreover, respondents are concerned that these

purchases are being "borrowed" from subsequent periods and that auto sales
will drop sharply when the rebates are eliminated.
Mining and Manufacturing
Respondants report further cutbacks in production and employment, but
at a decelerating rate.

Employment in the lumber and mining industries has

stabilized at a very depressed level, with these industries operating at about
60 percent of capacity or less.

But layoffs continue in the construction,

commercial aircraft, aluminum and automobile industries.

For example, the

Boeing Company in Seattle recently announced plans to layoff as many as 5,000
workers this year because of slow demand for commercial aircraft by foreign and
domestic airlines.

General Motors Corporation recently closed its assembly

plant at Fremont, California, and will shut down its plant at South Gate,
California on April 1.

These closures will layoff 2,500 and 500 workers at

those respective locations and will have ripple effects on other industries.
While rising defense spending is having some positive impact on regional
employment, most of the stimulus is expected in 1983-84 when programs such as
the B-l bomber move into the production phase.
Real Estate
The Twelfth District has failed to experience the pickup in either
new home sales or homebuilding reported elsewhere.

On the contrary, sales of

new homes remain so depressed that builders are still trying to dispose of
unsold inventory.

As a result, homebuilding activity has dropped to a new

post-World War II low.

Buyers are purchasing only when essential and only when

extraordinary financing is provided by sellers.

The slump in sales is eroding

selling prices for both new and older single-family homes and condominiums,

causing prices to drop below year-ago levels in real terms.

Moreover, realized

prices are lower than selling prices because of seller-financed transactions at
below market interest rates.

Distress among builders, brokers and property

owners is especially great in areas of higher than average unemployment.
Nonresidential construction activity also has been dropping recently as
business firms have scaled back capital spending programs.

Even the boom in

office building construction has subsided as a glut of space has begun to
appear in metropolitan areas.
Agriculture
Twelfth District farmers and ranchers experienced a decline in both
gross and net farm income in 1981 as bumper crops combined with lagging demand
to reduce commodity prices.

Prices for a large number of commodities have

risen recently but remain well below the level of a year ago.

Thus, unless

farmers produce significantly less in 1982 than in 1981, little or no
improvement in farm income is likely this year.

So far, agricultural sources

are pessamistic that farmers will carry out that production cutback.

Although

the Department of Agriculture has reinstated several set-aside programs to
reduce planted acreage, Twelfth District farmers generally are not expected to
take advantage of those programs.

Meanwhile, farmers and ranchers already are

heavily in debt and finding it increasingly difficult to meet loan payments.
Financial Institutions
Bank credit at Twelfth District banks rose sharply in February as a
result of a strong increase in business loans.

However, as in recent months,

the increase appeared to stem from the economy's weakness rather than from
strength.

Businesses are borrowing to finance involuntary inventory

accumulation and to meet short-term working capital needs.

Bankers also report

an across-the-board deterioriation in the financial condition of many
prospective business borrowers.

In other areas, real estate loans

continued to expand at a sluggish pace.

Demand for new mortgage loans

continued to be weak, with a slowdown in liquidation of old loans helping to
account for the increase.
month.

Consumer loans dropped for the second consecutive

Loans for automobiles and consumer durables were especially weak as

rising unemployment caused further weakness in household borrowing.

Bankers

also report an upward drift in consumer loan delinquency rates and personal
bankruptcies.

