CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

December 15, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.]
Overview:

Economic activity in most Districts showed some signs

of improvement except in the manufacturing sector.

Weakness in

manufacturing remained pervasive with some further layoffs reported and,
for the most part, little or no upturn in new orders.

Consumer spending

strengthened in November but several Districts noted sluggish
early-December sales.

Housing sales and starts registered gains in most

regions although the oversupply of office space kept nonresidential
construction generally slow.

In several agricultural areas a further

decline in farm income and land values overshadowed the few bright spots
that appeared.

Commercial bank lending was essentially flat in most

reporting Districts.

The general outlook ranges from a slight upturn

during the next six months to little pickup until late 1983.
Consumer Spending
Since the last report, consumer expenditures posted some gains
on both a month-to-month and year-over-year basis, helped in part by
promotional activity.

Nonetheless, no real exuberance was displayed.

Auto sales picked up in several areas in response to lower finance
charges but these lower rates are scheduled to end soon.

With regard to

the overall outlook for retail sales during the holiday season, the most
optimistic report was from Boston ("solid but unspectacular").

Several

Districts experienced good consumer buying immediately after Thanksgiving
but sluggish sales thereafter.

One factor cited was the trend in recent

years of a shift in sales to the end of the holiday season.

Inventories

were generally in line though one District reported that inventories

overall were high.

The San Francisco and Atlanta Banks noted relatively

strong tourist demand at areas in Hawaii, Oregon and Florida.
Manufacturing and Mining Activity
The manufacturing and mining sectors continued to languish
throughout the nation.

Although a few Districts observed scattered signs

of improvement, most reported that shipments and new orders remained
stagnant or declined further in a broad range of industries.
San Francisco, Minneapolis, and Chicago reported that timber mills, iron
mines, and producers of steel, industrial equipment, and castings were
operating at half capacity or less.

In Cleveland, manufacturers of steel

mill and other industrial equipment were hurt by the cancellation of
customers' capital expansion plans.

Boston and New York expressed some

concern for future bankruptcies in manufacturing if sales did not turn up
soon.
areas.

Even the business of high technology firms slackened in some
In many industries, widespread cost-cutting measures continued,

including layoffs, shorter workweeks, and longer-than-usual Christmas
shutdowns.

Despite the pervasive sense of sluggishness, however, a few

bright spots emerged.

In Richmond, sales of textile firms increased

significantly, and in St. Louis, food processors noted a slight
improvement.

Several Districts indicated that suppliers of building

materials and selected home furnishings were beginning to feel a pickup
from the increased activity in the residential construction sector.
Defense contractors were still doing well.

Construction and Real Estate
The housing market improved in many parts of the country.
Districts even experienced substantial gains.

A few

St. Louis, for example,

reported that new home sales were greater this November than in any other
November in recent years.

In Kansas City, increased activity reduced new

home inventories to an all-time low, and led to a significant increase in
housing starts.

These improvements in the residential real estate market

were largely attributed to the decline in interest rates and to stable or
lower home prices.

The office market, however, continued weak in most

areas of the country due to a glut of existing office space from
overbuilding and decreased demand.

Chicago and San Francisco were

especially hard hit, whereas New York and Richmond reported modest
strengthening in some areas of their Districts.

These latter two

Districts, along with Dallas, also noted a slight pick-up in industrial
construction activity.
Agriculture
In general the agricultural sector continued to experience low
net income resulting from depressed prices and little or no decline in
overall costs.

Grain, corn, and soybean farmers saw only a small chance

of profit from the 1982 crops and Dallas beef producers were preparing
cattle for slaughter rather than for breeding because of unfavorable
economic conditions.

Some farmers, however, were doing well.

For

example, prices were up and the cost of feed held steady or declined for
Minneapolis and St. Louis hog producers, and good crop yields were
expected to bring a profitable year for Atlanta cotton growers.
downtrend in the price of farmland continued in areas such as the

The

Richmond District where, in addition, farm business failures were still
above normal.

In the Northwest the timber industry remained depressed

due to low domestic and foreign demand.
Finance
Commercial bank lending was essentially flat in most reporting
districts.

In Minneapolis and Philadelphia corporate lending was down as

businesses turned to the bond market, but consumer borrowing
strengthened.

In Kansas City, however, the reverse occurred: corporate

loans increased while consumer loans were flat.

Deposit flows improved

somewhat at most commercial banks and at some thrift institutions.
Outlook
In many Districts, a number of signs pointed to somewhat
brighter prospects for consumer spending and construction.

Retailers

were cautiously optimistic that recent gains would continue into the new
year.

While the outlook for commercial construction remained weak,

homebuilders were hopeful that their modest pickup would accelerate.

As

for manufacturing, there was no consensus on how soon the advances in
retail and construction activity would result in increased production.
Several Districts did note that orders of a few firms were beginning to
improve.

But manufacturers in many Districts saw little chance of a

general upturn before the second half of 1983 or even early 1984, and
many have turned more pessimistic because the recovery has been so slow
in coming.

Inventories in manufacturing are lean in most regions and

when business activity does turn up, production should rise quickly to
meet the higher demand.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic conditions in the First District are much the same as they
were last month.

Retailers continue to experience relatively good sales

growth and look forward to a "solid" Christmas season.
are generally satisfactory.

Retail inventories

Among the manufacturers contacted, most of

whom produce capital goods, orders are flat to down and no recovery is
expected until the second half of 1983 or later.

Firms are using

combinations of wage freezes, reduced hours, plant shutdowns and layoffs to
bring down costs.

Among the few positive developments was a report that

sales of hardware for new and remodelled homes have picked up.

Also

suggestive of a recovery in housing was a report by a banking director that
his bank did more mortgage business in the month of October than in any
previous month.
Retail
Most retailers contacted in the First District reported

"high

single digit" sales growth in November compared to a weak November last
year.

Those with branches or associated stores elsewhere in the nation

said sales were much stronger in New England than in the Midwest or Sunbelt
regions.
goods.

In some local stores durables seem to be selling better than soft
The merchants expect solid but unspectacular Christmas sales.
One of the area's major department stores experienced a sales

increase of 9.2 percent over November 1981.

This growth was attributed to

the strength of the New England economy and the store's moderate - upper
income customer base.

A discount chain with 9.6 percent sales growth in

New England encountered sales declines in their Midwest and Southeast
stores.

The growth in New England was especially strong in hard goods;

kerosene heaters were very popular.

Both chains claimed that unseasonably

warm weather had reduced sales of cold weather-related goods.
On the whole, inventories were reported to be at satisfactory
levels.

The two department store chains had "excessive" inventories last

year; this year they are keeping stocks tighter but flexible.

A mail order

outdoor specialty firm and a pet store chain have increased inventories
well above last year to improve customer service and encourage impulse
holiday buying.
Several of the merchants contacted said that sales results so far
are consistent with the trend over the last few years for Christmas sales
to occur closer and closer to the end of the month.

They also expressed

concern that heroic promotional efforts would be required once the
snowballing effect of holiday purchasing ends.
Manufacturing
For most of the manufacturers contacted, order rates are unchanged
or declining.

The Redbook group includes firms in such high technology

industries as computers, telecommunications equipment and control
instruments, as well as manufacturers of machine tools and specialized
industrial machinery.

Neither the high tech firms nor firms from more

traditional capital goods industries expect a significant pickup in their
own operations until the second half of 1983 or the early part of 1984.
However, one machine tool maker said that if present conditions persist for
another six months, many firms will go out of business and the capacity of
the domestic machine tool industry will be permanently reduced.

This

sentiment was repeated by a bearings manufacturer, who also pointed out
that while book prices for bearings are rising, large buyers are
negotiating discounts of 20-30 percent.

All the firms contacted are trying

to bring inventories and employment levels into line with current orders
with combinations of layoffs, wage freezes, reductions in hours, and
Chirstmas shutdowns.

The high tech firms, which fared relatively well

earlier in the recession, seem to be relying more on wage adjustments and
Christinas shutdowns.
While reports from the manufacturing sector were generally
discouraging, there were a few positive developments.

Orders were up for

hardware used in building and remodelling residential housing.
also up for machinery to make circuit boards.

Orders were

Products which save money,

for example, energy efficient lighting, and which increase productivity,
for example, office automation equipment, continue to sell well.

The

defense business is strong.
Professors Eckstein, Samuelson, and Houthakker were available for
comment this month.

All agree that the economy is still weak and that the

recovery is not yet assured.
will begin soon.

They all predict that some sort of recovery

However, they differ in their assessment of the

probability of recovery and what the Fed should do to help the economy turn
the corner.
Eckstein was the most pessimistic of the three.

He believes that

before it is over the slide in business fixed investment will be the worst
since 1931.

His confidence in a consumer-led recovery has diminished

because he foresees no growth this quarter and little growth next quarter
in real disposable income.

His pessimism about next quarter is partially

attributable to scheduled increases in excise taxes and the social security
tax base and the proposed hike in gasoline taxes to finance public works.
He also feels the inventory-sales ratio is too high for this stage of the
business cycle.
Given his uncertainty about the recover)', Eckstein strongly urges
the Fed to do everything in its power to bring interest rates down at least
to the point where the prime rate is 9 percent.

When asked about the

current search for a reliable aggregate he exclaimed

"aggregates,

shroagregatesI" He'd like Congress to help out by accelerating the 1983 tax
cut, but he doesn't think it is politically feasible.
Samuelson believes that the economy will probably turn the corner
if the Fed continues its "slight departure from narrow monetarism to ease
nominal and real interest rates."

In his opinion, such a policy would not

regenerate inflationary expectations or damage the Fed's credibility.
However, because he thinks that further increases in the 1983 deficit would
rekindle such expectations, he is opposed to short-term temporary jobs
programs at this time.
Houthakker believes that, in light of recent improvements in
housing and autos and the continued improvement in inflation, the economy
will not deteriorate further and a recovery will take place in early 1983.
He urges the Fed not to "pump up" the money supply to accelerate this
process.

If it did, renewed inflation would push interest rates back up,

plunging the economy back into a recession.

He thinks that setting of

growth targets for business loans is a promising idea that merits further
consideration.

He is encouraged by Secretary Regan's proposal for a new

international monetary conference.

He favors less flexibility in exchange

rates and believes that many of our economic problems in the 1970s are
attributable to the breakdown of the Bretton Woods agreement.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

In recent weeks the Second District economy showed a few signs
of improvement, but the manufacturing sector remained depressed.
Promotions sparked early holiday shopping in the District and resulted in
a further strengthening of retail sales.

Declining mortgage rates

produced a modest rise in home sales, and builders were cautiously
optimistic about further growth.

Recent developments in the

nonresidential real estate market were mixed, but some improvement did
occur on balance.

In manufacturing, however, business leaders saw no

pickup and reported increasing pessimism about the short-run outlook.
Consumer Spending
Promotional efforts spurred early holiday shopping in the
District, and pushed year-over-year gains in November above those of
earlier months.

This strength was expected to continue through the

holiday season.

The eastern region in general met or exceeded sales

plans for those national retailers contacted, while sales in much of the
rest of the country continued to lag behind.

Apparel, cosmetics,

housewares, and consumer electronics were all reported moving well.
Seasonal increases in employment matched year ago levels for most stores,
and inventories were generally in line with planned sales.

Retailers who

had experienced a poor fall season expected business to be difficult
again in 1983, but those with better sales in September and October
looked forward to further gains in the new year.

Construction and Real Estate Activity
The residential construction market showed additional signs of
life during November though the rise in new home sales was modest.
Moderately priced homes geared to first-time homebuyers sold well.

The

existing home market also experienced a pickup in sales activity.
Declining mortgage rates were cited as a major factor in the sale of both
new and existing homes.

As a result of the renewed interest on the part

of actual and potential buyers, builder optimism increased though some
expressed concern that interest rates might rise again because of high
credit demand.
The nonresidential real estate market also improved but demand
for space continued weak in many areas of the District.

Activity and

planning by office developers increased in midtown New York City even as
the downtown market remained soft.
suburbs:

The pattern was also mixed in the

leasing activity was up in New Jersey and new construction

occurred in Westchester and Long Island, while in Connecticut the slow
pace of previous months persisted.

Industrial construction remained

depressed throughout the District, although some pickup was reported on
Long Island.
Business Activity
The manufacturing sector continued to be very weak except for
the relatively healthy high technology and defense industries.

Overall

sales remained poor in industries ranging from metal fabricating to
furniture.
production.

Many companies were finding it difficult to maintain steady
At a few concerns, however, orders were bolstered by a

unique product line or the closure of a competitor.

Cost-cutting

measures continued, including layoffs and the spreading out

of pay increases over longer periods of time.
were expected to be longer than usual.

Shutdowns for Christmas

Scattered recalls of workers

occurred only in response to specific orders and therefore were viewed as
temporary.

Although the recent drop in interest rates eased liquidity

problems somewhat, several companies were thought to be bordering on
insolvency and in need of buyers to bail them out.

The nonmanufacturing

sector still has not suffered a severe downturn, with some expansion
continuing in the financial and service industries.
Outlook
The outlook for retailing and construction brightened, but our
manufacturing contacts reported a deepening pessimism about the future.
When the rate of deterioration slowed in September, these same contacts
expressed a "glimmer of hope" that an upturn would begin within a couple
of months.

Since then, the recovery has proven elusive and that glimmer

has disappeared.

If demand should pick up, however, companies will be

able to increase production quickly since inventories, except for cars,
have been reduced to very low levels.

One of our respondents cited a

lack of a coherent policy at the national level as the source of the
pervasive gloom.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Donald Maude (Merrill Lynch),
Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty Trust), and Francis Schott (Equitable
Life Assurance Society):*
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Maude:

A sustained economic recovery cannot get under way

unless interest rates are brought down further.

However, the Fed is

running out of leeway for bringing down these rates by pushing down the
funds rate and the discount rate.

The credibility issue is growing and

will become more real once the markets see signs of economic recovery.
To bring rates down in a credible fashion, the Fed should quantify
publicly to the markets the magnitude of precautionary balance building
that has bloated M-l over the past year, go back to shift adjusting other
checkable deposits and come up with 1983 M-l targets more realistic with
trend changes in velocity and M-2 targets that net out the bloating of
interest-crediting to those components earning market rates of interest.
Riefler:

There is a real danger that the specter of higher

interest costs that may be incurred by banks in competing for deposits in
new DIDC authorized accounts will slow banks' willingness to reduce
lending rates.

This in turn may delay the rebound in consumer spending

that would be normal at this stage of the business cycle.
Schott:

Signs of revival in housing and automobiles and

improved cash flow at thrifts and life insurance companies raise the
question whether the Fed has done enough to stimulate recovery.
evaluation period may be appropriate.

An

Nevertheless the number and extent

of trouble situations domestically and internationally suggest that the
indirect assistance of a further easing of credit conditions may well be
advisable.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Indications from the Third District are mixed in December.

Activity in the

industrial sector declined fractionally from November levels and manufacturing prices
reflect that slump.

Retailers say spending has risen slightly since the last Redbook but

Christmas sales are still slow.
are healthy.

Loan activity is mixed at area banks, but deposit flows

Most Third District business contacts are projecting some improvement in

economic conditions over the next six months. Manufacturing executives are looking for
increased activity by June but remain cautious nonetheless.

Department store sales are

expected to show modest gains, although the 1982 holiday season will be below average.
Bankers are forecasting some gains for commercial and consumer lending in the first half
of 1982.
MANUFACTURING
Third District manufacturing activity has resumed its downward slide in
December,

according

to respondents

to the most recent Business Outlook Survey.

Specifically, shipments are down at over one-third of area plants and new orders fared
only slightly better.

Although there has been further tightening of industrial stock levels

recently, there are some signs that inventory run-down has abated somewhat. Setbacks
for labor, on the other hand, continue with no apparent moderation.

Reports of reduced

payrolls and shortened working hours are as prevalent now as they were in November.
Survey

participants

remain

recovery over the next six months.

optimistic

in their projections of

industrial

Local manufacturers' outlooks have, in fact,

brightened a little in December, in spite of the continuing slump.

Respondents are

expecting a strong push in new orders that will rebuild backlogs and allow employers to
expand both payrolls and the average workweek by June. Fractional additions to

inventories are forecast, as well.

There are few plans for increases in plant and

equipment expenditures, however.
Industrial prices also show further softening in December. Prices of finished
goods have been cut again and input costs have not changed from their November
levels.

Prices are expected to start climbing again between now and June, coincident

with the projected rebound in activity.
RETAIL
December sales at Third District department stores are building slowly as the
holiday buying season ends its second week, but area sales volume is still fairly soft
overall, according to retail contacts. Current dollar sales are ranging only 3 percent to 4
percent ahead of last year; real gains are slim at best. Sales of Christmas related items,
while pretty much in line with merchants' expectations, are considerably below past
holiday experiences.

Ten days of unseasonably warm weather following Thanksgiving put

a damper on holiday shopping spirit and thus kept the lid on spending. In addition, local
store officials say the Philadelphia retail market has become exceptionally tough over
the last two years as economic conditions deteriorated.

Seasonal sales are heavily

dependent on promotions and price discounting, often at the expense of full price sales.
As a result, merchants are starting their big holiday pushes earlier and more forcefully.
Recently, one local retailer extended an 18-hour "one-day-only" sale to three days in an
effort to encourage spending.
Retailers predict that sales growth will remain slow but steady throughout
the holiday season.

Contacts believe that shoppers are watching their dollars closely

though, and that the usual late season surge may be relatively minor. An extra shopping
day on the retail calendar this year will help a little, but sales gains for the season and
the year as a whole should remain in the 3 percent to 4 percent range. Projections for

1983 show more of the same for retail sales. Next June's current dollar sales volume will
be 4 percent to 6 percent ahead on a year-over-year basis, according to merchants'
forecasts.
The pickup in sales, though small, has helped bring inventories more in line.
Stock levels are lean but generally in "good shape" and comparable to levels of a year
ago.

Industry representatives say they will keep stocks in check until the sales outlook

improves.
FINANCE
Third District banking contacts report mixed loan activity in December.
Commercial loan demand, as expected, has softened even more since the last Redbook.
Chiefly responsible is the move toward the corporate bond market.

Distress borrowing

has faded somewhat, as well.

As a result, overall C&I loan volume is now running only

barely above last December.

On the other hand, lower interest rates have made retail

loans more attractive.

Activity in consumer loans has increased since November, but,

for the most part, volume still trails year-ago levels.

One contact noted that some

consumer loan dollars were being diverted away from automobile loans to new leasing
arrangements because customers have been unwilling to make large auto downpayments.
Forecasts of loan activity over the next six months are mixed but point to
some improvement. Bankers agree that further retail loan growth is likely, especially if
rates drop further.

Projections for commercial lending range from flat activity, if

economic recovery stalls, to a modest upswing if business conditions improve.
Third District bankers are quoting a prime rate of 11.50 percent, down from
12 percent a month ago.

The slide in the prime has slowed recently and caused many

local seers to revise their outlooks for interest rates. A trough for the prime of around

11 percent is forecast for early 1983 and any movement in the next six months is likely
to be "slow and modest."
Deposit flows are very strong again this month.

Demand deposits have

improved since November and are now running 3 percent to 4 percent ahead of a year
ago. Time deposits gained strength as well, with unexpectedly robust growth in the 7 to
31-day time deposits leading the way.

One reason cited for this burst of activity is that

dollars intended for the new money market deposit accounts are being held in the 7 to
31-day accounts temporarily, until MMDAs are offered on December 14th. Bankers have
high hopes for the MMDA, and expect to attract a significant amount of deposits away
from the money market funds.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.
remain dismal.
are sluggish.
industry.

Economic conditions and the outlook in the Fourth District
Unemployment is high and rising.

Early December retail sales

Little near-term improvement is seen for the automobile

The steel industry is in desperate condition.

Survey results and

leading indicators point to further contraction of manufacturing.
construction is showing only a little improvement.

House

On the bright side,

scattered indicators of disinflation continue.
Labor Market Conditions.

Unemployment continues high and rising.

The

November unemployment rate was 14.2 percent (sa) in Ohio and 12.1 percent in
Pennsylvania.

The District's eleven major SMSA's unemployment rates (nsa) in

October ranged from 8.9 percent in Columbus to 19.7 percent in Youngstown, and
averaged 3.2 percentage points above the national rate.

The unemployment rate

has reached 21 percent in Lorain County, adjacent to Cleveland, as
shipbuilding, automobile and steel industries have stagnated.

The United Mine

Workers union reports only AO percent of active members in Ohio are working.
Consumer Spending.

Two major department store chains in the midwest

report Christmas season sales are moderate to sluggish so far, perhaps because
of unusually warm weather.
above the year-ago level.

Both expect real sales this season about 1 percent
One chain reports inventories are somewhat high and

expects it will take a record amount of price promotions to achieve their
forecast; the other says inventories are smaller than usual and promotions
won't be as aggressive as last year.

Both expect sales volume to be

concentrated closer to Christmas than in previous years because of a secular

trend in that direction and because unseasonably warm weather has delayed
sales of apparel.

One chain expects real PCE to rise 4% (saar) this quarter

from last and, assuming a continuation of automobile purchase incentives, to
rise 2 1/2% in the first quarter.
Automobiles.

Automobile inventory adjustment appears near completion

but a near-term sales reduction is expected by industry economists.

November

sales were better than expected by one major producer, who believes some of
the sales were borrowed from next quarter.

The firm projects import and

domestic sales at 7.4 million units (saar) next quarter, unless all domestic
producers were to give sales incentives on 1983 models, in which case sales
might reach 8.0 million.
and 1983 models.

Current sales are divided about evenly between 1982

Inventory will still be a little too high at yearend.

The

firm sees no change in inventory next quarter, and industry production will be
only slightly above fourth quarter levels.

Employee recalls to produce certain

models will be offset by temporary layoffs from other model production
facilities, so there will be little net increase in employment next quarter.
Another major automobile producer expects December sales will drop
about 8 percent from November, partly because fewer of the popular 1982 models
are left.

First quarter sales will be down slightly from this quarter, as

sales incentives terminate at year-end.

Production will rise somewhat next

quarter to build inventories for second quarter sales, but seasonally
adjusted, inventories will be flat.

Some employees will be called back next

quarter.
Manufacturing.

Manufacturing activity continues to contract, although

less rapidly than earlier in the year.

A survey of purchasing managers

reveals further reductions in inventories of raw materials, supplies, and

finished goods.

A record percentage of firms are purchasing production

materials on a hand-to-mouth basis.

The survey shows new orders, production,

and employment continue to decline.

A diversified producer of parts for cars,

trucks, and materials handling equipment reports his orders are weak because
many customers are cancelling capital expansion plans.
trucks are the lowest since 1967.
1983:IVQ.

Orders for heavy

He expects no upturn in his business before

A producer of consumable equipment for the mining industry sees no

sign of an upturn in orders.

This bank's survey of Fourth District

manufacturers shows December declines in new orders, shipments, backlogs,
inventories, and employment, although the declines are expected to be somewhat
smaller than in November.

Indexes of leading indicators point to further

decline in Pittsburgh but a bottoming in Cleveland.

An index of leading

indicators for the Pittsburgh area registered its 17th consecutive monthly
decline in October, while the index for the Cleveland area has been advancing
erratically and in September stood 2.5 percent above its April low.
Steel.

The steel industry is in severe distress.

A major steel

producer reports further declines in shipments, inventories, orders and
employment.

Fourth quarter shipments are expected to be less than 13 million

tons for the industry, 29 percent below the depressed year-ago level, and
orders received so far give no indication of first quarter improvement.
Another major producer describes the market as "unbelievably weak," and
expects further drops in shipments and employment.

The firm is operating at

20 percent of capacity, with only one of twelve blast furnaces in operation,
and is no longer certain of survival.

The firm projects industry losses

larger this quarter than last because shipments and transaction prices are
lower.

Steel mills are reducing inventories to generate cash as working

capital continues to erode.

Several firms plan to liquidate inventories, draw

down lines of credit, and sell off assets to delay bankruptcy while waiting
for economic recovery.

Survival of some producers is contingent on economic

recovery and strengthening of steel demand by mid-1983.
stocks of oil country pipe are still high.

Another firm reports

Steel producers have sharply

reduced capital expenditure plans, hurting steel mill equipment producers, who
see no upturn in their sales before 1984.
Construction.

A major builder of houses forecasts national housing

starts of 1.3 million units in 1983, up from about 1.1 million this year.
However, builders see a slower recovery in this District, where there are
scattered reports of mild increases in house construction.

In the Cleveland

area, bankruptcies among contractors and building-material suppliers in 1982
are up 36 percent from last year, and will account for one-third of total
corporate bankruptcies.
Prices.

Scattered indicators of disinflation continue.

Retailers in

Cleveland are offering unusually extensive pre-Christmas price reductions.
Some Teamster Union locals in Cleveland have been bidding against each other
with wage concessions to obtain employment, but steelworker union local
presidents recently rejected concession adjustments to the current labor
contract.

Industrial vendors are reported to be offering deep discounts to

obtain orders.

A survey of purchasing managers reveals more price declines

than increases, while a survey of manufacturers predicts prices they pay will
not change from November to December.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Recent economic and business activity in Fifth District could best
be described as flat.

On balance, manufacturing activity showed little change

over the past month, although within the sector substantial differences
persist among industries.

Shipments and new orders were essentially flat,

overall, and manufacturer's inventories were down slightly, as was employment.
Retailing showed much the same pattern with total sales, relative sales of
big ticket items, and inventories all holding at month earlier levels.

There

appear to be significant differences among areas and among product categories,
however.

According to some reports, housing sales and construction have been

picking up, perhaps substantially.

Expectations are more positive than in re-

cent weeks as most respondents anticipate improvement in their business activity in the near term.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity across the district held its own over the past
month, although for a number of industries current operating levels are quite
low.

Survey responses suggest little, if any, net change in the level of ship-

ments, new orders, or order backlogs.
some interesting developments.

This aggregate stability, however, masks

Chief among them is an apparent sharp rebtmnd

in the textile industry where several respondents report gains in shipments and
orders.

Another is the at least temporary arrest of the decline in activity

among building materials and furniture manufacturers.

Also, there is no dis-

cernible concentration, but only isolated reports of further declines in activity over the past month.
On the other hand, there is no evidence of any improvement on the manufacturing employment front.

In fact, responses suggest further declines in

employment since the last survey.

Inventories were brought down somewhat, and

most respondents are now comfortable with current levels.

Consumer Spending
By all accounts the consumption sector has been a mixed bag in recent
weeks.

Reports vary widely from sector to sector and from locality to locality.

It appears that consumer activity is picking up, but that it remains very
spotty.
where.

Consumer durables other than autos continue to languish nearly everyAuto sales are showing marked improvement in some areas, but continue

generally weak.

General merchandise lines are experiencing typical holiday

buoyancy in some localities, continued softness in others.

Housing and Construction
There is growing evidence that the housing sector is in a modest upswing that began some 2-3 months ago.

Permits and construction activity seem

to be up generally, although this is not true everywhere.

Also, sales activity

is reported to be improving in many areas, significantly in some.

Commercial

and industrial activity is very strong in some areas and reports of improved
conditions in markets for this property are becoming more widespread.

The Financial Sector
Financial institutions are generally preoccupied with the coming of
the MMDA.

Promotion has been moderately heavy but short on the specific terms

to be offered on the accounts.

Bankers seem to be expecting relatively little

new money to be available to individual banks as a result of this account.
Most bankers contacted expect only very modest inroads against MMFs in the
near term.
initally.

They see perhaps 5-10% of MMF assets as potentially available
Further, they expect most of the growth in MMDA in the early stages

to be at the expense of savings accounts.

Most District institutions have been

holding back on announcing pricing arrangements.

Some advertising of specifics

has been designed to capture new deposits at the outset and offers initial
yields in the 12-15% range and 2-3 points above the 91 day T-Bill rate beyond
that.

It is too early to tell what will happen beyond the first month or two

of the new deposit instrument.

Agriculture
Fifth District farm credit conditions in the third quarter of 1982
were marked by declining interest rates, continued sluggishness in farm loan
demand, slow farm loan repayment rates, and an increase in requests for loan
renewals and extensions.

Fund availability again improved, and liquidity

pressures on rural banks eased.

The downturn in farmland values continued,

further eroding farmers' equity positions.

Moreover, the proportion of District

farmers that went out of business, filed for bankruptcy, or liquidated part
of their assets in the past six months was said to be much larger than normal.

SIXTH DISTRICT -

ATLANTA

Late fall economic conditions in the Southeast show mixed signs. Construction
continues to improve, generating optimism among construction-related manufacturers.
The labor market appears to be stabilizing, and job growth in some sectors is accelerating.
Optimism prevails in the travel industry. However, the profit potential for most farmers
remains clouded and consumer spending has yet to show a pre-Christmas surge.
Employment and Industry.
an

end

to

the

deteriorating

labor

Latest available statistics on employment imply
market

conditions

reported

previously,

but

unemployment continues to rise, and reports from industry representatives on capital
spending plans indicate that the outlook for increased hiring is inauspicious.

October

figures indicate that declining construction employment finally may have reached bottom.
Rates of decline are decelerating in several construction-related manufacturing sectors,
such as lumber, wood, stone, clay, and glass.
manufacturers

Bankruptcies

among

lumber-related

are reportedly on the wane, although some smaller firms may have

trouble surviving until the seasonal spring upturn in housing.

Except in government

and trade the rate of growth in other nonmanufacturing sectors accelerated in October.
Job attrition continued in most manufacturing sectors, and for the first time since
World War II the District's unemployment rate reached 10.5 percent.
Our survey of firms and trade associations reveals moderate optimism among
producers of construction-related goods, such as lumber and carpets, and among makers
of structural steel. The latter expect government spending on defense and infrastructure
to stimulate demand.

However, chemical manufacturers do not share this optimism.

Even in industries with capital spending plans, job creation is likely to be minimal
because the impetus is cost-cutting efficiency rather than growth-related expansion.

Consumer Spending.
activity

compared

to

the

District retailers report generally higher promotional

same period

last

year.

They

regard

immediate

post-

Thanksgiving consumer buying to have been good, as expected, but the subsequent lull
is lasting longer than usual.

Consumers are delaying holiday purchases in hopes of

deep discounts in the last few weeks before Christmas.
continue to show improvement in some areas.
exercise

equipment,

small

appliances,

Big-ticket home furnishings

Purchases of personal computers, tools,

and

cosmetics

generally

remain

strong.

Unseasonably warm weather has caused winter apparel to move slowly, but luxury wear
has noticeably improved.

In contrast to 1981, retailers are comfortable with inventory

levels and are not likely to reduce prices more.
narrow further.

Thus, profit margins are unlikely to

However, sales volume and profits will depend upon the strength of

last-minute buying.
Southeastern auto sales slightly outpaced the nation's rise of 31 percent in
November.

Cut-rate loans are successfully stimulating sales and helping to reduce car

inventories.

Nevertheless, the short-term sales outlook is not bright because consumers

remain troubled by rising unemployment and high real interest rates.
Construction and Finance.

For the near future, realtors and thrift officials

feel that the post-election November 15 drop in the FHA/VA rates may have "propped
a stick" in the mortgage "window," which the pre-election slide in mortgage rates
opened.

Confidence in the future of housing is slowly returning as concern diminishes

that political engineering occasioned earlier drops in mortgage rates.
building permits show the greatest degree of recovery.

Single-family

Other construction sectors are

faring less well, and industry representatives expect slack demand and overbuilding to
keep nonresidential contract construction sluggish well into 1983.
Thrifts have been slow to accrue benefits from the housing recovery, but
total loans closed by S&L's have finally begun to improve.

Industry spokesmen attribute

the delayed recovery of thrifts vis-a-vis other construction indicators

to increased

competition from seller financing and mortgage companies and to a longer "wait and
see" period by home buyers.
Tourism.

Optimism, predicated upon national economic recovery, discounted

airfares, and the popularity of
representatives in our survey.

EPCOT,

is widespread

among

the

tourist

industry

Preliminary, partial data and reports from those polled

indicate that out-of-state travel in the upper-price brackets (air travel and lodgings)
has already begun to rise. November attendance at EPCOT remains ahead of projections
reportedly because Florida residents and out-of-state retirees are flocking to the new
attraction.

Nonetheless, several sources maintain that EPCOT's effect elsewhere in

Florida is negligible or negative.

Business and convention travel shows mixed signs.

Contacts report that Atlanta appears to be improving while South Florida, Alabama,
and Louisiana remain weak.

Respondents in Georgia, Tennessee, and Alabama blame

rainy weather rather than economic conditions for the more than seasonal decline in
local tourism.
Agriculture.
yields in 1982.

Southeastern

cotton farmers are experiencing

extraordinary

The most recent USDA projections estimate five of the six District

states will enjoy record yields; Georgia should surpass its previous record by 20 percent.
Yield is likely to determine profitability for most cotton producers, but some Mississippi
farmers are facing losses of both their crop and income as a result of an apparent
business failure.

A large cotton company, already in receipt of substantial cotton, is

unable to pay farmers or to return the cotton for which warehouse receipts are now
held by a creditor of the company.
Most grain farmers face only a small chance of profit from the 1982 crop,
notwithstanding a recent 5 percent rise in prices.

At present, widespread flooding in

the Mississippi valley has done little injury to crops, but potential damage is of concern,

and extension personnel in Mississippi report other weather-related damage.

Recent

aberrations in temperature and a surfeit of rain have adulterated the quality of the
remaining soybean harvest.

One estimate suggests a possible loss of 10 million bushels,

valued at approximately $52 million.

Large supplies have thwarted efforts to sell low-

quality beans.
Finance.

A survey of a cross-section of District banks and savings and loans

regarding "bridge" and Money Market Deposit Accounts (MMDA's) indicates a substantial
response to the new instruments.

Although few institutions in the District are offering

rates as high (21-22%) as those in Atlanta, the premiums are enough above current
money market funds to attract considerable corporate and personal interest throughout
the District.

Insurance, which the MMDA's provide, is another factor of particular

attractiveness to retired and large personal account holders.

Except in institutions

offering low rates, early indications are that most of the funds are being attracted
from money market mutuals.

The probability of continued substantial shifts between

money market mutuals and the new accounts appears high.

Such shifts may create

either liquidity problems or an atmosphere of potential problems.

In such a climate

even more funds would be transferred out of money market mutuals.
Panel of Economists.
weaknesses of their respective

In response to our request to assess the strengths and
economies in 1983, most members

economists cite construction as a probable leading sector.

of

our panel of

Several respondents are

pessimistic regarding nonresidential construction though. Reflecting in part the economic
heterogeneity of the District, little consensus exists otherwise regarding either strengths
or weaknesses.

Construction-related

opinion of many panelists.

manufacturing seems likely to improve, in the

Chemicals, textiles, oil, gas, exports, and agriculture were

each cited by a few respondents as potentially weak sectors.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

The sorry state of economic conditions in the Seventh District

reported in earlier Redbooks has not improved.

Employment, output, and new

orders in the manufacturing sector continued to decline in November.
plant shutdowns over the holidays commonly will be extended.

Normal

The

retrenchment in capital goods is unprecedented in the postwar era.

The

industrial base of the equipment and automotive industries is contracting as
more plants are closed.

Retail sales continue sluggish, with the Christmas

season disappointing so far.

Residential construction should improve

significantly in 1983 if interest rates stay down.
new office space is causing rents to decline.

The heavy oversupply of

Widespread price cutting in

wholesale markets frequently means sales below cost.

No sign of improvement

from depressed levels is noted in the agricultural sector.

Business demand

for short-term funds is down sharply.
Business Sentiment. Chronic hard times are taking a toll in reduced
long-term confidence for both managers and workers.

Morale has been

depressed by abortive improvements in demand, which were assessed,
erroneously, as heralding solid revival.

In the past month, District

analysts in retailing, paperboard, and cement have noted the evaporation of
what had appeared to be promising signs.

The Chicago Purchasing Management

Association summarized the views of its members on December 7:
recovery has not materialized.
Lower Break-Even Points.

"The expected

All key indicators remain strongly negative."
Some companies are confident that they can

maintain profitability at sharply reduced levels of operation.

Breakeven

points have been drastically lowered by large, permanent cuts in personnel,

closing of marginal facilities, sales of unprofitable divisions, scaling down
operations by purchasing more parts and services, elimination of less
essential functions, and stringent cost control.

Such restructuring could

bring rapid increases in profits if and when revenues rise significantly.
Consumer Purchases.

General merchandise retailers have been unhappy

with Christmas sales after a promising start in November.

Part, but not all,

of the shortfall is attributed to unseasonably warm weather in some weeks,
including early December.

Virtually all product lines are slow.

One large

chain has increased sales of household durables by heavy promotions.

The

largest airline reports passenger traffic up substantially since August, but
this reflects bargain fares and free bonus flights.
Employment Losses.

Payroll employment in the five Seventh District

states in the fall was 8 percent below the same period of prosperous 1978,
while employment in the U.S. was one percent higher.

Many manufacturing

employment in the District was down 25 percent in this comparison.
of course, has the largest decline.

Michigan,

Wisconsin, specializing in capital

equipment, has the smallest decline in the District, but its situation has
deteriorated very rapidly in the past 12 months.

Many manufacturing jobs are

gone forever as plants have been closed.
Jobless Funds.

State jobless pay funds have been strained as

unemployment has remained at high rates for extended periods.

The Illinois

and Michigan funds each have debts of almost $2 billion to the federal
Treasury.

Debts of Iowa and Wisconsin are growing.

Indiana, despite its

severe unemployment problem, has no such debt because of legal restrictions.
Proposals to raise employer contributions to jobless funds are opposed as

likely to encourage additional migration of industry.
Labor Negotiations.

The Caterpillar strike that began October 1 has

affected many smaller companies that supply components.

Management insists

that substantial labor contract concessions must be made to reduce an
estimated 40 percent cost advantage held by foreign competitors.

The

Chrysler dispute apparently is being resolved, with the UAW winning its key
demand for an immediate wage hike.

With the year drawing to a close, it

appears that, by-and-large, organized labor is winning its fight to prevent
"take-aways of hard-won gains".

(The rank-and-file has been more adamant

against concessions than union leaders.)

Unfortunately, the failure to

cut unit production costs substantially in major hard goods industries
implies a further erosion of the region's industrial base as producers step
up efforts to seek foreign sources for components or finished goods.
Inventories.

Although most businesses are still attempting to cut

inventories, holdings remain excessive in lines where sales have been even
weaker than expected, e.g. apparel, paperboard, and some motor vehicles.
Nevertheless, inventories will have to rise in some sectors, including
residential building, if demand increases only moderately.

A major producer

of diesel engines that are mainly used in heavy trucks has recalled some
workers.

Demand for trucks has not improved, but engine production had been

below usage and inventories had been exhausted.
Capital Goods.

Prospects for business equipment in the Seventh District

are even worse than in earlier months.

Conditions vary by company and line

but, overall, no earlier post-war recession was nearly so bad.

Bookings are

off 10 to 65 percent from reduced levels of a year ago at various companies.

One diversified equipment producer is operating at 50 percent of capacity,
while another is at 25 percent.
percent of capacity.

Castings production also is at about 25

Foreign demand, which had been relatively good for some

products, has ebbed in recent months.

Among the worst lines are equipment

for railroads, trucking, agriculture, construction, mining, and metalworking.
Capital goods firms have drastically cut corporate staff, including those in
design and development, to an extent that could harm competitive positions in
future years.
Motor Vehicles.

The spurt in auto sales in November, aided by favorable

credit terms, is not regarded as a clear indication of an improvement in
demand. Some auto dealers dislike temporary incentive programs, because sales
almost invariably decline afterwards.

Instead, they would prefer lower

prices.
Steel.

Steel demand remained very depressed in December.

Bookings are

beginning to show up for January, but probably because of the desire of
customers to have inventories at rock bottom for year-end financial
statements.

Steel companies have learned that customers' normal holiday

shutdowns will comnonly be extended into January, perhaps into February.
Construction.

While residential building is expected to increase

significantly in the new year, nonresidential construction is almost certain
to be down.

Capital expenditure programs are being cancelled or stretched

out by manufacturers and public utilities.

The glut of new office space in

the Chicago area has caused rents to drop by 11 percent in the past year.
large office leasing firm has filed for bankruptcy because of its liability
on blocks of space contracted for at rates above the current market level.

A

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Consumer spending increased during November and early December in
the Eighth District, an indication that the economy is about to move out of
the business trough.

Respondents noted marked increases in purchases of

homes and automobiles, and other retail sales began showing signs of life.
At the same time, however, industrial production and employment changed
little from their depressed levels.
Just as a recovery appeared to be developing, the District's
economy was dealt a blow by the weather.

Heavy rains over much of the area

in late November and early December, accompanied by several tornadoes, and
followed by flooding of the Mississippi River and many of its tributaries,
caused widespread damage.

Estimates of the direct loss of wealth are

running into the hundreds of millions of dollars.

Moreover, operations of

many businesses were severely interrupted, and the cleanup will place a
further burden on the economy.
Automobile sales have strengthened.

Ford dealers in the St. Louis

sales district reported that passenger car sales in November were up 26
percent from last November and that truck sales jumped 71 percent.

One

large dealer said that his used car sales in the month were comparable to
previous peaks.

Two dealers in the Memphis area reported a moderate

improvement in sales, and dealers in Arkansas have been encouraged by the
lifting of the 10 percent usury ceiling which should facilitate credit
sales.

New home sales in the St. Louis area during November were greater
than in any other November in recent years, according to the St. Louis
Homebuilders Association.

Home prices have declined slightly since the

spring of 1981, and have fallen strikingly in real terms.

This decline has

been even sharper because prices have been effectively reduced through
"creative financing" offered by sellers to consummate deals.
Sales at major stores in the District (Sears, J.C. Penney, May
Company, and Woolworth) were, on the average, 6.'t percent higher this
November than during November 1981, an increase of nearly 3 percent after
adjusting for merchandise price Increases.

Early December sales were

running at a similar pace above those of last year.

Five smaller retailers

reported gains of 9 percent since October in year-over-year nominal sales.
Consumer demand has probably strengthened more than the sales data alone
indicate as managers made fewer price concessions this year than last.

A

shoe chain reported an 11 percent increase in sales from November 1981 to
November 1982.
Orders, production and shipments at most District manufacturing
firms were slightly lower in November and early December than in the early
fall.

Companies producing business equipment, chemicals, metals and wood

products were particularly depressed.

On the other hand, a supplier to

firms producing consumer durables noted the first improvement in orders and
production in many months.

Businesses producing food, defense goods and

boxes noted a slight improvement in activity.

Employment declined at many

industrial firms; a chemical company retired over 1,200 workers.
smaller businesses, however, employment continued to increase.

At many

Deposits changed little at District savings and loan associations
in Ifovember and early December.

Several associations continued to report a

moderate net outflow of funds, but others gained funds by bidding
aggressively for them.

Mast associations still report the current rate of

earnings on assets to be slightly less than the cost of obtaining funds,
but the negative yield spread has narrowed.
The agricultural situation appears to be near a trough.

Favorable

selling prices and low feed costs are generating profits for livestock
raisers, particularly those engaged in hog production.

Prices of grain are

holding at current levels, largely supported by government programs.
Carry-over stocks of grain, however, are estimated at near 50 percent of
annual u s a g e — t h e highest level since 1960.

Many farmers are in severe

financial difficulty, reflecting large debts at the beginning of the crop
year, high interest rates, and low selling prices for crops.
Scattered farm groups in Illinois, Missouri and Tennessee
reportedly have adopted militant tactics to discourage creditors from
foreclosing on farm debt.

Their activities include blocking entrances to

farms, bullying bidders at auctions, and hiding farm equipment.

Although

the number of actual cases is small, the incidents have received
publicity.

A few creditors reportedly have agreed to delay foreclosure

and negotiate further.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

After many months of waiting, the Ninth District economy has finally
begun showing a fev definite signs of recovery.

In response to lower interest

rates, district home and auto sales increased in November.

General merchan-

dise sales improved also, and orders of some manufacturers increased.
positive

signs

are

admittedly

economy remained depressed.

tenuous,

however,

and

much

of

the

These

district

The district had less excess capacity in manufac-

turing than the nation, but orders continued to decline at many local manufacturers.

Although most district

farmers were able to complete the fall har-

vest, poor prices continued to trouble them.
mained weak, and most district

Lending at district banks re-

financial institutions were slow to formulate

plans for the new Money Market Deposit Accounts (MMDAs).

Consumer Spending
Home and auto sales have picked up in the Ninth District.
Redbook

report

indicated

that,

in

October,

reduced

mortgage

rates

Our last
had

creased the number of people looking at homes—but not the number buying.
November, home sales actually picked up.
of Realtors, home

In

According to the Minneapolis Board

sales in Minneapolis and its suburbs increased 20 percent

between October and November, a period
cline.

in-

during which home sales normally de-

Also, regional sales managers for domestic auto manufacturers indicate

that in November

district car sales improved.

company's 10.9 percent
50 percent.

One says that last month his

finance rate helped reduce inventories of 1982 models

A director reports that, thanks to the pickup in car sales, most

Montana car dealers

showed a profit in November, for the first time in many

months.
General merchandise
polis-St.
October

Paul

and

normal.

retailers

November,

Two Minnea-

report that their sales increased modestly

but

They attribute

sales have also improved somewhat.

that

this to

post-Thanksgiving
changed

shopping

was

between

slower

than

shopping habits; consumers are now

delaying purchases until retailers cut prices just before Christmas.

Thus,

these retailers are planning pre-Christmas sales and expect this December to
be better than last year's.

Directors, however, report that many retailers

outside the Twin Cities hope to just match last year's holiday sales.
glum

outlook

in

many

parts

of

the

district

is

directly

due

to

the

This
long-

depressed iron mining and farming industries.

Industrial Activity
The pickup
manufacturers.

in consumer

spending has started to carry over to a few

Reflecting the recent improvement in retail sales, new orders

of microwave ovens increased markedly at one manufacturer.
a large meat packing

company

A spokesperson for

in southern Minnesota, which recently opened a

new plant, reports that business has been better lately than expected.
firm plans to hire additional people.

This

Due to the upturn in home sales, orders

increased at a large manufacturer of windows and doors and another of ceiling
tiles.
Most
doldrums.

district manufacturing

concerns, however, have remained in the

Eleven of the 23 largest manufacturers headquartered

trict report third quarter

sales below those a year ago.

in the dis-

Particularly hard

hit have been producers of industrial equipment.
and

material handling

equipment

reports that

A firm making construction

its order backlog

shrank

from

$150 million at the beginning of the year to $50 million in early December.

A

representative for a company producing industrial controls and painting equipment indicates that an anticipated pickup in nev orders has not yet materialized.

In fact, new orders have declined, leaving its current inventories at

higher

than

desired

levels.

other high technology

Growth rates have slowed even at computer and

firms, where sales are generally

increasing, according

to a Minneapolis security analyst who follows this industry group.
Capacity utilization data can provide some insight on the performance
of

the

manufacturing

sector.

These

data aren't

available

at the

district

level, but we can infer some information from differences in the structure of
manufacturing

between

Approximately

U5

percent

industries—machinery
industries

the

and

nationally.

district
of

and

district

food

nation and

from anecdotal

manufacturing

processing—compared

evidence.

is concentrated
to

30 percent

in two

in

these

Moreover, within the machinery group, computer manu-

facturing is about three times more important to the district than to the nation.
According to our recent conversations with industry spokespeople, the
district's capacity utilization rates are currently well above the nation's in
both

the

machinery

and

food

processing

industries.

In

machinery

manufac-

turing, where the national utilization rate is 67 percent, the district rate
is higher;

our

contacts

indicate

that most

lately have been operating at near capacity.

district

computer

manufacturers

Conversations with representa-

tives of large district food processors indicate that their capacity utilization

rates are also above the nation's

for the

industry.

The

district's

80 percent capacity utilization rate

remaining

manufacturing

industries are

a

diverse group, and for them, capacity utilization rates may not be too different than the national rates, at least not on average.
structural

Therefore, based on the

differences between the district and nation and on the anecdotal

evidence, the district's current

capacity utilization rate for manufacturing

is almost surely above the nation's 68 percent.
This
metal mining.

same

approach

may be used

Iron mining accounts

to examine

capacity utilization

in

for 75 percent of metal mining locally,

compared to 20 percent nationally, and copper mining accounts for much of the
rest of Ninth District metal mining.
district
eleven

iron mining was

mines

were

around

producing.

In September, capacity utilization for

10 percent, when
Utilization

is

only

two or three out of

somewhat

higher

now

because

several additional iron ore mines resumed partial operation in October.
two more Minnesota
so,

an

industry

iron mines plan to resume operation in early 1983.

official

reportedly

expects

capacity

utilization

in

And
Even
iron

mining next year to average only 55 percent.
Current capacity utilization in district copper mining is also very
low.
down
being

The one mine in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan was indefinitely
in early

October.

produced, because

shut

And, in Montana, only a small amount of copper is
the

state's

one

large

mine was

closed

permanently

earlier this year.

Based on the local mining industry's heavy concentration

in iron and copper

(especially

iron) and on the extremely low output levels

for both metals, it is virtually certain that the district's capacity utilization rate in metal mining

is well below the nation's Uo percent rate.

More-

over, it seems likely that this situation will continue well into 1983.

Agricultural Conditions
Although

recent

remained depressed.

weather

conditions

were

been

percent
sota.

good

for

harvesting,

of the corn
But

and

prices

for corn and

levels a year ago; and

as

South

spot in district agriculture:

also.

troubling.

down

St. Paul cash prices

bright

a year

28, the

USDA reports, 81

In November,

in Minne-

Minneapolis

soybeans were, respectively, U and 9 percent below

in November were

from

of November

remain

cattle

percent

has

Recently, however, the weather

and 97 percent of the soybeans were harvested

agricultural

cash prices

agriculture

Our last Redbook report said farmers were concerned that

wet weather would interfere with the harvest.
has

favorable,

earlier.

5 and 1 percent,

Dairy

for feeder and

respectively.

slaughter

Hogs

remain

a

in late November their price was up 25
farms

have been

doing

relatively

veil

According to an industry analyst, however, the federal government's as-

sessment of 50 cents per hundredweight of milk produced has put a "good dent"
in dairy farmers' income.

This assessment began December 1.

Financial Developments
Bank lending has remained weak.

In November loans at district banks

and S&Ls were essentially unchanged from their lackluster October level.
of

the

reason

for this

creased their use

sluggishness

of the primary

is that

district

corporations

securities markets, and in some

they have been using these funds to reduce bank debt.

have

Part
in-

instances,

Sluggish loan demand may explain the response of local firms to the
new MMDAs:

most have not been aggressively promoting them.

tion, according to our telephone

Another explana-

survey of district banks and S&Ls, is that

they are waiting for the DIDC's directive on the Super NOW account.
also frustrated with the short

They are

implementation period for the new MMDAs.

In

fact, most of the banks and S&Ls say they haven't decided yet about the new
MMDAs or are "waiting to see what the competition will do."

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Business activity in the Tenth District appears to be

generally flat, except for slight improvement in the housing sector.

Soft

retail sales have brought higher than desired retail inventories, but manufacturers' inventories are generally satisfactory.

Housing starts are up

slightly, as is demand for mortgage funds and commitments.

Both deposit

growth and commercial and industrial loan demand are up slightly at commercial
banks.

Tenth District farmers continue to experience financial stress because

of poor income prospects.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers in the Tenth District report only moderate

gains in sales in the first 11 months of 1982 compared to the first 11 months
of 1981.

Sales improved slightly in November although durable goods sales

remained weak.

Merchandise costs have not risen recently but slow sales have

put downward pressure on profit margins.

Inventories are currently higher

than desired for most retailers primarily because of slow sales.

Most

retailers anticipate that gains in sales during the remainder of the
Christmas season will eliminate excess inventories and improve profit margins.
Purchasing Agents.

Most purchasing agents contacted report modest

declines or no change in input prices over the last year, and only minor price
increases over the past three months.

While purchasing agents expect no major

price increases soon, a few expect input prices in 1983 to be about 6 percent
higher than in 1982.

Most firms contacted are having no difficulties getting

materials, but some purchasing agents express concern about possible difficulties in 1983.

They feel that if the economic upturn begins, suppliers may

be caught understocked, and if it does not begin, more suppliers may close.

Nearly all firms report satisfactory inventory levels.

While most firms are

trimming inventories in response to general economic conditions and the need
for improved efficiency, others have stopped trimming and are trying to
maintain inventories at minimal levels.
Housing and Housing Finance.

The decline in interest rates has brought

a significant rise in housing starts since October 1 in the Tenth District
that could result in starts for 1982 exceeding those in 1981 by 25 percent.
Respondents see this increase continuing, if interest rates stay at current
levels.

Sales of new homes have also increased recently.

The slack demand in

1982 has resulted in new home prices similar to those in 1981, but respondents
expect prices to move up in the spring.
time lows.

Inventories of new homes are at all-

Material prices are reported to be at approximately the same level

as in 1981, although some respondents report recent increases in lumber prices.
Respondents are expecting a general increase in prices beginning in the spring
of 1983.
Officers at Tenth District Savings and Loan Associations generally report
little or no change in savings inflows compared to a year ago, but they expect
increased activity in the near future.

The introduction of money market deposit

accounts is the primary source of their optimism.

Most officers report recent

improvement in the demand for mortgage funds and mortgage commitments, but a
minority report continuing slack demand.

Additional increases are expected,

assuming continued declines in interest rates, but with no significant
additional activity before spring.

Loans are being made at interest rates of

12 1/2 to 14 5/8 percent, and further slight declines are expected.
Banking.

Tenth District banks report little recent growth in loan demand.

Consumer, agricultural, and real estate lending remain flat.

About half the

banks surveyed note increases in commercial and industrial loans, which is only
partly seasonal.

Most bankers report that loan quality has stabilized.

The

prime rate is 11 1/2 to 12 percent, down from 12 to 12 1/2 percent last month.
Deposit growth is up slightly at Tenth District banks.

Nearly all banks report

growth in demand deposits, some of which is seasonal, and in large CD's.

NOW

accounts, small time deposits, and savings deposits have grown slightly, while
money market and small savers certificates have remained constant.

All banks

surveyed plan to offer the new money market deposit account (MMDA).

Very few

are offering bridge accounts, however, and no significant movement of funds in
anticipation of the new MMDA is reported.
Agriculture.

The harvesting of crops throughout the Tenth District is

virtually complete, with little damage from frost or recent heavy rainfall.
Winter wheat conditions range from poor in Oklahoma to fair elsewhere in the
Tenth District.
occurring.
District.

As a result, little pasturing of cattle on winter wheat is

Grain storage capacity continues to be adequate throughout the
Despite considerable use of temporary storage facilities, the quality

of stored grain is not expected to be adversely affected.

Without a reduction

in grain stocks, however, next year's storage capacity may be inadequate.
District bankers report that some local areas are receiving slightly higher
cash prices for their crops, resulting in an increasing number of farmers
selling grain.

Paydowns are being made by farmers on their agricultural pro-

duction loans but at a slower than normal rate.

Tenth District farmers continue

to experience financial stress because of poor income prospects.

Rural nonfarm

businesses in the District are also experiencing nearly as much financial stress
as a result of the depressed economy as are farmers.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The

District

economy

shows

some

signs

continuing weakness in the durable goods sector.
is unusually active for this time of year.
projects

has

Unemployment

lately
seems

to

slowed

declines

have

stabilized.

of

reviving

despite

Residential construction

A surge in smaller commercial

in

nonresidential
Auto

sales

construction.

are

up

sharply.

Drilling activity continues to accelerate, but steel and other oil related
industries remain sluggish.
Residential

construction

continues

to gain momentum.

sales and starts during November were roughly
sales and starts.

rates have abrogated

The

of

beginning
proceeding

signs

even with October's strong

Home construction usually falls this time of year, but

falling mortgage
first

New home

increasing

to escalate.
swiftly,

costs

Apartment

although

the traditional
are appearing

and

condominium

condominium

sales

seasonal

as lumber

patterns.
prices are

construction

in the Border

is also

region are

depressed.
Commercial

construction

declines recorded in September.
warehouse

construction

rebounded

somewhat

from

the

large

Although the pace of office building and

continues

to

slow,

retail,

industrial,

government construction are picking up some of the slack.

and

The result has

been a sharp increase in the number of nonresidential projects accompanied
by a more moderate increase in the total project value.

For the year to

date the value of construction is well behind last year's record.
At worst, unemployment figures indicate that the
not weakening.

job market is

Texas' seasonally adjusted unemployment rate dropped from

8.3 percent

in October

to 7.6 percent

statistically significant.
unchanged

from

September

in November.

This

change is not

Total nonagricultural employment was virtually
to

October.

Gains

in

government

employment

largely offset declines in durable goods manufacturing and mining.
November
financing

made

sales of new autos surged

available

Credit Corporation.

by

GMAC,

Ford

in response

Motor

Credit

to the discount

Co.,

Used car sales also declined.

auto

inventories,

reduced

dealer

models, and pushed up overall profits.
sacrifice

Chrysler

Sales suffered among import dealers due to their lack

of special financing programs.
purchases

and

some or all of

increased

The surge in

new orders

for

'83

Nevertheless, dealers have had to

their profits from financing in order to obtain

the lower rates for their customers.
Real department store sales for the District for the year to date
are about even with

last year.

While

sales

remain

slow

in Houston and

Border stores, sales in other areas of Texas are picking up.

The effects

of the peso devaluations are still felt along

in Houston.

Houston is also affected

by

the Border and

the slowdown in durable goods

Respondents in areas that report sales gains are quick

manufacturing.

to point out that

earlier than usual holiday promotions account for the increases.
Drilling
December, more
weekly

continued

to

pick

up

throughout

so than seasonal patterns would

increases

have pushed

level since May 24, 1982.

the Texas

rotary

November

dictate.

Six

rig

to

count

and

early

consecutive
its

highest

Analysts point to higher domestic crude prices

at refineries and lower labor costs as the reasons for the increase beyond
seasonal norms.

The

outlook for drilling

depends on the outcome of the

December 19th meeting of the OPEC oil ministers.

Larger future beef supplies were signaled by the number of cattle
and

calves

on

feed,

which

Unfortunately,

much

conditions

livestock

for

of

are

this

at

the

highest

increase

producers,

reflects

as heifers

rather than being added to breeding herds.
steady while

crop prices

inputs stayed constant.
Manufacturing
erode as the demand

have moved

maintaining

yet

for

unfavorable

are being

1982.

economic

placed

on

feed

Livestock prices have remained

slightly

higher.

The

cost

of

farm

Planting of winter grains is mostly complete.
production

is mixed.

Steel markets

continue

to

for concrete reinforcing products is slipping and oil

related product demand remains depressed.
are

level

electronics

production

Home computer and defense sales
and

refinery

output

is

stable.

Lumber and wood product suppliers report that business is picking up as a
result of increased housing construction.
Deposits at District member banks grew a modest 0.8 percent from
September
demand

to November

deposits.

period, while

real

as

Loans

time
by

estate,

deposit

member

growth more

banks

business, and

grew

2.0

consumer

than offset
percent
loans

at

declining

during

this

large weekly

reporting banks grew by 5.3, 2.3 and 1.5 percent.
Total deposits at federally

insured S&L's increased 0.9 percent

in October to a level which was 9.2 percent greater than the same time a
year ago.
earning

The increase was due to large gains in jumbo CD's and accounts
the

passbook

rate

or

less.

Although

total

mortgage

loans

outstanding increased a mere 0.6 percent during October, outstanding loans
for construction jumped 3.6 percent.

The latter usually falls this time of

year and is, in fact, 76.5 percent greater than a year ago.

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO

The economy of the Twelfth District appears to have slipped more deeply
into recession.

Unemployment rates generally rose during November and the

District as a whole posts a higher unemployment rate than the national
average.

Although declines in interest rates have spurred residential

construction permit activity (substantially in some cases) the industry is
operating at such levels that little absolute stimulus has been felt as a
result.

The lumber mills in the District are suffering from the combined

impact of the continued reduced domestic and foreign demand, and costly timber
cutting obligations.

Retail sales have been disappointing thus far and

conventionally strong industries—such as aerospace and electronics—are
experiencing major layoffs.

Motor car manfacturing is sagging under the

announcement of further plant closures.

Financial institutions in the region

report deposit outflows or only weak deposit growth except in the high-yield
money-market type accounts and loan demand has been flat.

Consumer spending
Reports from major department stores and other retailers indicate
"disappointing" sales growth over last year, which was itself a weak year,
although there is some early optimism about Christmas season activity.
Several major Southern California department stores, when surveyed, indicated
that nominal sales growth was up only about 7 percent, barely matching the
inflation rate.
ago.

Penny's and Sears report sales volumes below that of a year

In the restaurant industry, the picture is much the same with nominal

sales growth of about 6 percent; even that modest growth is attributed to
stable food costs and no increase in the minimum wage allowing restaurants to
induce continued patronage with relatively low prices.

Volume is flat for one

California retail grocery chain and net income is below the level of a year
earlier.

Only tourism in Hawaii and Oregon are consistently reported as

bright spots in the consumer spending picture.

Hawaii expects to top its all-

time tourism volume record this year, helping to make the Hawaiian
unemployment rate one of the lowest in the District and considerably below the
national average.

Manufacturing and mining
There are few good reports concerning the condition of the District's
manufacturing and mining enterprises.

Aerospace and electronics report

falling orders and reduced margins on foreign sales because of the unusual
strength of the dollar.

Boeing's new equipment sales, for example, are at the

lowest annualized volume in 20 years.

Manufacturers of electronic equipment

are experiencing reduced domestic and foreign sales; so many retailers
returned merchandise to Atari, Inc., for example, that the price of its stock
experienced an unprecedented plunge in early December.

The mining of the

region's copper, silver and molybdenum remain at low levels of activity, with
10,000 of Arizona's mining employees out of work in copper mines alone.
Depressed world oil and gas prices have also affected the economies of Alaska,
California and the intermountain states, although Utah's relatively more
diversified economy has allowed it to experience "flat" growth rather than
absolute declines in overall activity.

Although declining interest rates have

helped some corporations' profit positions, many remain "locked in" to long
term financing agreements at much higher rates, causing a spotty pattern of
profit margin changes.

Automobile manufacturing in the District was dealt

another blow with Ford's announcement that it would close its Northern
California assembly plant.

Car sales, however, have picked up in the

District, primarily in response to the special interest rate concessions
offered by General Motors and Ford.

Construction and real estate
Lower interest rates have undoubtedly provided some stimulus to the
housing industry; there have been surges in activity reported throughout the
District, with permits increasing as much as 80 percent in some parts of Utah.
Homes are selling more rapidly in the low and high-priced ranges than in the
medium-price range; the base level of activity is so low, however, that recent
upsurges can hardly be called a recovery.

Commercial real estate is also

beginning to suffer as the traditional overbuilding cycle takes hold and
demand for office space weakens.

Distict architects report the lowest levels

of backorders in years, an ominous leading indicator for future activity.

Agriculture
Although early rains damaged tomato and wine and raisin grape crops in
California, in general the harvest season yielded bumper crops, leading to
depressed prices and farm incomes.

In addition, there is a growing move

toward protectionism among the Distict's farmers who feels that certain
foreign products—particularly cotton and raisins—enjoy the benefit of
government subsidies and are hurting domestic producers.
amplified by the relative weakness of foreign currencies.

The problem is
The timber products

industry is suffering a three-pronged effect of weak domestic demand (with
most mills operating at less than 40 percent capacity), weakened European and
Asian demand for stumpage, and costly public timber harvesting obligations.
It is estimated that Northwest timber producers will suffer a $2 billion loss
if they are required to comply with earlier contracts to harvest 10 billion
board feet from public lands during this period of weak demand.

Financial institutions
District financial institutions report flat loan demand and either flat
deposit in-flows or continued outflows; the latter is particularly true of the
beleaguered savings and loan industry.

Preliminary evidence from October

indicates that the outflow from maturing All Savers Certificates may be in the
$6 to $8 billion range for savings and loan associations.

Roughly 25-45

associations are disappearing through consolidation each month.

Falling

interest rates have improved spreads for some associations, and some will
report second-half profits.

However, much of the profits are due to sales of

loans or trading profits and the picture still remains bleak.

The high-

yielding money-market type accounts are the only major source of funds inflows to banks and savings and loan associations.

The largest Western banks

report continued deterioration in the financial positions of a sizeable number
of existing commercial loan customers, as well as in the condition on a major
portion of applicants for new business loans.

Until firms have seen a

significant improvement in the business fortunes and have had time to resolve
their current financial difficulties, near-term improvement in business loan
demand seems most unlikely.

