CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

August 18, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk:Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.]

Overview
District reports suggest that economic activity in most sectors has
slowed in recent weeks retracing some of the progress made in late spring and
early summer.

Manufacturing activity has declined broadly giving rise to new

layoffs and plant closings in most Districts.

Consumers are widely described

as extremely cautious, buying very selectively, and almost totally avoiding
any major commitments.

As a result of excess capacity and weak orders, many

businesses are scaling back or deferring capital spending plans.

The con-

struction industry is confronted by continued weakness in the residential
area and a recent fading of support from the commercial and industrial sector.

Crop prospects are generally quite good, but the resultant prospect of

falling prices implies further financial difficulties for farmers.
demand is soft with only widely scattered pockets of resurgence.

Loan

The out-

look is very subdued and cautious, although a few Districts discern traces
of optimism.
Manufacturing
There is little in the District reports to suggest any recent improvement in industrial activity.

Production, shipments, and orders are

generally below the June-July levels and cost cutting measures are being
pursued vigorously.

Inventories are modest for the most part, but there is

widespread determination to trim them further. Layoffs continue to exceed
recalls; vacations and plant shutdowns are being extended; and average
workweeks are being reduced.

Capital spending plans are being scaled back

since plant and equipment capacity is far in excess of current needs.

Dallas, St. Louis, and Philadelphia report that industrial activity
has stabilized.

All other Districts but Kansas City report production cut

backs that have resulted in layoffs and plant closings.

New York, Cleveland,

and Chicago cite capital goods industries, in particular, as an example.
Cleveland finds major steel producers in great difficulty with inventories
high, prices low, orders weak, and capacity utilization at 40-50%.
Chicago District over half the freight car plants are closed.

In the

Only defense

related industries, noted by Boston and St. Louis, and some seasonal industries
such as food processing, seem to be offering much support to the broad industrial sector.
Consumer Spending
In the retail sector, consumers are generally described as
cautious despite aggressive promotional and discounting programs by retailers.

The net effect has apparently been to hold real sales at or near

year ago levels.

There is virtually no indication of a consumer led recov-

ery being imminent.
Dealers are keeping inventories very tight and squeezing profit margins but have been disappointed recently, particularly by the apparent failure
of this summer's tax cut and social security benefit increase to boost sales.
Retailers have adopted extremely cautious buying plans, hoping that stronger
back to school and Christmas spending will materialize, but basically waiting
to see before committing heavily.
Durable goods still seem to be the most affected, but San Francisco
finds even grocery store sales sliding.
appear:

Only two areas of relative strength

tourist trade is doing well in the mountains of Pennsylvania and in

the western half of the Minneapolis District; also, Chicago and Kansas City
report recent strength in automobile parts and repairs.
Construction and Real Estate
A very weak but stable residential sector and a stronger but fading
commercial and industrial sector sum

up the current construction picture.

The housing sector is almost uniformly weak, although regional differences
do exist.

San Francisco reports homebuilding picking up slowly while in the New

York and Chicago Districts there is no revival in sight.

Mortgage rates have

drifted down in some areas, but so far without effect.
Commercial construction is generally stronger than residential building, but varies considerably from District to District.

Most Districts remarking

on commercial building find it slowing somewhat or being sustained only by projects already in progress.

Dallas reports a high level of activity, however,

and Atlanta notes an upturn in permits in early August.
Agriculture
With few exceptions District reports on agriculture are bleak.

Farm-

ers are generally faced with high and rising production costs and the prospects
of falling crop prices.

Weather conditions have been good to excellent and

forecasts call for bumper crops of grains and soybeans, which along with large
inventories and weakening export demand are widely expected to depress prices
significantly further as harvests proceed.

The livestock sector is somewhat

stronger as feed prices continue soft and smaller hog and cattle supplies lend
support to meat prices.
Continuing deterioration of price to cost ratios is depressing farmland prices and eroding the equity position of many farmers.

Minneapolis

reports storage facilities already near capacity and Kansas City sees -the

possibility of a shortage later.

Furthermore, Minneapolis and Chicago expect

relatively small portions of the corn crop to be eligible for support programs.
The implications of these conditions for farmers, lenders, and agribusinesses
are, in Chicago's view, ominous.
Financial Sector
Loan demand is widely described as soft.

Businesses have slashed

inventories and otherwise cut costs, greatly reducing credit needs.

Philadelphia

also notes that declining interest rates are attracting some borrowers into the
long term debt market, further dampening business loan demand.
New real estate loans are very weak, but in some areas outstandings
are on the rise due to lower turnover rates of residential properties and a
modest increase in second mortgages.

Additional financing for ongoing com-

mercial projects is also lending support in some areas.
Consumer borrowing is showing few signs of life.

In the Third District

there has been a mild recovery, but even there outstandings remain slightly below year ago levels.
Recent bank difficulties have reportedly prompted a great deal of
caution by banks contemplating extensions of credit.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Neither retailers nor manufacturers in the First District see any
evidence of an upturn.

Respondents from the retail sector report that July

sales were good but not markedly so; they attribute this strength to heavy
promotional activities rather than the start of a consumer-led recovery.
Manufacturers were unanimous in reporting no signs of a pickup.
orders and backlogs continue to fall.
inventories and payrolls.
cut.

For some,

Most firms are aggressively cutting

Costs previously regarded as fixed have been

Although layoffs are widespread, some firms are using four-day work

weeks and periodic shutdowns to reduce wage costs while still avoiding
permanent staff reductions.

Because of these cost cutting efforts, cash

flow positions are relatively strong.

However, in both retailing and

manufacturing, the firms participating in the Redbook survey are probably
among the stronger members of their industries.
Retail
Retailers in the First District report that they continue to meet
or exceed sales plans because of extra promotional activities, but they see
no evidence of the predicted July upturn.

Plans for the next six months

show increasing strength, but buying and ordering are proceeding with
greater than normal caution.

Several firms with stores or affiliated

merchants in other regions said operations in New England compared very
favorably to results elsewhere.

However, while the Redbook respondents are

weathering the recession, newspapers have reported some store closings in
the region.

Department store sales were weak In June because of unseasonably
cold and rainy weather; as the weather improved in July, customers bought
the summer merchandise planned for June, more than making up June's lost
sales.

However, several merchants mentioned that July sales were heavily

promoted, so that sales were maintained at the expense of profits.

None

attributed July's strength to the tax cut or a consumer-led turnaround.
Executives at several department stores reported that they are buying
cautiously for the Christmas season; they are planning on good sales but
staying in a position to cut expenses if back-to-school buying does not
track plans.

Inventories will be kept smaller and more liquid than usual.

One contact noted that the second half of this year will look better even
if current activity levels continue, because last year's second half was
weak.
A building goods specialty house reported retail operations
continuing at a very healthy pace as a result of strong promotional
activities:
them."
year.

"The customers are there, you just have to work harder to get

Contractor sales of the same firm were off considerably from last,
While most firms report keeping inventories very lean, exceptions

can be found.

One pet supplies operation has gained a larger market share

by increasing its inventories so as to have what the consumer wants always
in stock.
Several retailers said that for purchased merchandise, the number
of items with price increases is declining and for those with increases,
the rate of increase is lower than in the past.

In weak markets, special

opportunities from manufacturers appear more frequently.

Manufacturing
Responses from the manufacturing sector were remarkably
consistent.

There are no signs of an upturn.

Representatives of firms

manufacturing such diverse products as packaging, communications and
electrical equipment, engine castings, processed steel products and
springs, precision metal products, printing equipment and supplies,
furniture, heavy capital equipment and specialized industrial machinery all reported that business is very weak and there are no encouraging
signs.

The precision metal products manufacturer and the castings producer

reported that orders are 30 percent below the level of a year ago.

Orders

and backlogs for heavy capital equipment, springs, and electrical equipment
and supplies continue to fall.
Most firms, even those which see no further deterioration in orders
and backlogs, are aggressively cutting costs.

Inventories and employment

are being reduced and capital spending plans are being scaled back.
of the cost cutting measures are likely to be permanent.

Many

Executive after

executive said that the economic downturn has caused a much greater
emphasis on productivity and efficiency.

Internal procedures have been

changed and costs previously considered fixed have been cut.

Because of

these cuts, many of the firms contacted have strong cash flow positions
despite low sales volumes.
While many firms reported sizable layoffs, some are attempting to
share the reductions among all personnel.

One machine tool manufacturer

with a 25 percent layoff in April plans an additional 10 to 15 percent
layoff for October.

However, both castings and precision metal products

manufacturers said they are cutting hours, reducing corporate payrolls,
and extending plant shutdowns in order to keep production forces intact.
No one is making business plans based on a recovery in the near
term.

Several executives, from a variety of industries, see no recovery in

their businesses until the middle of 1983.

A couple of respondents noted

that, if a robust recovery were to develop, spot shortages might occur
because of the conservative planning and tight inventory management.
The one bright spot is defense.
getting better.

The defense business is good and

However, competition is becoming more intense, as more and

more firms are looking to replace lost commercial sales with military
business.

Also, one large prime contractor finds it is taking longer than

expected to get specifications approved.

A surprising number of firms in a

wide range of industries reported having defense business.
Professors Eckstein and Houthakker were available for comment this
month.

Eckstein sees "no evidence of recovery in July so far.

What little

evidence there is shows that the economy, at best, has been flat and the
risks of further deterioration have mounted."

The first month of the tax

cut failed to ignite a consumer spending spree, the tax cut instead may
have prevented a slump in retail sales.

Because of the somewhat modest

change in withholding schedules, Eckstein also notes that "we shall have to
wait until next April before we see the full benefit of this July's tax
cut."

Eckstein believes "the Fed should turn more toward ease until we see

convincing evidence that the economy has turned up."

He suggests holding

the federal funds rate below 10 percent for the time being.
Houthakker believes that the economy has begun a very slow recovery

and that the recent decline in interest rates is not just a fluke.

"The

dollar's exchange rates have risen despite the drop in yields because,
unlike many of our trading partners, we have made progress in reducing
inflation.

Lower inflation is achieved in three stages:

First, raw

materials prices decline; second, the pace of wage increases declines; and
third, the increase in prices for industrial goods and services declines.
The first stage is completed, we have achieved about half of stage two, and
we have come not very far at all into stage three.
three stages may take another year or two."

The completion of all

In view of this progress,

Houthakker believes the Fed should not relax monetary policy.
gives the Fed "high marks.

So far he

The present rate of money growth at the high

end of the range (without exceeding the range) is appropriate, and not
changing the guidelines for 1983 is appropriate as long as money growth
moves more to the middle of its range."

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

The economy of the Second District continued to languish in July
and early August, displaying more evidence of deterioration than recovery.

Almost all sectors suffered from depressed business activity.

Retail sales turned down at many stores.

Residential construction showed

no signs of pulling out of its persistent slump.

Nonresidential construc-

tion, however, continued to be the healthiest segment of the region's
economy.

In the manufacturing sector, production schedules were cut

through layoffs and shorter workweeks.

Business leaders saw no reason to

expect an upturn before the end of the year.
Consumer Spending
Retail activity was flat or down at almost all stores contacted.
Few merchants achieved their July goals, and some reported that business
had distinctly worsened during the first week of August.

No respondent

had yet observed any stimulus from the July tax cut or social security
increase.

Only a few nondurable products, such as apparel and cosmetics,

demonstrated any strength, and big ticket items continued to move
slowly.

Department stores maintained the heavy promotions of the past

twelve months, and one reduced markups to their lowest levels in recent
years.

Furthermore, buying plans were tight, although inventories

generally were not considered high.

Retailers had become more uncertain

about the next few months but were hopeful that back-to-school shopping
would bring a modest gain.

Construction and Real Estate Activity
Residential construction remained depressed.

The few bright

signs noted during the past two months have not led to any significant
improvement.

Even the construction of high-priced condominiums and

single-family homes, which had been accounting for most of the activity,
appeared to have slowed.

Many homebuilders experienced severe cash flow

problems as suppliers pressed for faster payment.
The prospects for new nonresidential construction activity
remained weaker than a few months ago, but that sector was healthy relative to the rest of the economy.

While the recent softening in the

office market persisted, as reflected in a small rise in vacancy rates, a
considerable surplus of space that had been anticipated by some real
estate brokers has not materialized.

Observers nonetheless believed that

few new buildings would be started in New York City until the economic
recovery was well underway.

However, ongoing projects were sustaining a

high level of construction.

Suburban areas showed some promise of

renewed strength, including the commencement of two large scale
ventures—an office park and a luxury hotel.
Business Activity
Business leaders throughout the District reported that economic
activity had been flat at best, and many observed evidence of additional
deterioration.

Capital goods producers cut production further, with one

firm considering the permanent closure of a plant.
steel company just filed for bankruptcy.

In addition, a large

Auto production, which picked

up in June, leveled off.

And, high technology companies and producers of

a variety of goods, including firearms, pianos, and silverware, were hurt
by a lack of orders.

Many of these firms shortened workweeks to four

days or extended vacation shutdowns for a week or more.

Workforce

reductions, both blue and white collar, continued in a broad range of
industries.

While scattered recalls were noted at a few plants, they

amounted to only a small proportion of the workers that had been laid off
by those establishments.

A rising number of companies forecast real

reductions in capital spending over the next year, and inventories were
being held at very tight levels.
Outlook
Business leaders felt that the economy would drift along at its
current languid pace through the rest of the year.

Even our contacts who

had previously been the least pessimistic saw no indication that any pickup was imminent.

One respondent believed that an almost total lack of

confidence by both businessmen and consumers would thwart any recovery.
Another expressed the view that while the economy was on a low plateau, a
renewed deepening of the recession was more likely than an upturn.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Donald Maude (Merrill Lynch),
Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty Trust), and Francis Schott (Equitable
Life Assurance Society)
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]

Maude:

Strains anticipated in the financial system have been

alleviated to some degree by recent easing in Federal Reserve policy.
The easing has been accepted by the financial community as appropriate
and desirable because of the perception that the recession still persists
and the present turbulence in the financial sector.

But as signs of

economic recovery become more evident and the wave of financial shocks
recede, the Fed's credibility will be scrutinized more critically.

The

most recent easing moves combined with normal cyclical forces will
probably lead to a renewed acceleration in money supply growth.
Looking ahead, while interest rates will generally trend down,
there will be occasional pressures on rates and a risk of renewed
recession over the first half of next year.
Riefler:

Business conditions are poor and worldwide credit

problems continue to mount.

The Fed appears to be properly shifting its

focus toward concern about the weak economy.

At the same time it would

be reassuring to the capital markets for the Fed to define more precisely
its longer goal for the inflation rate, which in my view should be zero.
Schott:

The widely forecast business recovery for the second

half is not yet a reality.

Erosive effects of weak cash flow are

becoming more apparent in the industrial sector.

Repercussions in the

financial sector are also spreading.
Federal Reserve policy is mildly supportive of recovery.
may have to be done.

More

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports frail the Third District in August fail to give any clear
indication of the direction the local economy is taking.

Manufacturing

remains weak, retail sales have dropped, and business loan demand has tapered
off in recent weeks.

Area farmers are facing mixed crop yields, and tourist

business, although good in seme areas, is also spotty.
The outlook varies by industry.

Despite persistent sluggishness in

the industrial sector, manufacturers continue to look for an imminent
recovery. Retailers also anticipate a pickup, but one that is mostly seasonal
in nature. Bankers foresee further cuts in interest rates, but softening loan
demand, as borrowers turn to long-term capital markets.
AGRICULTURE
Third District crop yields will be mixed this year, according to
area agriculture officials.

While the New Jersey tomato crop is strong, and

corn and soybeans are also doing well, several of the area's major farm
products will not turn in a good 1982 showing.

Most vegetable farmers, for

example, will have a small harvest this year, owing to record rainfall in
early spring which delayed plantings.

That wet weather also forced hay

growers to put off their first cutting.

Hence, they will get only two or

three cuttings this year, rather than the usual four.
early spring damaged the New Jersey peach crop.

A severe coldsnap in

Peach volume is currently

running 17 percent below that of a year ago.
Area

farm

prices are generally

strong, especially

for those

commodities in short supply, but farmers may not get to keep much of the money
they take in.

Rising distribution and production costs, especially interest

expense, will keep the lid on farm income again this year. An official of the
Pennsylvania Farmers Association predicts that total interest expense for
farmers in 1982 will exceed the 1981 mark of 13.6 percent of gross income.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers responding to the August Business Outlook Survey
report that local industrial activity has stabilized this month following a
seasonal drop in July.

This month's results point to continued weakness in

the industrial sector, which seems to have bottomed out in February but has
yet to show any real sign of recovery. Both new orders and shipments dropped
sharply under seasonal pressure in July.

In August, new orders have declined

slightly, while shipments have held steady, causing further shrinkage of
backlogs at area manufacturing plants.

Reports of inventory liquidation are

still widespread and reductions in payrolls and average workweek length
persist.
Despite the continuing slump in industrial activity, more Outlook
Survey respondents are optimistic about future business conditions than in
June or July.

Over three-quarters of participating manufacturers now expect

business conditions to improve within six months, and there are widespread
predictions of growing strength in both new orders and shipments.

In

response, local manufacturers plan to expand payrolls and working hours, but
projections of weakness in both inventory growth and capital spending raise
doubts about the real strength of the recovery.
The prevailing sluggishness in local manufacturing continues to have
a

stabilizing

effect

on

industrial

prices.

At

over

80 percent of

participating firms, neither input nor finished goods prices have changed

since July.

Looking ahead, however, forecasts of continued stability in

prices, apparent in the June and July surveys, have diminished somewhat this
month.
RETAIL
As predicted by many retailers, neither the July tax cut nor the
Social Security increase has had a significant effect on consumer purchases to
date.

In fact, sales have slipped considerably over the last few weeks, and

can now be described only as mixed.

Reports of current sales volume range

from 5 percent below to slightly ahead of a year ago, but sales are generally
belcw retailer's expectations.

Merchants simply blame the lingering general

economic slump for current lackluster consumer performance.
Looking ahead, retail contacts see sales improving by year-end, and
hope for a reasonably good holiday season.

They concede, however, that even

with a strong finish, they'll be lucky to break even on the year. They remain
very cautious about inventory building, and have no plans to add to current
stocks until a turnaround in sales is obvious.

Presently, department store

inventories are down from August '81 by as much as 10 percent.
FINANCE
Third District bankers say lending activity is mixed in August. The
recent decline in interest rates has apparently attracted sane borrowers to
long-term debt instruments and put a damper on the demand for business
loans.

Reports of C & I loan activity range from slightly off to 7 percent

ahead of a year ago, not disasterous but definitely less robust than earlier
this year.

At the same time, however, bankers have opened the door to

consumer loans, and retail borrowing, down by as much as 15 percent just six

weeks ago, is now running oily about 1 percent under August 1981 levels. The
outlook for lending reflects a continuation of current developments. Bankers
expect that, as the economic picture shapes up, business borrowing will drop
further as stress borrowing fades.

Further growth of consumer loans is

projected.
The prime rate has been lowered to 15 percent at Third District
banks contacted this month, and local bankers are forecasting further cuts.
Estimates of a trough in interest rates center around early- to mid-fall. At
that time, bankers expect rates to firm up and begin to climb as business
investment picks up.
Time deposits at Third District banks have maintained the surprising
firmness that has been evident throughout 1982, and are now running as high as
13 percent above a year ago. Demand deposits are still running about 3 to 4
percent behind on a year-over-year basis.
TOURIST SERVICES
Businessmen at Third District vacation spots give mixed reviews of
the season so far. Seashore businessowners say early summer was disasterous,
with record rainfalls noted in many areas. Midsummer business has been a bit
better, but tight budgets have led many families to shorten their vacations,
resort to daytripping, and generally pare expenditures.

The strength of the

i

U.S. dollar, vis-a-vis the Canadian dollar, has been a particular problem in
South Jer&ey, a favorite vacation spot of Canadians.

Overall, seashore

business is currently holding at about last year's level, but a boon in late
summer will be necessary to offset early season losses.

Mountain vacation spots in Pennsylvania, on the other hand, are
having a good year. After a strong winter season, summer tourist trade in the
Poconos is now well above most expectations.

To be sure, the average stay at

mountain resorts is shorter this year than last, but late summer and fall
business is projected to be strong. Advance reservations are running 10 to 14
percent over a year ago, which should give Pocono businesses a good boost and
help them finish well ahead of 1981.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

A sluggish national recovery is expected to begin this

quarter but there are few signs of recovery in the Fourth District.
Unemployment remains high and additional plants are being closed.
remain cautious and capital goods activity is weak.
reductions are likely.

Consumers

Additional inventory

Steel producers and farmers continue in difficulty.

National Outlook.

Respondents in the Fourth District generally expect

a sluggish national recovery beginning this quarter but have scaled down their
expected gains in output for the near-term because the capital goods slump is
sharper than expected.

One respondent asserted that recovery will not be

sustainable without (1) a better outlook for Federal deficits, (2) greater
conviction by consumers that inflation has moderated, and (3) a 200 basis
point decline in long rates and a further 100 to 150 basis point decline in
short rates.
District Outlook.

Most observers report no signs of recovery in the

Fourth District, although there are some signs that the bottom is near.
Primary metals, capital goods, and the coal market are all weak.

Plant

closings and layoffs continue, and capital spending plans are being reduced.
Preliminary results from our August survey of Fourth District manufacturers,
however, show some optimism for August.

On balance, the 19 respondents expect

shipments and new orders to rise in August after declining in July, and
backlogs to be unchanged after declining in July.

The survey indicates

manufacturers are significantly more optimistic, or at least less pessimistic,
in their expectations for August than they were a month ago about July.

Employment Situation.

Labor markets in the District remain weak as

unemployment continues high, additional plant closings are announced, and
layoffs exceed callbacks.

In Ohio, the unemployment rate at 11.8 percent (sa)

in July, showed no net change since March.

Among the District's eleven major

SMSA's, unemployment rates (nsa) in June ranged from 9.6 percent in Wheeling
to 18.3 percent in Youngstown, and most SMSAs had rates about 2 percentage
points higher than the national rate.

Measures of current activity in the

Pittsburgh area, which usually lags the national economy, show continued
declines through early July.

Initial unemployment claims are up

significantly, and an index of leading indicators for the Pittsburgh region
fell in June for the 14th consecutive monthly decline.
Temporary and permanent plant shutdowns continue to be announced.
Babcock and Wilcox will permanently close an 800 employee boiler parts plant
by December 1, AM International is permanently closing a 450 worker
duplicating machine parts plant on October 15, Republic Steel will "suspend
indefinitely" by November 1 operations at two bar mills, affecting 700
employees, and Clark Equipment Company is closing its 450 employee truck plant
in Georgetown, Kentucky.

A director in southern Ohio reports that layoffs

exceed callbacks in his area.
The Consumer.

Some respondents assert that the tax cut is not leading

to a surge in spending on durables.

Consumers are very cautious because of

high interest rates, fear of unemployment, and the belief, conditioned by the
sticker shock phenomenon, that inflation has not abated.

One banker estimated

car financing rates would need to decline to 12% before cars would sell well.
Consumers are cautious on both necessities and luxuries.

A hospital

association reports patients are now sicker and staying longer than several
months ago because they delay seeking care, while major amusement parks in

northern Ohio report attendance is down from last year.

A major national

retailer reports sales are very weak.
Capital Goods.

The capital goods industry continues to suffer as new

orders are weak and planned projects are deferred or stretched out.

A machine

tool manufacturer says orders are flat and will remain flat until after two or
three quarters of solid increases in PCE.

A large diversified capital goods

manufacturer sees no spark in any of his markets.
below 1974-75 levels.

Sales of heavy trucks are

U.S. Steel is making sharp reductions in 1982 capital

spending plans, including stopping construction of a continuous caster in
Lorain, Ohio.

Republic Steel has reduced capital spending plans for 1982 from

$280 million to $200 million.

Armco recently reduced planned capital spending

in 1982 from $570 million to $370 million.

Sohio has reduced its planned

capital spending in 1982 from $3.0 billion to $2.6 billion.
One respondent asserted capital spending could not lead the national
recovery because (1) capacity utilization is so low, (2) interest rates are
too high, and (3) the new tax bill would offset a substantial part of the tax
reductions that corporations obtained from the 1981 tax law changes.
Inventories.
quarter.

Additional inventory reductions are likely this

A major steel producer expects his inventories to fall sharply again

in the third quarter and less rapidly in the fourth quarter.
oil country pipe are especially high.

Inventories of

A major automobile producer, who had

involuntary inventory accumulation in the second

quarter wants to reduce

inventory this quarter but so far has not been successful.

A major retailer

expects less reduction of retail inventories this quarter than last.

He

reports excess stocks of household goods, especially furniture.
Steel.

Major steel producers continue in great difficulty.

One firm

forecasts shipments will remain anemic this quarter and show only a slight

improvement next.

Prices are a "disaster," according to a director, with oil

country pipe prices continuing to fall rapidly from a high level and other
steel product prices drifting down from already low levels.

Orders are

extremely weak and capacity utilization ranges between 40% and 50%.
Agriculture.

Financial difficulty continues among farmers.

More

bankruptcies are expected, even if interest rates fall and crop prices rise.
Agricultural land prices have fallen by one-third or more in eastern Kentucky,
and many farmers there who bought land just before the price decline now have
no equity to collateralize working capital loans.

A midwest grain storage

executive reports grain crops are large, inventories high, and prices low, and
asserts the farm economy won't turn around very fast.
Banking.

Some bankers acknowledge the prime rate is higher than

justified by money costs because banks want greater spreads to offset loan
losses, and because they want to minimize the risk of rate increases later in
the year.

Business loan demand has weakened, and loans are limited from the

supply side also as bankers have become more cautious.

Small banks report

more problem loans, and small businesses being liquidated.

A bank that cut

mortgage rates to 16 1/4% from 17% received no customer response and expects
none until the rate moves below 15%.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Nearly all indications are that business activity in the Fifth District
continues very weak, and may still be declining.

Our recent surveys suggest

further deterioration of business at both the manufacturing and retail levels
in recent weeks.

We continue to hear of layoffs and the number of unemployed

is apparently still on the rise, although unemployment rates have turned down
in some areas.
six weeks.
ing.

Inventories have apparently turned up over the past month to

Survey responses are to the effect that prices are actually fall-

There has been no evidence of any revival in the housing industry and

other construction seems to be lagging as well.

Credit demands remain gen-

erally soft, particularly in the consumer and real estate sectors.
quency rates are up modestly on most types of loans.

Delin-

Expectations for

business performance remain generally positive, but have weakened somewhat in
recent weeks.

The Manufacturing Sector
Activity in the manufacturing sector appears to have weakened since
our last survey.

Respondents report declines in shipments, new orders, and

order backlogs.

Also, employment has been cut back further and the average

workweek has been shortened.

Inventories, of finished goods and materials,

moved back up over the month leaving total stocks generally above desired
levels.

Current plant and equipment capacity is also well above present

needs according to respondents.
In this area the greatest difficulties are being felt in such industries as textiles, furniture, building materials, metals, and machinery and
equipment.

Much of what little support the manufacturing sector has gotten

recently has come from seasonal strength in the tobacco and food processing
sectors.

Consumer Spending
Retailers responding to our latest survey experienced declines in
total sales and in relative sales of big ticket items over the past month.
They further report declines in inventories, which remain somewhat above
desired levels, and in

employment.

Indications are that prices remain weak

and that retailers are offering heavy promotions and discounts to keep the
goods moving.

Despite the efforts, a common view around the District is that

the consumer has withdrawn and is awaiting some encouragement from other sectors of the economy.

In the meantime, consumers are generally managing their

existing debt with only a modest increase in delinquencies, and increasing
savings.

Many believe that postponement

of purchases is setting the stage for

a significant rebound in sales of autos and other durables once attitudes begin
to improve.
Housing and Construction
Housing continues to contribute disproportionately to the overall weakness in District business activity.

The overall construction sector is lagging,

having lost the support until recently furnished by the commercial and industrial area.

The residential sector remains the weakest, however.

Sales of

existing houses also remain very slow.

The Financial Sector
Loan demand is very soft overall.

In the real estate area it is de-

scribed as virtually non-existent, and the consumer sector is doing little better.

Business loans are also down considerably in the face of an inventory liquidation which may now have run its course.
Delinquency rates are being held to modest increases in nearly all
areas, but several Richmond directors mentioned the growing numbers of business
and personal bankruptcies as an area of concern.

One noted that a loan need

not go delinquent before it goes bad, as in the case of a bankruptcy.
Our directors generally believe that if interest rates continue to fall
borrowing could rise substantially.

Most believe that the strength will appear

first in the consumer and real estate areas.

Agriculture
Fifth District farmers' financial difficulties continued unabated during the second quarter of 1982, according to this Bank's survey of farm credit
conditions.

Moreover, farmland values are trending downward, eroding farmers'

equity positions.

Under these circumstances, farm loan demand remained sluggish

and bank supplies of farm loan funds were plentiful.

Farm loan repayment rates

and requests for loan renewals and extensions, although showing slight improvement over the spring quarter, were equally as poor as during the same period
last year.

Bankers were requiring significantly more collateral to secure

farm loans than they did a year ago. Meanwhile, liquidity pressures facing
some rural banks eased slightly from year-earlier levels.
Marketing of this season's flue-cured tobacco crop, under way for two
weeks, has been characterized by lower grade prices and slightly poorer quality
than a year earlier.

Because of dissatisfaction with prices, growers have

placed more than one-third of gross sales thus far under the government loan
program.

The crop is some 13 percent under 1981's output.

SIXTH DISTRICT - A T L A N T A

Midsummer economic conditions in the Sixth District remain weak; however,
signs of increasing activity in some sectors are encouraging.

An upturn in building

permits indicates that the outlook for construction may be brightening.

The District's

farm economy is also showing some improvement.
Consumer

Spending.

With

the

exception

of

Atlanta,

Knoxville,

and

Jacksonville, retail sales are down or flat in real terms in spite of heavy promotions.
Sales in Mississippi and Florida seem to be especially weak.

Home furnishings, most

hard goods, and some apparel are moving slowly, while menswear, auto parts, and home
entertainment equipment are doing relatively well.

Consumers are buying cautiously

and paying particular attention to quality. Retailers, reporting generally taut inventories
and anticipating a gradual increase in sales over the next two quarters, are buying
guardedly for the Christmas season.
Auto sales have come to a virtual standstill since the termination of price
promotions in early June.

Even in metro Atlanta's relatively strong economy, July and

August floor traffic and buying have been quite slow.

A spokesman for Atlanta car

dealers attributes this slowdown to consumer expectations of further declines in interest
rates and of reinstated price rebates.
Construction and Finance.

The construction sector appears to be poised for

a possible recovery from the slight decline of the past several months.

In July and

early August both single-family and commercial building permits rose after a two-month
drop.

Office vacancy rates have been slowly falling.

to have an impact on the housing market, where

Lower mortgage rates have yet
most

activity is attributable to

adjustable mortgage loans, state mortgage bond programs, and higher income buyers.
Nonetheless, realtors and thrifts remain hopeful that the market will improve.

Bank loans in Georgia, especially to corporations, are reported to be showing
strong gains from year-ago levels, whereas loan growth in other states is slowing as
acceptable loan customers are becoming increasingly difficult to find.

Because of the

decline in energy-related business activity, bank lending in Louisiana has been especially
hard hit.
Planned capital spending for 1982 amounts to a mere 3.5 percent increase
in current dollars over last year.

Moreover, most of this investment is concentrated

in the chemical and petroleum industries.

One bright spot is the Port of Mobile, where

recently expanded coal-handling facilities have contributed to a 103 percent expansion
in coal exports during the first seven months of 1982 compared with 1981.

Ongoing

improvements should allow the port to double current coal export capacity by early 1983.
Employment and Industry.

In general, Sixth District employment statistics

except in certain "pockets" of prosperity such as Atlanta present a bleak picture.

From

May to June the District's unadjusted employment declined slightly (0.4 percent), running
counter to both seasonal and current national trends.
increased slightly more than in the nation.
hours remain below last June's levels.

However, average weekly hours

Regional employment and average weekly

Employment growth did occur in some sectors,

for example, construction, services, and certain nondurable manufacturing industries
(food, apparel, and paper), but this expansion was generally less than seasonally normal.
Chemical and petroleum industries in Louisiana have been particularly hurt by the
recession.

Layoffs in Louisiana's chemical processing plants numbered more than 2,500

in the past six months, and more are slated.
At 9.4 percent, the region's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in June
was down fractionally from

May

and remained slightly below the nation's, largely

because of Florida's and Georgia's jobless rates of 7.5 and 7.6 percent, respectively.
Four of the six District states continue to have double-digit jobless rates.

Tourism.

The tourist industry is thriving in the vicinity of the World's Fair

in Knoxville, Tennessee, but in Louisiana and Florida, business is down and, elsewhere,
merely holding steady over last year. July attendance at the Fair tapered off somewhat
from

May and June levels but continues to meet official projections.

The Fair's

"spillover effect" is being felt at hotels, motels, campgrounds, state and national parks,
and private attractions as far away as Nashville and in the border regions of Kentucky
and the Carolinas.

However, elsewhere, the Fair has not overcome the effects of the

recession by triggering the widely anticipated increase in tourist trade.
Agriculture.

The present outlook for the District's farm economy shows a

few bright spots and the possibility of future improvement.

In the livestock sector

pork producers are receiving prices approximately 15 percent higher than last year.
Continuing declines in production of both pork and beef presage further price increases.
Poultry, which is important in the District's farm economy, has not yet shown much
gain from reductions in supplies of competing meats.

Aggregate income from the

livestock sector is likely to remain below 1981 levels, but profit margins of individual
farmers should improve.

Crop producers face low prices and forecasts of high yields.

Cotton and tobacco prices, which have recently shown strength, are the sole exceptions.
Despite some improvement District farmers are not likely to be able to
make significant progress toward debt reduction in 1982.
declined

Loan delinquencies have

modestly in recent weeks, but they remain alarmingly high by historical

standards.
Panel of Economists.

Local academic, banking, and business economists

polled in a telephone survey indicated their evaluation of the Fed's continuing targets
for

money

growth

as

acceptable

and appropriate

to anticipated

recovery.

Their

recommendations for monetary policy ranged from maintaining the status quo by not

revising targets upward to stimulating further reductions in short-term interest rates
to foster recovery.
Estimates varied regarding the timing of recovery.

Some respondents felt

that the recession had already reached its trough in all District states except Florida
and Mississippi, but others were more optimistic regarding Florida's economy and less
so regarding Louisiana's.

At least one economist predicted that recovery would not

begin until spring, 1983, well after the nation's unemployment rate surpassed 10 percent.
All those polled expected only a weak or moderate recovery.
None have seen much effect from federal income tax cuts and social security
increases because of the offsetting effects of "bracket creep" and higher state and
local taxes.
the

Response in Florida was expected to be stronger than elsewhere due to

relatively large percentage

of the work force still employed

disproportionately large number of social security recipients.

and the state's

Economists surveyed

anticipated retail sales of nondurable goods to be the prime beneficiary of increased
disposable personal income.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Summary.

With the third quarter well advanced it appears that

economic activity in the Seventh District is still declining.
improvement noted in the spring have evaporated.
slow in virtually all sectors.

Consumer purchases are very

Capital goods producers, almost without

exception, are cutting output further.
permanently.

Signs of

More plants are being closed, many

Motor vehicle sales continue well below expectations.

vacation shutdowns commonly have been extended.
increasing for many lenders and borrowers.

Normal

Financial problems are

Residential construction is at a

postwar low with no revival in sight, and nonresidential plans are being
scaled down.

Demand for workers is weak, but many unions adamantly oppose

significant concessions, and most nonunion employers are increasing compensation.

Analysts were shocked by recent USDA predictions of record crops,

which threaten the financial health of agriculture.

Farmland values are

continuing an unprecedented postwar decline.
Financial Stress.

Revelations of the extent of problem loans of

the District's largest bank sent a chill wind through the financial and
business community.

Most large banks have special teams monitoring existing

loans, and new loans are being scrutinized very closely.

First-half losses

of some of the largest S&Ls would wipe out their book net worth if not
checked in the second half.

(Actual net worth, taking into account current

market values, is rarely mentioned.)

Many business and agricultural

bankruptcies would result if lenders chose strictly to enforce loan
contracts.

Liquidations of retailing and manufacturing establishments

without bankruptcy are frequent.

A number of capital goods firms are

planning to consolidate two or more plants, with the survivor likely to be a
newer facility in the Sunbelt.
Capital Expenditures.

Machinery and equipment production is

declining or remaining at very low levels, depending on the type.

Demand for

equipment for construction, agriculture, industry, utilities, and transportation is at very low levels.

Orders for all types of capital goods were poor

in the second quarter, and some producers reported a further drop in July and
early August.

Forging and casting operations are off 50 percent or more from

last year and dropping further.

Employees of 40 to 50 years experience at

some capital goods companies "have never seen anything like this."

Some

firms that normally only manufacture complete machines are seeking repair or
retrofit jobs.

Over half of the freight car plants are now closed, and with

orders near zero, the ratio may rise to 90 percent by year-end.

Construction

engineering firms have reduced staff, and plant location advisers have
relatively few new projects.

These developments suggest that the capital

expenditure slump will be long extended.
Consumer Spending.
out of its recession.

Consumers are not leading the Seventh District

Large general merchandise retailers report dollar

sales about equal to last year in July and early August in dollars, and
significantly lower in real terms.
cutting and strong promotions.

Customers generally respond only to price

The only consistently strong line is auto

repair and service, reflecting the fact that people are holding on to cars
longer.

Airline traffic in July was 8 percent below March, seasonally

adjusted, because of reduced vacation travel.
vacancies than in past years.

Resort areas have much larger

Labor Negotiations.

Unions are strongly resisting attempts of

management to obtain concessions on wages, benefits, and work rules.

On

August 1, just after negotiations broke off in the steel industry, contract
provisions automatically boosted average total compensation of production
workers by about 75 cents per hour to $22.50.
nontaxable benefits.)

(Over one-third represents

This multiplies out to almost $47,000 per year.

Ford and GM the comparable figure is almost $45,000.

For

Chrysler workers have

rejected virtually all new management proposals to cut costs and are
demanding a return to "parity."

Various managements dependent on autos and

steel have decided that survival for their corporations requires scaling down
operations, diversification into unrelated fields, and turning to foreign
sources for major components such as engines and transmissions.
Housing.

Residential construction continues near rock bottom with

the year 1982 now "written off for lost."

New units being built, in the

main, are either ordered by well-financed buyers or are subsidized rental
units.

Used home sales are very slow.

One survey indicates that actual

selling prices in the Chicago area, adjusted for special lending terms, are
down 8 percent from last year, but there are reports of auctions bringing
cuts of 25 percent or more.

Average quoted mortgage rates on conventional

loans are 16.5 to 17 percent, but almost no loans are being made on these
terms.

Most lending activity involves short-term loans, "blended rates" and

second mortgages.

There are reports of "balloon" notes coming due with

refinancing difficult to arrange.
Nonresidential Construction.

Vacancy rates for first-class down-

town Chicago office space increased sharply in the second quarter.

New space

is coming on the market rapidly, and needs of some renters are shrinking.
Some proposed new buildings, put up for bids only recently, have been
postponed or cancelled.

Leasing agents are offering attractive concessions

to sign tenants, suggesting the downtown building boom is collapsing.

The

suburbs have had substantial excess office space for at least a year.
Agriculture.

Crop prices had declined in recent weeks in anticipa-

tion of bumper corn and soybean harvests.

Nevertheless, analysts were

surprised by the very large production estimates released August 11 by the
USDA.

Excepting Iowa, record corn and soybean harvests are forecast for all

District states.

The five District states account for 55 percent of the

nation's corn and over 40 percent of its soybeans.

The implications of the

large crop forecasts for District farmers, agricultural lenders, and agribusiness are ominous.

Already burdensome carryover stocks of corn and

soybeans will rise substantially, and crop prices, at unprofitable levels for
several months, are likely to decline further.

Because of limited compliance

with the government's program only a small portion of the corn crop will be
eligible for CCC price support loans.

District farmland values, off 10

percent in the past year, probably will decline further.
sales probably will remain depressed.

Farm equipment

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic conditions in the St. Louis District have changed little
since May, baffling a number of respondents who thought that business
activity would accelerate during the summer.

Retail sales, after adjusting

for price changes, were less in June, July and early August than in the
like period last year.

Manufacturing orders continued at the earlier

depressed pace, and employment was essentially unchanged.

According to

Southwestern Bell's composite index, economic activity in June declined 0.5
percent in Arkansas and 0.2 percent in Missouri.

Farmers have had a

favorable growing season, but the anticipated large grain and soybean
harvests are likely to result in low selling prices.
Retail sales in the District have been listless during the
summer.

Nominal sales were up about 3 percent in June and July over the

corresponding period in 1981, but fewer goods were moved as average prices
rose faster than dollar sales.

Smaller retail stores, especially those

handling luxury-type merchandise, and small service businesses performed
better than major department stores. July sales were particularly
disappointing to retailers in view of the 10 percent tax cut and the larger
social security payments.

The demand for consumer goods may have been

strengthened more than the sales figures indicate, however, since some
merchants expected improved sales in July and offered fewer price
promotions than normal.

Industrial activity has remained steady since May*

Defense

procurement is still strong, while sales by food producers are normal or up
moderately.

On the other hand, orders remain at relatively depressed

levels at firms producing consumer durables, chemicals, aluminum and wood
products.

Several companies, particularly those producing industrial

equipment, indicate further sales deterioration.

Capital spending plans of

most manufacturers have changed little since May.
Employment in the District remains at May's level.

A few larger

industrial firms have continued to reduce work forces through attrition,
and several plants were shut down longer than usual during the summer for
model changeovers.

On the other hand, many smaller businesses have hired

more workers.
Residential home sales continue to be slow, and home construction
remains depressed.

According to the Home Builders Association, home sales

in the St. Louis area were 10 percent lower in June and July than in the
same months a year ago, and the trend continued in early August.

New

housing starts in the St. Louis area in June and July were only 20 percent
of normal.

A moderate improvement is expected in the near future, however,

since the typical interest rate on residential mortgages has fallen

from 16 3/4 percent plus 3 points in May to 15 3/4 plus 3 points in early
August.

Also, about $50 million of lower interest rate mortgage funds for

first time homebuyers in the St. Louis area soon will be available from
state revenue bonds. The demand for commercial construction, although
restrained, remains stronger than for residential.
Crops in the St. Louis District are excellent, reflecting near
ideal weather conditions during the planting and growing season.

Also,

relatively favorable feeding margins are benefitting hog and cattle
producers.

Because of the high interest rates and low grain prices,

however, many farmers remain in financial difficulty.

Prices of farm land,

according to scattered reports, have decreased somewhat, and there have
been few purchases of major farm equipment.

Bankers serving rural areas

are anticipating fewer pay-downs of agricultural loans than normal this
fall.
Savings and loan associations in the District continue to lose
deposits, primarily to the higher yielding money market funds.

As a

result, these associations have made few new loans to home buyers.
Virtually all associations are operating at a loss, and four associations
in the St. Louis area currently are being liquidated.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Previously reported weaknesses in district economic activity have
persisted through the summer.

So far, the only important evidence we see of

the consumer-led recovery predicted by many economists is a strong showing in
tourism and vacation spending.

Consumers have remained unwilling to spur the

district econony "by stepping up their purchases of merchandise, homes, and
motor vehicles.

Manufacturing orders and production have continued to shrink

this summer, and the already depressed lumber and metal mining industries have
suffered additional blows.

While district crops have benefited from superb

growing conditions, this has been a mixed blessing at best, primarily serving
to aggravate farmers' price problems.
continued decline in new bank loans.

Confirming these weaknesses has been a
Demand to roll over existing credits has

been strong, but nuch of this lending activity mist be attributed to borrowers' liquidity problems.

Tourism
Tourism accounts for approximately 7 percent of district nonagricultural employment, and this summer it has been the one bright spot on our
otherwise dreary economic landscape.
In the western half of the district, tourism is oriented to travel
and sightseeing (the Black Hills, Mount Rushmore, Glacier National Park, for
example), and these activities have been expanding lately.

In North and South

Dakota, state tourism directors report that tourism in June and July was up
about 3 percent from 1981 levels, and 1981 was itself a good year.

In

Montana, poor weather held down spending "by tourists in May and June, but the
state tourism office indicates that business in July and early August was much
improved, well ahead of a year ago.
population

centers

and primarily

These vacation areas are far from major
reached by automobile.

Thus, industry

sources attribute much of the improvement to the recent easing in gasoline
prices.
Tourism in the eastern half of the district has been respectable this
summer, but not as strong as in the western half.

Resorts, fishing, camping,

and the like dominate the eastern area's tourism business.

Resort operators

and trade association officials in Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin, and the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan indicate that business has been up from a year ago
at some resorts, down at others.

This spottiness is attributed largely to

reduced group entertaining by corporations and, in some areas, to poor weather.

Other Consumer Spending
While consumers have been willing to spend on vacations, they have
continued to be reluctant to make other purchases.

An economist for a locally

headquartered national retailer reports that his firm is "waiting but still
hopeful."

Major department and discount stores in the Minneapolis-St. Paul

area report that weak: sales (reported in recent Redbooks) continued into
July.

Specialty store revenues have also been flat.

A national book retail-

er, headquartered in Minneapolis, terms its summer sales as "soft," and a
large

Minneapolis

company

with

several

characterizes recent sales as "weak."

specialty

retailing

subsidiaries

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

directors report that merchandise sales outside the Twin Cities area have also
been soft.

Consumers have remained wary of big-ticket items such as homes and
motor vehicles.

According to the Minneapolis Board of Realtors, July home

sales in Minneapolis and its suburbs were down 25 percent from the already
depressed level of a year ago.

Furthermore, after reporting in our last

Redbook that motor vehicle sales had strengthened modestly in May and early
June, regional sales managers indicate that sales turned down again in July.

Industrial Activity
Accompanying weak consumer spending has been a continuing decline in
manufacturing orders and production.

District manufacturers of toys, house-

wares, and cosmetics report that retailers have simply not been ordering this
summer.

Also, orders received ty district paper manufacturers have been

"weakening rapidly," according to a director associated with that industry.
Until

recently,

this was

one

of

the

district's

strongest

manufacturing

sectors.
Lack of demand has continued to reduce production as evidenced by
more layoffs announced in early August:

a Minneapolis clothing manufacturer,

30 workers; two Minneapolis-St. Paul computer manufacturers, 73 workers; a St.
Paul manufacturer of heavy equipment, 270 workers; and a South Dakota meatpacker, 600 •workers.
Lumbering and mining have been further depressed this summer too.
Not only has weak construction activity continued to hold down lumber production, but directors report that unseasonably heavy summer rains at both ends
of the district have interfered with logging operations.

Also, several iron

mining companies extended their previously announced shutdowns, (discussed in
our last Redbook).

Iron ore production at district mines this year is now

projected to total 35 million tons or less, well below the 50 million tons
that industry sources were estimating in early June.

Agricultural Conditions
Good growing conditions in the district and elsewhere have driven
down crop prices and exacerbated the problems confronting
district.

farmers in the

The threat of cold and wet weather in the spring did not materi-

alize, and prospects now are for record harvests in the Ninth District.
However, local storage facilities are full to capacity from previous harvests,
and manor farmers are not eligible for price support loans on this year's
crops.

For example, only 25 percent of Minnesota corn producers are eligible

for price support loans.

The threat of this fall's bumper crops forcing large

amounts of grain on the market has sent corn and soybean prices tumbling from
already weak levels.
To compound district farm problems, farm stored grains in Minnesota
are reported to have above average amounts of insect infestation and mold this
year.

If those reports are true, some Minnesota farmers will have difficulty

getting even these poor prices for privately stored grains.

Financial Developments
Recent bank lending has reflected these weaknesses in the district
econoncr.

A Minneapolis-St. Paul banker indicates that new bank loans at

metropolitan area banks have "drifted down" through the summer.

Outside the

metropolitan area, the poor farm econoiqy has been slowing debt repayment.

At

the end of June, 4 3 percent of the rural bankers responding to our Agricultural Credit Conditions Survey expected the demand for farm debt refinancing
in their area to be greater than normal in the third quarter.
percent characterized the current rate of debt repayment as slow.

Moreover, 62

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Business conditions in the Tenth District continue weak with

little indication, as yet, that an economic recovery is underway.
sales across the District, however, improved somewhat in June.
dealers have experienced a modest increase in sales, as well.

Retail

Automobile
Input prices,

as reported by purchasing agents, are mixed compared to a year ago with some
further trimming of inventories expected.

Large corn and soybean crops are

in prospect, if an early frost is avoided.

Loan demand at Tenth District

banks is generally flat, while deposit growth is mixed.

Some deterioration

in loan quality is occurring at commercial banks, resulting in more careful
monitoring of the financial condition of all borrowers.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers in the Tenth District report sales in

the first half of 1982 were slightly less than in the first half of 1981.
Sales improved somewhat in June with automotive repair and parts sales especially strong.

Durable goods sales remain weak.

While merchandise costs have

not changed significantly in recent months, promotional price cutting is
resulting in some downward pressure on profit margins for retailers.

Primar-

ily due to lackluster sales, inventory levels remain slightly higher than
desired.

Retailers express cautious optimism about sales in the remaining

months of 1982, indicating that some further inventory liquidation is expected.
Automobile Industry.

Automobile dealers in the Tenth District express

guarded optimism due to recent marginal upswings in sales.

With the exception

of Colorado where sales were off 15 percent in July from a year earlier, the
District is experiencing a general increase in sales, especially in Oklahoma.

Credit is generally available, but at quite high rates.
tightly controlling inventories.

Dealers are still

Yet, some larger dealers have expanded

slightly—primarily in the better selling luxury cars.

Dealer optimism,

however, is fragile and they are reluctant to predict further significant
increases in sales over the next six months.
Purchasing Agents.

Tenth District purchasing agents report input

prices are mixed compared to last year at this time, ranging from 15 percent
decreases to 15 percent increases for certain materials.

Prices are expected

to remain relatively stable for the rest of the year, with at most a 5 percent
increase for certain raw materials beginning in the fourth quarter.

Firms

contacted continue to trim their inventory levels and plan to maintain them at
very low levels for the remainder of the year.

Consequently, input availability

is becoming a problem for many firms in the District.

All firms report excess

capacity at this time and no shortages of skilled labor.
Agriculture.

Tenth District bankers report corn and soybean crop

conditions range from good to excellent.

Concern is expressed about the

vulnerability of late planted crops to an early frost, however.

Harvesting

of the large Tenth District winter wheat crop is nearly complete.
bankers indicate that wheat prices are unusually low.

District

The grain storage

situation appears to be adequate at present with the possibility of some later
shortage of storage facilities, depending upon the final crop production outcome.
Hog production continues to be profitable and more cattle are on feed in the
Tenth District than a year earlier.

District bankers indicate that cattlemen

are reducing the size of their cattle herds from year-ago levels.

Banking Developments.
show little or no growth.

Loan demand in the Tenth District continues to

Districtwide, demand for commercial and industrial

loans remains constant, although some banks in Colorado report a growth in
loans to nonenergy-related businesses.

While some banks indicate increases

in agricultural loans, farm lending is generally weaker than normal for the
season.

Several Oklahoma bankers note strong growth in loans to finance

commercial construction; however, there are no indications of greater real
estate lending elsewhere.
District.

Demand for consumer loans is flat throughout the

Districtwide, the prime rate ranged from 15 to 15 1/2 percent,

down from the 16 to 17 percent range reported last month.

Some bankers

note a deterioration in the quality of their outstanding loans, resulting in
close monitoring of the financial condition of all borrowers.
Deposit growth reported by Tenth District banks is mixed.

NOW accounts

show little or no growth, and money market certificates are up slightly.
Growth in large CD's range from flat to moderately strong, except in Oklahoma
where large runoffs are reported in some instances due to apprehension
resulting from the Penn Square failure.

Districtwide, other categories of

time and savings deposits remain flat or down slightly.

Very few commercial

banks report their institutions offer deposit sweeping arrangements.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Economic indicators for the Eleventh District are mixed.

The

unemployment rate and manufacturing output are stable, but the drilling rig
count continues to fall.

Loan growth at commercial banks is down, but

construction loans are up.

Commercial and residential construction is

stable, but housing permits are rising.

Department store sales fell in

July and auto sales are sluggish.
Texas' unemployment rate stabilized at 7.0 percent in June and
July, up

from

6.7 percent

in May.

The number

of

layoffs

is down

considerably from its peak two months ago, but new claims for unemployment
insurance

remain high.

The

Texas

Employment

Commission reports that

unemployment is hitting workers in a much broader than normal range of
professions.

The Commission notes that an unusually high proportion of

workers filing claims for unemployment compensation now come from firms
that have gone out of business.
The situation in manufacturing is little changed, except for the
reduction in the pace of layoffs.

Large inventories and depressed new

orders rates persist for manufacturers of non-electrical machinery and
fabricated metals for the petroleum industry.

Orders for construction

steel are declining slowly, but backlogs are large and production stable.
Electronics manufacturers are relying on military contracts to offset low
commercial demand.

Petroleum refineries are maintaining low, but stable

production levels.

Apparel manufacturers report smaller than anticipated

orders for fall merchandise.

The number of drilling rigs operating in the District continues
to fall from December's peak.

A small rise, after eight months of decline,

in the number of crews that explore for potential drilling sites could mark
the end of the decrease in the rig count.
The growth of loans at commercial banks slowed in July, and
deposits declined.

Loan growth has been significantly above average for

the year to date, but was slight last month.

Loans to businesses at large

weekly reporting banks increased an average of 2.0 percent each month this
year, but rose 0.4 percent in July.
that

the

financial

condition

deteriorating, particularly

in

of

Key lenders at large banks indicate

borrowers

with

outstanding

loans

is

the energy industry and its suppliers.

Credit requirements are tightening.

Total deposits declined, in spite of

the rise in time deposits.
S&L's are posting large rises in loan volume.

Over half of the

dollar amount is for construction, and S&L's prefer to invest in apartments
and office buildings.

Loans for home purchases are up modestly—increases

that respondents attribute
interest rate declines.
since June.

to the combination of seasonal factors and

The number of delinquent payments is up slightly

Liquidity is above required levels.

Respondents in the residential construction industry say the pace
of building is stable.

Construction should increase, however, as permits

rose 27.9 percent for multifamily units and 10.5 percent for single-family
homes in June from May's level.

The combination of low apartment vacancy

rates and an abundance of office space is helping to attract financing for
apartment construction.

The level of commercial construction is high, and should be
fairly stable into next year.

The number of new projects announced is

slowly declining, but exceeds cancellations of projects on which work has
not begun.
Sales at department stores for the year to date are 5 percent
above last year's cumulative levels but below year-ago levels for the month
of July.

Inventories have been tightly controlled, but price discounting

of merchandise is greater than planned.
expectations

for

manufacturers.

fall

sales

and

Retailers are reducing their

cancelling

some

orders

placed

with

Sales along the Mexican border are significantly decreased

after the recent devaluation of the peso.
Auto

dealers

attribute

their

slow

sales

programs, interest rates, and high unemployment.
excessive.

to

earlier

rebate

Inventories are not

Many would-be buyers are visiting dealerships but respondents

expect little stimulus from the model changes in the fall.
Farm incomes are declining.

Storms and disease have damaged the

wheat and cotton crops, and bumper crops in the rest of the United States
are depressing prices.
costs are rising.

Livestock prices are declining and energy and feed

The volume of loans for agricultural production remains

high as the pace of payments is slowing and many loans are extended.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy slipped deeper into recession during the
past month and further near-term weakness appears to be in prospect.
Consumer spending declined in July at both department stores and new car
dealerships, and reports for early August suggest no improvement.
Homebuilding continues to pick up gradually, but from an extremely
depressed level.

Moreover, the large inventory of unsold homes and recent

Supreme Court ruling permitting Federally-chartered S & L's to enforce the
due-on-sale clause on outstanding mortgages suggest that any further
recovery this year will be negligible.
is slowing.

Meanwhile, commercial construction

In the manufacturing and mining sectors, a number of

industries cut back production further in July and announced further
curtailments for August to reduce excess inventory.

In the agricultural

sector, the relationship between farm costs and prices continues to
deteriorate.

At Twelfth District banks, real estate loans outstanding

continue to grow, but for reasons related to hardship among builders and
households rather than strength in construction activity.
Consumer Spending
The long-expected consumer led recovery does not appear to have
materialized in the Twelfth District.

Respondents report that retail sales

dropped in July and barely exceeded the year-ago level in nominal terms.
The decline was noted for both department stores and automobile dealerships
selling new cars.

In fact, car dealers reported July sales activity as the

worse yet during this recession.

In the face of rising unemployment, high

interest rates and an uncertain future outlook, consumers still appear to
be exhibiting extremely cautious spending behavior.

A slow tourist season

also is adversely affecting retail business.

Meanwhile, retail profits are

depressed, bankruptcies are rising, and managers are scaling back plans for
purchasing Fall merchandise.

Even grocery store sales are reported to be

sliding.
Manufacturing and Mining
Many basic Twelfth District manufacturing and mining industries cut
back production and employment further in July.

In the Pacific Northwest,

the lumber industry sank deeper into depression as the renewed weakness in
national housing starts further reduced orders and prices.

The paper

industry also experienced further weakness in orders, not only from
domestic but foreign customers.

The Boeing Company in Seattle continued to

reduce its payrolls in response to order cancellations for commercial
aircraft, also forcing further curtailments at Pacific Northwest aluminum
plants.

In the Intermountain states, cutbacks were especially severe in

the copper industry where producers in Arizona and Utah reduced mine
production to only about 55 percent of capacity.

Efforts to arrest the

worldwide accumulation of excess inventory have been unsuccessful due to
rising foreign production and depressed demand from such industries as
automobile manufacturing and construction.
curtailments are planned for August.

As a result, further

In California —

a state which

traditionally outperforms the nation —

the unemployment rate reached an

all-time high of 10.5 percent in July.

Particularly notable has been

another recent wave of layoffs in the semiconductor industry which once
again is facing excess inventory due to depressed business capital spending
for such products as computers.
Construction and Real Estate
The slight improvement in Twelfth District homebuilding activity that
began in the spring appears to be continuing.

But residential construction

activity in the region is still even more depressed relative to a year ago
than activity nationally.

Moreover, the recent pace of residential

building permit activity virtually guarantees that any further improvement
this year will be negligible.
outcome.
rise.

There are other factors that suggest this

First, the inventory of new and old unsold homes has continued to

Second, a large proportion of sales in recent months has been

through some form of creative financing, and the recent Supreme Court
decision allowing Federally-chartered S & L's to enforce the due-on-sale
clause will end the assumption of mortgages originally issued by those
institutions.

Meanwhile, nonresidential construction expenditures are

slowing dramatically as a result of rising vacancy rates and cutbacks in
private and public capital spending.

Vacancy rates in office buildings and

shopping centers are reported to be rising.

For example, in San Francisco,

about 10 percent of the city's first class office space is vacant.
Agriculture
Prices for important Twelfth District agricultural crops and livestock
products have shown mixed patterns recently.

Prices for fruits and

vegetables generally have increased, while prices for cattle and grains
have moved lower.

But, in general, the relationship between farm prices

and costs has continued to deteriorate, both relative to earlier months in
1982 and a year earlier.

Moreover, the outlook for improvement in net

income later this year is not favorable, given the bumper crops in
prospect.

Adding to the industry's problems, the rising foreign exchange

value of the dollar and slowdown in overseas economies have been acting to
reduce agricultural exports.

Due to declining net income, the industry's

demand for credit has been increasing substantially while its
creditworthiness has been deteriorating.

Financial Institutions
July data show no significant change in total bank credit from the
month earlier.

Real estate loans outstanding were the only major component

to exhibit strength, although growth there was slower than a year ago.
Growth in mortgage loans continues to reflect a lower rate of turnover of
properties and consequent slower pace of repayments on outstanding loans,
as well as the continued expansion of credit needs for commercial projects
already in progress.

Slow sales of new housing units and high long-term

interest rates also are forcing builders to restructure existing debt and
to turn increasingly to short-term bank borrowing.

Residential loans

outstanding also continue to grow because homeowners find home equity loans
(seconds) attractive and because banks have been offering below-market
financing on new homes to help move the excess inventory of builders to
whom they have extended construction financing.

