CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

June 23, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]
Overview:

Reports from the twelve Districts suggest that on balance

the economy may have reached its trough but few signs of recovery are seen.
Only Atlanta, St. Louis, and Kansas City report signs of improvement.
Districts report either flat or deteriorating conditions.

Other

Retail sales

improved in May but were mixed in June, and retailers remain very cautious.
Manufacturing activity remains depressed with new production cutbacks seeming
to outweigh the few production increases.
inventory liquidation seems likely.
remain weak.

Additional, although slower,

Construction, mining, and agriculture

There are some signs that inflation continues to abate.

Consumer and real estate lending is weak, while business loan demand is
mixed.

Bankers are concerned about delinquencies and loan quality.
Retail Sales:

Retail sales improved in May but were mixed in June and

retailers are cautious about the second half.

The May improvement reported by

most Districts was mostly in non-durable goods.

Sales of household durable

goods generally are weak, except in San Francisco.

Several Districts report

sales gains were achieved only because of strong promotions and large
markdowns.

Discount stores are doing better than full-price stores.

San

Francisco, St. Louis and Minneapolis report improvement in car and/or light
truck sales, but Dallas reports car sales fell after GM's low interest rate
promotion ended.

Some Districts report continued improvement in early June

while others report retail sales falling back from their May levels.
Retailers are at best cautiously optimistic about sales for the second half.
They are reported to be conservative about ordering goods and keeping a tight

rein on inventories.

While some look for sales to increase in response to the

tax cut and social security increase, others expect consumers to emphasize
saving and paying down debt.
Manufacturing and Mining:

Manufacturing activity generally remains

depressed, with new production cutbacks seeming to outweigh the few production
gains.

Most Districts report either declining or flat orders, shipments and

backlogs.

Some increases in motor vehicle production are reported, but

production of steel and machinery is depressed.

Dallas reports firms selling

to the petroleum industry are making particularly large cutbacks.

Paper

production is still being cut but lumber production has stabilized at a
depressed level.

San Francisco reports cutbacks in commercial aircraft and

electronic equipment production more than offset gains in aerospace defense
equipment.
Reductions in mining activity are widespread.

Minneapolis reports

sharp curtailment of iron and copper output, a modest reduction in coal
production, and oil and gas drilling activity at less than half the year-ago
level.

Dallas reports oil drilling rates are low, but increased slightly at

the beginning of June.

San Francisco reports copper and silver mine

production at 50 percent of capacity.
Inventories:

Many firms have reduced their inventories to desired

levels, but there are widespread reports of continued liquidation, and few
reports of plans to build inventories.

Most Districts report retail

inventories are at desired levels but some suggest inventories are still on
the high side.
inventories.

Retailers are reported to be extremely cautious about building
Cleveland reports that liquidation of inventories of consumer

goods and some industrial products "has probably run its course" but further
liquidation of inventories is likely in primary metals and capital goods.

Other Districts generally report significant proportions of manufacturers
still planning further reduction of inventories.

Richmond reports nearly

one-third of manufacturers still view inventories as excessive, and Boston
reports many manufacturers plan to reduce inventories over the next three to
six months.

Dallas reports many firms have excess inventories, particularly

those selling to the petroleum industry.

Philadelphia reports the pace of

inventory liquidation is tapering off from May's peak rate of reduction.
Construction:

Most Districts that commented on residential

construction report very low levels of activity with no indications of
improvement.

Two exceptions are Dallas, where starts are "up strongly from

April," and San Francisco, where homebuilding "appears to be picking up,"
albeit from a post-World War II low.
The outlook for commercial construction is weakening.

New York and

Chicago report postponements of new projects and Dallas reports a decline in
the number of new project announcements.

Softening in office rental markets

is reported by New York, Atlanta, Chicago, and San Francisco.
Agriculture:

The situation in agriculture is generally gloomy.

prices are depressed while input prices continue to rise.

Grain

Low farm income,

high interest rates, and falling land prices make financing difficult.
Financial strains are reported by Atlanta,.St. Louis, Dallas, and San
Francisco.

Several Districts report spring planting delayed by wet weather.

A bright spot for farmers is livestock prices, reported up by St. Louis,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.
Inflation:

There are some signs that inflation continues to abate.

Prices in department stores are reported to be sharply discounted in most
Districts.

San Francisco reports food supermarket price wars.

property rental markets are soft in some Districts.

Commercial

Chicago reports

construction project bids "10 to 20 percent below estimates," and sharp price
discounts in building materials and paper prices.
grains also are weak.

Prices for basic metals and

Manufacturers in the Richmond District report declines

in prices paid and received in the past month.

Chicago reports "unilateral

cuts" in salaries of nonunion employees and negotiations with unions to adjust
compensation and work rules.
stabilized in May and June.

Philadelphia reports industrial prices
However, prices of livestock and crude oil are

rising.
Financial Conditions:
business loan demand is mixed.
loan quality.

Consumer loan demand is generally weak and
Bankers are concerned about delinquencies and

Little, if any, growth is reported in bank consumer lending.

Loans to finance purchases of automobiles are reported to be constrained by
usury laws.

No strength is reported in real estate lending.

Business loan demand is reported strong in some Districts and weak in
others.

Where strong, it is variously described as distress borrowing and as

a substitute for tapping the bond market, but there is little indication of
borrowing for plant expansion.

Several Districts report bankers are concerned

with the quality of existing loans and are very cautious about the quality of
new credits.

Delinquencies have risen, and San Francisco reports concern

about the "level of nonperforming business loans, particularly to the
construction, forest products and aerospace industries."

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

There Is a sharp dichotomy between the recent experience of
retailers in the First District and that of manufacturers.

Retail sales in

the past month have been good and compare favorably with sales a year ago.
The firms contacted are looking forward to the widely predicted pickup in
consumer spending in the second half of the year.
other hand, have become more pessimistic.
poor.

Manufacturers, on the

Business continues to be very

The rate of decline seems to be slowing, but there are no signs yet

of an upturn.
Retail
Retailers in the First District have become more bullish.

The

firms contacted reported that, in spite of the recession, sales growth over
the year exceeded the rate of inflation and either matched or exceeded the
growth projected in their business plans.

One firm, which had run an extra

circular promotion, achieved an increase in New England sales in May of 19
percent over May last year.

Another experienced growth over the year "in

the high single digits"; sales were particularly strong in New Hampshire
and Rhode Island.

Persistent rains have not hurt overall sales much, but

have reduced sales of swimwear and other items traditionally sold at the
beginning of the summer.

Most of the firms contacted are cautiously basing

business plans on the widely reported forecast of a pickup in consumer
spending in the second half of the year.
A representative of a major department store said that prices of
purchased stock are becoming more attractive.

Since the store maintains a

constant markup, prices to the consumer will improve.

Another retailer

expects price increases to slow over the next several months, as earlier
reductions in energy prices filter into the transportation component of
retail costs.
Manufacturing
Gloom pervades the manufacturing sector.

The firms contacted were

almost unanimous in describing business as very poor.

Several expressed

great concern about the deterioration in corporate balance sheets, with the
chief economist of one large firm suggesting that today's high interest
rates are justified to a significant degree by the decline in business
coverage ratios and the resulting increased risk to the lender.
The rate of decline in manufacturing appears to be slowing,
however.

In a May survey of New England purchasing managers the percentage

of firms reporting decreases in orders and backlogs was lower and the
percentage reporting no change was higher than in the March and April
surveys.

However, more firms still reported that orders and backlogs

declined than reported increases.

Among the firms contacted directly, a

group including firms in the rubber, chemicals, appliance, electronics and
aircraft industries, most thought that orders and shipments had
stabilized.

However, almost no one saw signs of a pickup and a few firms

continued to suffer decreases.

A designer and manufacturer of process

industry control systems, which had not felt the recession as recently as
March, has now seen a definite slowing in orders and a rise in
cancellations.

These systems reduce costs at existing facilities, rather

than add to capacity; so the cancellations suggest that firms in the
process industries are having difficulty justifying even cost-saving

investments.
Reports of increased sales were very few and were usually
contradicted.

Thus, one manufacturer of specialized printing equipment and

supplies reported a pickup in demand, while a firm in a closely related
industry reported a decline.

A third manufacturer of printing equipment

said that there had been a slight upturn earlier but business was now
levelling off, still well below plan.

Also, one very large manufacturer of

electrical equipment saw the beginnings of a recovery in Europe; however,
another firm described Europe as "dead and getting deader".

The defense

business is the only area about which reports are consistently positive.
The manufacturers contacted directly were generally satisfied with
recent inventory levels.

However, the survey of local purchasing managers

showed a substantial fraction of firms planning to reduce inventories over
the next three to six months.
Professors Eckstein, Solow, Samuelson, and Houthakker were
available for comment this month.

They all believe that a weak recovery

will begin soon, although Eckstein and Samuelson emphasized the downside
risks to their forecasts.

They differed, however, on whether the Fed

should nurture the recovery by permitting the monetary aggregates to grow
outside their target ranges.
Eckstein and Solow both believe that the Fed should not apply the
monetary brake because interest rates are remaining at unacceptably high
levels.

Eckstein emphasized that continued high interest rates could

neutralize the stimulative effects of the July tax cut, thereby aborting
the recovery and dragging the economy into a deeper recession.

He is

especially alarmed by the devastating impact of high rates on business

fixed investment.

In his view capital spending will be considerably weaker

during the remainder of the year than indicated by the Commerce
Department's most recent plant and equipment expenditure survey.
Solow agrees that, given current economic conditions, the Board
should "intelligently lean against the wind" by easing monetary policy.

He

cautioned that a decline in interest rates per se would not necessarily
indicate that the appropriate degree of easing had taken place.

Monetary

policy could still be too tight if the decline in rates were caused merely
by prolonged economic weakness.

At the same time, he acknowledged that a

dramatic return to rapid monetary expansion would risk rekindling
inflationary expectations.
Samuelson, although sympathetic to Eckstein's and Solow's position,
nevertheless urged the Board to "make some semblance of an attempt" to
attain the high end of its targets.

He argued that "monetarists have so

mesmerized Wall Street" that failure to do so would raise fears of a new
round of inflation and therefore keep real interest rates from falling.
Nevertheless, if economic conditions continue to deteriorate through the
summer, which he believes is a distinct possibility, then he would consider
abandoning the targets.
Houthakker recommended that the Board stay at the upper limits of
its target ranges in order to preserve its gains aginst inflation.
However, he urged a cautious approach to the targets, given the probable
weakness of the recovery and the randomness of movements In the
aggregates.

He believes that adherence to the targets would keep pressure

on Congress to reduce proposed budget deficits.

Solow believes that for

political reasons "Congress has gone about as far as it can go" in trimming
the deficit for fiscal year 1983.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

After holding up fairly well earlier in the recession, the economy of
the Second District appeared to be weakening in May and early June.

The

unemployment rate for the region remained below the nation's, but there were
signs of deterioration in many sectors and localities.

Indeed, we were unable

to find any concrete indications that an upturn had begun.

Many of the gains

scored by retailers in May could prove short-lived as early reports for June
showed a decrease at some stores.
residential construction sector.

Poor conditions generally prevailed in the
Nonresidential building was still brisk, but

the outlook was uncertain as softness in the office rental market persisted.
There was no letup in layoffs in the manufacturing sector and some producers
noted sharp declines in their business.

It was therefore not surprising to

find business leaders generally more pessimistic than last month with few
looking for any recovery before year-end.
Consumer Spending
Retail activity increased in May, as many department stores finished
the month above plan. The improvement could be short-lived, however, as some
firms reported a weakening of sales in early June.
heavy throughout this period.

Promotional activity was

Overall, nondurable goods generally sold well

despite a softening in apparel sales at a few stores; sales of big ticket
items like home furnishings stagnated.

While inventories did not pose serious

problems, stocks at some stores tended to the high side.

Some retailers

continued to expect the tax cut and social security increase to spur sales
during the second half of the year.

Construction and Real Estate Activity
Residential construction remained depressed with sales and
starts substantially below year-ago levels.
observers noted some positive signs.

As in our last report,

In New York City, sales of existing

homes were still brisk in Queens, and sales of cooperative apartments in
small buildings improved in Brooklyn.

In suburban areas, condominum

construction increased modestly, and "buy downs" stimulated some
homebuying.
The outlook for nonresidential construction weakened.

Many

developers throughout the District postponed groundbreakings for new
buildings, but ongoing projects, like Battery Park City, are likely to
sustain a high level of construction for the next few years.

The office

rental market was soft again this month in both city and suburban areas,
enabling lessees to negotiate more favorable terms.

Possibly

foreshadowing further weakening of the midtown market, two firms—one in
advertising and one in publishing—resisted large rent hikes by moving
from prime space to less costly parts of Manhattan.

Nonetheless, most

respondents believed the office market was fundamentally sound.

Demand

for space was expected to grow rapidly as banking and the international
sector in general expand further.
Business Activity
Business conditions varied widely across the region.

Some

previously strong areas, such as Syracuse, reported a softening and those
already hard hit, such as Buffalo, deteriorated further.

Although the

rate of unemployment was essentially unchanged and still below the
nation's, announcements of new workforce reductions continued.

In

industries such as oil and steel, firms shut down plants, some
permanently.

Companies postponed or even cancelled capital expenditure

plans, as capacity utilization fell and interest rates stayed high.
many producers business distinctly worsened.

For

For example, a ball bearing

manufacturer reported that new orders fell to only 10 percent of the
level of a few weeks previous and were running below cancellations.
Similarly, a furniture producer which had been prospering at the
previously resilient luxury end of the market found that the demand for
its goods had collapsed.
Outlook
Business leaders, except for retailers, turned more pessimistic,
and few looked for any upturn before the end of the year.

As economic

conditions have weakened across the region, hopes for an early turnaround
have faded.

Respondents from such previously strong areas as Rochester

and Long Island are voicing much more concern than before, although their
gloom does not approach that reported in Buffalo.
The price slowdown continued, but contacts expressed little
confidence in its permanency.

Once demand picks up, prices are expected

to rebound as firms restore profit margins.

A more encouraging sign on

the price front was the apparent moderation in wage settlements, with
reports of increases in the 6 percent range not uncommon.

Financial Panel
This month we have comments from David Jones (Aubrey G. Lanston &
Co.), James O'Leary (U.S. Trust Co.) and Robert Stone (Irving Trust Co.)
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Jones:

Three factors are tending to prop up interest rates, despite

still pronounced recessionary tendencies.
policy.

First, a commendably tight monetary

Second, heavy Federal government credit demands associated with an

excessively loose fiscal policy.

Third, large "desperation" business

borrowing as profits-strained business competes with the Federal Government
for funds to finance excessive inventory stocks, interest payments, wages and
salaries and other necessities.

The upshot is likely to be continued high

interest rates through most, if not all, the remainder of 1982.

Also, there

could be mounting business failures, and major financial strains in the
commercial paper and Eurodollar markets which could operate to virtually cut
off financing to less credit worthy borrowers.

Paradoxically, it may be that

significant interest rate relief will not come until sustained economic
recovery gets under way in 1983.

Only then will business (those that survive

the recession are likely to be lean, cost efficient, and highly productive) be
able to generate sufficient profits to be able to pay off short-term debt.
O'Leary:

During the balance of the year the political and public

pressures on the Fed will intensify to an alarming level:

(1) the current

increase in interest rates, if it continues and is sustained, may deepen the
recession or at least postpone any significant recovery; (2) the financial
side of the economy is a minefield and "crowding out" is a serious danger; (3)
the Fed does not have much room to maneuver before it begins to lose its
credibility; (4) the widely expected bulge in money supply in July will present

a very difficult problem for the Fed; (5) the fear remains high the huge
Federal deficits and excessively easy credit will sooner or later lead to a
new upward ratcheting of inflation; (6) the long-term capital market is
especially vulnerable—due in part to the changed position of the life
insurance companies it has lost much of its stability and is much more
susceptible to wide swings in psychology.
Unfortunately, the Fed has very little option and must adhere quite
closely to its targets even if in the near term they contribute to a rise of
short-term rates, prolongation of the recession, and intense political
pressure.

If instead the Fed permits the monetary base to expand at the rate

it has increased so far this year or even higher, the result will be a sharp
increase in interest rates in any event, especially long-term rates.
Adherence to the monetary targets will keep the heat on the Administration and
Congress to hold down the Federal deficit, which is where the real policy
problem lies, not with Federal Reserve policy.
Stone:

The economy has reached bottom and activity has begun to turn

up or will soon do so.

Recovery is likely to be moderate however, and should

interest rates not decline it may abort in late 1982 or early 1983.

The

market's focus is currently on the possibility of another bulge in the
aggregates in July and on the large Treasury financing needs that loom
ahead—all against the background of the heightened state of uncertainty in
the aftermath of Drysdale.

With all of this, it seems to me the appropriate

course for the Fed is to hold to its present nonborrowed reserves path and to
let borrowings rise to meet the increase in reserve requirements associated
with the July bulge in the aggregates should it occur.

But in view of the

very fragile state of the market I believe the Fed should temporarily speed up
the provision of nonborrowed reserves i_f the rate increases that would
accompany such a rise in borrowings should seem disorderly or excessive.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District are mixed in June.

Reports from the

industrial sector continue to point to a bottoming out, but signs of growth are few and
far between.

Industrial prices continue to reflect that sluggishness.

sporadic, with large gains in May being offset by a weak June.

Retail business is

In the financial sector,

bankers say business borrowing is strong and deposit flows are reasonably good.
As for the future, Third District businessmen are optimistic but cautious.
Manufacturers anticipate a pickup over the next six months, but not one strong enough to
warrant increased capital spending or significant inventory building.

Retailers seem to

agree. They project some gains, but none large enough to really signal a recovery. They,
too, plan to keep the lid on inventories.

Area bankers have mixed views about business

over the next six months, mostly as a result of widely variant interest rate forecasts.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers responding to the June Business Outlook Survey say their
industry is still in a lull.

Industrial activity has remained virtually unchanged for four

consecutive months now.

A note of encouragement comes from the durables sector,

however, which appears finally to have stabilized.

Specific indicators show that new

orders and factory shipments both posted small gains in June.

As a result, the pace of

inventory liquidation, although still significant, has tapered off somewhat after reaching
a two-year peak in May.

Labor's situation has not improved, however, with cutbacks in

payrolls and working hours still being reported.
The dampness of the current business climate seems to have only slightly
affected survey participants' outlooks; about 70 percent still see clear sailing ahead.
There is widespread anticipation of gains in shipments and new orders between now and
year-end, and manufacturers are planning to expand both their work forces and the
length of the average workweek to some degree.

Respondents also predict an end to the

inventory run off, but are not projecting a recovery strong enough to warrant a serious
increase in plant and equipment spending.
Industrial prices, which were stable in May, are holding steady in June too.
And, while some area manufacturers foresee some renewal of inflation over the next two
quarters, at least some of the present price sluggishness is expected to persist. In June,
a larger portion of respondents than at any other time since the last months of the 197375 recession say that both raw material costs and finished good prices will remain steady
through the balance of 1982.
RETAIL
Area department stores turned in a strong showing in May, but primarily as a
result of heavy promotion.

Sales through the first half of June have been fairly slack,

and May gains, some as high as 12 percent, are being partially offset. Even so, yearover-year gains for the May-June period are expected to be in the neighborhood of five
percent.

Reasons

for

the

current

dampness

in department

store

sales

include

unseasonably wet weather and a "DON'T buy now" consumer psychology, a sharp contrast
to a few years ago when the public believed in "buy now" to avoid price hikes. With the
inflation rate down, consumers now tend to put off purchases and wait for price
markdowns. As a result, retail margins are under the gun.
Looking ahead to the balance of 19C2, retailers are very cautious.

Although

some small sales gains are anticipated, merchants generally don't predict a strong surge
until at least the fourth quarter. The tax cut and Social Security increase are expected
to go into further rebuilding of balance sheets.

As a result, retailers are keeping very

tight stocks, to the point of causing some spot shortages of certain goods. No plans for
inventory building are evident.

BANKING
Third District bankers say retail borrowing is still off substantially from a
year ago, but business loan volume is strong.

Reports this month put current CicI loan

volume from 8.5 to 12.5 percent ahead of June 1981 levels.

Much of that strength,

according to contacts, comes from businesses barred from the bond market by the high
cost of long-term capital.
Bankers' views on interest rates have turned mixed since the last Redbook,
and some now believe we've already seen the trough of the current interest rate cycle.
Forecasts of the prime, which now stands at 16.5 percent, range from a 250 basis point
drop between now and year-end to a 200 basis point increase by that time.

Uncertainty

over whether the Fed will bring monetary aggregates into line with targets seems to be
the source of the variance in the forecasts.
Loan demand forecasts for the next six months depend heavily on the
direction of interest rate movements.

With slack demand for retail inventory financing

expected and a possible end to stress borrowing, some bankers believe that a further
decline in rates, drawing customers to the bond market, would cause the bottom to drop
out of the commercial loan market.

Without that decline in interest rates, though, loan

volume will probably hold up, they say.
Deposit flows in the Third District are mixed but improving.

Demand

deposits have been picking up at major banks recently, but are still about 3 percent off
on a year-to-year basis. Time and savings deposits are ahead of year-ago levels by about
11 percent.

Sales of both 91-day money market certificates and 42-month ceiling-free

deposits have been less than dramatic.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Economists have scaled down their forecasts of economic

activity for 1982.

Unemployment rates in the Fourth District are higher than

the national rate and more layoffs are expected.

Manufacturers report little

sign of recovery in orders and sales, although declines appear to have
bottomed, except in capital goods.

Inventory liquidation probably is complete

in consumer goods and some industrial products but further liquidation is
expected in primary metals and capital goods.
expected.

Little recovery in housing is

A variety of financial strains are reported.

Outlook.

Economists who attended the Fourth District Roundtable

Meeting on June 11 at this Bank scaled down their forecasts of economic
activity for 1982 from their March forecasts.

The median of 29 forecasts now

shows a 0.5% annual rate of increase in real GNP in the second quarter, 3.5%
in the third quarter, and 3.3% in the fourth quarter.

Twelve of 29 forecasts

show declines in the second quarter, while none expects a negative third or
fourth quarter.

The median forecast shows the implicit price deflator

accelerating from a rate of 5.0% in the second quarter to 6.4% in the third
quarter and 6.7% in the fourth quarter, and the unemployment rate gradually
receding from a peak at 9.5% in the second to 8.6% in fourth quarter.

They

expect fourth quarter 1982 to fourth quarter 1983 increases of 3.7% in real
GNP and 6.4% in the implicit price deflator.
Employment.

Labor markets in the District remain weak, and

unemployment rates are generally much higher than the national rate despite a

decline in May.

Most of the major metropolitan centers in the District have

double-digit rates of unemployment.

The Cleveland Press, an afternoon daily,

failed in June idling 900 workers.

Our latest monthly survey of manufacturers

suggests employment will decline again in June, particularly in the District's
steel industry where the drop in orders has resulted in the banking of
numerous blast furnaces in Cleveland and Pittsburgh.
Manufacturing Activity.

A variety of manufacturers in the District

report little sign of recovery in orders and sales, although the declines
appear to have bottomed except for the typically lagging capital goods
industries.

Producers of personal safety equipment for industrial uses, basic

chemicals and reinforcement fiber glass report orders and sales have flattened
in recent months but no improvement has yet occurred.

Sales of residential

glass are flat to down a little but sales of commercial building glass
continue strong.

Coatings and glass sales to the automotive industry

apparently bottomed in April, but sales of house paint continued to decline in
May.

A producer of corrugated boxes (sales of which apparently closely

parallel industrial production) reports a small sales increase in May over
April, and a petroleum refiner reports gasoline sales in May were the best in
the last two years.

Capital goods producers generally report further

deterioration in orders and shipments.

Orders for bearings from the

construction, agricultural and railroad equipment industries weakened further
in May, and a producer of electrical capital goods reports that their orders
deteriorated in June.

A producer of pneumatic and hydraulic parts reports

orders from industrial machinery manufacturers have dropped severely
recently.

Machine tool orders remain very weak, even for robotic equipment,

and no turnaround is expected until well after an economic recovery because of
weakened balance sheets and cash flows of capital intensive industries.

Inventories.

Most respondents in the District report that inventory

liquidation of consumer goods and select products in industrial markets has
probably run its course but further liquidation remains in primary metals and
capital goods.

A producer of major home appliances has cut inventories "below

the bare minimum" and could not respond quickly to an upturn in orders.

A

diversified producer of industrial materials reports that their inventories
have been reduced from a 5 to 6 month supply to 30 days and are down "as far
as they can go."

Dealer inventories of tires for agricultural implements are

also reported to be extremely low.

Crude oil inventories are expected to

decline more in the second quarter than in the first, according to a petroleum
economist.
quarter.

Refined product inventories are expected to grow in the third
An auto manufacturer reports their inventory reduction in the second

quarter was much less than in the first.
that are high.

There are still some inventories

A pneumatic and hydraulic parts producer reports inventories

of construction and agricultural machinery and some non-electrical machinery
are high.

Steel producers expect inventory liquidation again in the third

quarter, although not as severe as in the second quarter.

One expects no

improvement in steel production until the fourth quarter, which should be the
best of the year as users begin to rebuild inventories.
Housing.

Neither lenders not suppliers to the housing industry expect

much of a recovery in housing, at least in the near term.

A producer of major

home appliances forecasts little recovery in house construction in 1982-1983
as an increase in the number of units is offset by reductions in house size.
A housing industry economist projects a weak recovery in housing

because

mortgage rates are not expected to fall much, consumer income is constrained
by the sluggish economic recovery, and savings institutions are weak.
reports there is not yet any pickup in S&L loan commitments in this

He

region.

House sale closings are at one-third the level of 1978, delinquencies

are up sharply in the last 18 months, and foreclosures are also rising.
Financial Conditions.

Bank officials in Cleveland and Pittsburgh

report business loans are still strong, although banks in some smaller
metropolitan centers report all kinds of loans, business and consumer, are
weak.

One banker reports delinquencies on consumer loans have not yet been a

problem despite widespread layoffs in his area, but another predicts mortgage
foreclosures

and bankruptcies will increase unless economic conditions

improve next half.
A variety of financial strains are reported.

A major public

accounting firm reports that many client firms are in severe financial
difficulty.

One auto producer reports that their credit company is not

encouraging new business and has been advising dealers to seek credit from
local banks.

Another reports that an estimated one-third of the new car

market is unattractive to lenders because of usury law limits on interest
rates.

He estimates that the prime rate would have to fall to 12% for new car

financing to be attractive to lenders in all 50 states.

Thrifts in the

District are preoccupied with their continued deterioration in net worth and
are concentrating on merger plans rather than making mortgage loans, according
to an economist in this District.
activity.

Thrifts generally report very little loan

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Fifth District business and economic activity continues very weak
and by many measures has deteriorated further in recent weeks.

Generally,

activity in the manufacturing sector has continued to decline.

Manufacturers

surveyed report further declines in shipments, new orders, and order backlogs
in the past month.
ues.

Inventory liquidation has apparently moderated but contin-

Retail sales began to show some life but big ticket items were not helped.

Sales and construction in the housing sector have made no appreciable recovery
from the very low levels of recent months.
ity is generally quite slow.

Business and mortgage lending activ-

Consumer lending continues spotty and basically

weak, but may have picked up slightly from former levels. Expectations continue
to improve and are quite strong among survey respondents.
The Manufacturing Sector
Sales, shipments, and order backlogs all declined further during
the latest survey period according to our manufacturing respondents.

Once

again, stocks of materials declined while finished goods were basically unchanged.

Nearly a third of the respondents, however, still view current

inventories as excessive.

Manufacturing employment among respondents also

continued to fall during the mid-May to mid-June period, as did the length
of the average work week.

Official reports just becoming available, however,

indicate that manufacturing employment, as well as total employment, began
rising in the early spring in most areas of the District.

Unemployment rates

remain high but have dropped back from the record levels reached in March.
Respondents further report no change in employee compensation and actual
declines in other prices paid and received over the past month.

Optimism continues to spread among these manufacturers as about three quarters
expect business conditions to improve shortly.
Consumer Spending
Survey responses suggest a modest improvement in the retail sector
in recent weeks.

This improvement has been narrow, however, and there is some

evidence that it may mask a decline in sales of big ticket items.

Retailers

surveyed and Richmond directors believe that sales of durable goods have been
reduced to those absolutely necessary.

Any improvement, in this view, will

be dependent upon a change in consumer attitudes.
change as imminent, however.

They do not see such a

Our information further suggests a continuation

of consumers paying down debt and increasing savings.
Housing and Construction
Little change is evident in this sector.

Sales of houses and con-

struction generally remain very slow, and there is no apparent expectation of
significant near term improvement.
The Financial Sector
Richmond directors generally expect little or no increase in business
or consumer loan demand over the next few months.

They find that businesses

have reduced their loan requirements through inventory liquidation but that
the process may still have a way to run.

While some business sectors like

autos and wholesalers are thought to be near the minimum levels for inventories, other industries are seen as likely to reduce stocks further.

Gen-

erally, business borrowing is being restricted to the absolute minimum.
The outlook for consumer lending is no better.

There is little

expectation that consumers' purchases of durable goods will show any sustained improvement in the next few months.
only in near emergency cases.

Here too, purchases are being made

The Outlook
Manufacturers responding to our survey have become even more optimistic than last month.

Nearly three fourths of them expect the level of

business activity nationally, locally and in their respective market areas
to improve over the next two quarters.

Retailers, on the other hand, still

expect little or no change in the level of activity over the remainder of
the year.

SIXTH DISTRICT -

ATLANTA

Growing evidence suggests the District economy is in a moderate upturn.
Employment is edging higher, although some sectors remain weak.
have declined slightly in most areas.

Unemployment rates

Consumer spending is up moderately.

However,

high long-term interest rates are depressing the housing and housing-related industries
as well as the farm sector.
Consumer Spending.

Retail sales are reported to be up moderately in the

District compared to recent months and this time last year.
to outperform hard goods sales.

Soft goods sales continue

Sales of home entertainment products are also good,

while sales of quality goods generally are outperforming lower priced items.

Widespread

sales promotions and markdowns contributed to the sales gain but also narrowed margins
and strained liquidity of financially weak stores.

Although many retailers believe that

sales erosion has stopped, they are reported to be lowering their sales estimates for
the remainder of the year.

For example, many clothing retailers expect fall 1982 sales

to be flat compared to fall 1981 and are thus now buying cautiously at trade shows
in Atlanta and Miami.
Auto sales in May in the District were generally off from May of last year
but up from levels of mid-1981 and early 1982. The geographic pattern of sales within
the District is consistent with geographic differences in the severity of the recession;
Atlanta car sales are strong compared to agriculturally-depressed South Georgia.

Full-

size cars continue their recent gain of market share at the expense of compact cars;
however, the recent increase in the price of gasoline may soon reverse this trend.
Auto dealers are fearful that high interest rates will limit future sales levels.
Financial and Construction.

The housing industry remains sluggish.

estate sales and issuance of building permits are basically unchanged since May.

Real

Realtors

do not expect much improvement for the summer.

Realtors and S&Ls report that

housing is definitely a buyers' market—price concessions are causing a decline in housing
prices in some areas.

The much-feared overbuilding of commercial office space may

have been exaggerated.

In many areas of the District, downtown office space is

attracting occupants, but often as a result of the lowering of rents.
Strength in bank lending is reported to be largely distress borrowing related
to the recession.

Firms are avoiding the long-term credit market because of high

interest rates and are using short-term bank credit to finance operating costs.
Florida, some firms are continuing to borrow to relocate businesses to the region.

In
The

Mississippi area had little strength in bank loans from any source.
Employment and Industry.

There are recent indications that the region is

experiencing a moderate upturn in employment.

Florida is behaving as usual, with a

slowdown beginning six to nine months after the national recession.
is declining and the state's unemployment rate is over 8 percent.
weak throughout the District, but based on employment

Employment there

Construction remains

figures through April

and

impressions from those close to the industry in June, construction jobs have improved
somewhat.

Service-related employment continues to climb, but recent increases have

been below trend as recessions elsewhere have slowed the inflow of northerners to
Florida.

Unlike the private sector, however, government jobs are still declining.
A slight upturn in employment is also evident in slightly lower unemployment

rates in the region.
the

District,

with

Unemployment rates declined in April in five of the six states in
Georgia

experiencing

the largest

decline.

Although

Alabama's

unemployment rate edged up, the increase was marginal when compared to previous
months.

Florida's jobless rate fell in April despite a decline in employment as labor

force growth slowed in response to the reduced inflow of people from outside the state.
Florida and Georgia are the only two states in the six-state region with single-digit

unemployment rates.

These two states, however, comprise a large portion of the area's

population and labor force.

Thus movement in their rates has an important influence

on the region's job picture.
There are signs of a turnaround in the south Louisiana petroleum industry
due to higher crude oil prices and the potential for greater demand.

Well financed oil

drillers and related operations see opportunities to expand as the surplus is consumed.
Streamlined regulations regarding offshore drilling have stimulated drilling

activity,

particularly in the Mobile Bay area.
The textile industry, a major portion of which is based in the Southeast,
has been affected by the recession.

However, production has bottomed out and a very

gradual revival is expected to begin in August after normal July plant closings.

Products

tied to autos and housing have been doing more poorly than other segments of the
industry and are expected to recover more slowly.

Personal consumer products are

considered most likely to lead the rest of the textile industry out of the recession.
Tourism.

Attendance at the World's Fair through June 17 was 3,427,096

compared to the original projection of 2,271,000.
was considerably heavier than expected.

After a slow start, May attendance

Due to physical site limitations, promoters

are still sticking with original projections of 11 million total attendance.

Still, overall

attendance should exceed 11 million.

People driving to the World's Fair are taking in

other Tennessee attractions as well.

Tourists are reportedly arriving in Memphis and

Nashville in record numbers.
the state.

The Fair's so-called "spinoff effects" appear limited to

Tourist activity in north Florida is down from the same time last year, and

in New Orleans, hotel occupancy rates are lower than usual.
Agriculture.
unfavorable.

The farm financial picture

for the Sixth District remains

From a low rate of 26 percent in Tennessee to a high of 60 percent in

Georgia as of June 2, delinquencies on farm loans represent a continuing problem.

The

40 percent delinquency rate for the District demonstrates the high proportion of FmHA
farm borrowers who are in economic difficulty.

Completed and pending foreclosures,

nevertheless, comprise less than 2 percent of delinquencies.

Recent legal decisions

would also appear to forestall any foreclosure activity in the near future.
With few exceptions, acreage for the major crops is down 10 to 15 percent
from last year's.

Peanut acreage is down even more, 20 to 30 percent.

But these

acreage reductions do not necessarily portend a drop in production. The highly favorable
weather and soil moisture conditions which exist throughout the District may result in
production near that of last year.
upward pressure on farm prices.

Clearly, if such is the case, there will be less

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Summary.

Developments in the Seventh District provide little hope

for near-term improvement.

It is unlikely that the region will participate

in the uptrend widely expected for the nation in the second half of 1982.
Machinery and equipment output and bookings have been declining sharply this
year in virtually all lines.

Sales and output of motor vehicles improved in

the second quarter, but remained at depressed levels.
outlays have not been a significant factor here.

Retail sales of nondurables

rose somewhat in May, but remained relatively soft.
showed less than seasonal gains.
best, maintaining staff.
common.

Increases in defense

Construction activity

Most employers have been reducing or, at

Unilateral cuts in nonunion compensation are

Renegotiations of labor contracts continue, not always successfully.

Some large corporations are shrinking or restructuring operations.
reductions are still common, but may be moderating.
rebounded.

Oil product prices have

Seventh District farmers are completing crop plantings, after a

slow start in Iowa.

Livestock prices continue at favorable levels, but corn

and soybean prices remain depressed.
Declines Spread.
untouched by the recession.
adjustment.

Price

Farm equipment sales remain poor.

Few economic sectors in the District have remained
Meat packing has been going through a painful

Electrical component manufacturers report substantial declines

in orders, for some the worst in their history.

Demand for office furniture,

which remained strong through the first quarter, softened in the spring.
Service industries also report reduced demand, including engineering,
technical consulting, public relations, commodities trading, and recreation.

Inflation.

Some companies now expect a 5 percent rise in average

prices of purchased materials in 1982, only half as much as in 1980 or 1981.
But in some sectors prices are down dramatically.

Bids on construction

projects are running 10 to 20 percent below estimates.

Sharp price discounts

also are noted for steel products, nonferrous metals, cement and other
building materials, and paper products.

Many of these depressed prices would

rebound rapidly if demand improved, partly because capacity has been reduced
by retirement of older facilities.
Corporate Restructuring.

Financial problems and reduced estimates

of future demand have caused various District corporations to take steps to
restructure their operations.

Drastic actions are required in some cases to

"ensure survival", and to get into position for the eventual upturn.

Divi-

sions are being closed or sold—some because they are unprofitable, others
because they are readily marketable.

Substantial reductions in corporate

staff and unilateral cuts in nonunion salaries—up to 10 percent—are common.
Negotiations with unions to adjust compensation and work rules in order to
control labor costs continue, often without publicity.

However, substantial

increases in compensation continue to be announced in many fields.
Employment.
District.

Labor markets continue soft in all portions of the

In April, payroll employment in the five District states was down

5 percent from the prosperous level of April 1978 and manufacturing down 18
percent, a much worse performance than the nation.

Unemployment averaged 12

percent in the District in April, compared to 5.6 percent four years earlier
(when it was lower than for the nation).
many workers are on short hours.

In addition to those unemployed,

Complete shutdowns for a week or more

at a time are common.

New hirings are at a low ebb as indicated by help-

wanted ads and reports from job-finding agencies.
is less available than at any time since the 1930s.

Summer work for students
New college graduates

with technical degrees are having unusual difficulty finding work.
Capital Expenditures.

Evidence from District companies suggests a

much larger decline in capital spending than was indicated by the recent
Commerce Department survey, both for projects to be located here, and for
equipment produced here.

Business equipment orders are off sharply this

year, frequently by 20 to 30 percent or more.

Components such as castings

are off as much as 50 percent.
Motor Vehicles.

Auto production was off 31 percent from last year

in the first quarter, and 22 percent in the second quarter, but the third
quarter is expected to be u£ 7 percent.

Light truck output has been running

well ahead of last year since February, but heavy trucks remain weak.
Vehicle inventories are at comfortable levels and imports are under restraint.

Industry leaders expect a continuing moderate improvement in sales

and output of both cars and trucks, but not enough to return the auto centers
to prosperity.
Steel.

Although steel demand is running well below forecasts made

earlier this year, District producers have increased their share of the
total.

Primarily, this is because auto industry demand for steel, an impor-

tant market for these mills, is "less bad" than the total.

Demand for heavy

steel products for structures and equipment is "weak and getting weaker."
Steel executives are pleased that the Administration has decided to take

action to curtail steel imports, although imports are less of a factor here
than nationally.
Retail Sales.

Sales of general merchandise improved in May accord-

ing to major District retail chains, but no strong further advance is anticipated.

Auto parts and apparel are moving well, but big ticket items, includ-

ing household appliances and floor coverings, remain slow.

While use of

instalment credit has increased somewhat, delinquency experience has been
favorable, reflecting tighter standards.
Construction.

Construction contracts for new commercial and indus-

trial structures in the Midwest are running well below last year's depressed
level. Work continues on large new office buildings for Chicago's downtown
area, but new starts are being delayed because major tenants have not been
signed and permanent financing has not been arranged.

Rehabilitation work is

relatively strong.
Agriculture.
District.

Crop planting is nearly complete throughout the

Even west of the Mississippi, where rains caused delays, substan-

tial progress has been made.

As of June 20, soybean planting in Iowa was 88

percent complete (compared to a five-year average of 100 percent), and corn
planting was 98 percent complete.
crop conditions are quite good.

Despite heavy rains in some local areas,

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Although economic conditions In the St. Louis District generally
changed little during May and early June, there were some indications of
improvement.

Increases in retail sales and total employment provide the

most encouraging news.

Also, farmers have benefited from relatively high

livestock prices and a favorable planting season.

Manufacturing orders,

however, have not picked up, and the unemployment rate remains essentially
unchanged as the labor force has swelled with students seeking summer jobs.
Retail sales rose in the District during May and early June, with
discount outlets outperforming regular department stores.

St. Louis'

largest department store reported May sales 4 percent above a year ago,
while a major discount chain experienced a 21 percent jump in sales.

Sales

of nondurable goods gained the most, reflecting large promotions and price
concessions.

One shoe store chain reported excellent sales in May—over 2 5

percent above last May.

As a result of the increased sales, retail

inventories declined.
Automobile sales, although still below normal, increased again in
May.

Rebates to customers and factory sales incentives offered to dealers

have stimulated sales.

A major Ford dealer quickly moved a sizable number

of cars slightly damaged by a hail storm by passing on to the purchasers,
in cash, the insurance adjustment.
Most service firms report that business has remained steady.
and TV repair shops have kept busy.

One restaurant chain reports a

Auto

significant gain in volume.

Gasoline sales have improved moderately, and a

motel chain noted fewer vacancies.
the Memorial Day weekend.

Air travel was especially heavy over

A firm that provides business promotional

activities reported a 27 percent increase in sales during May.
Industrial activity, on the other hand, has changed little in
recent months.

Defense procurement remains strong, a garment factory

reports a backlog of orders despite capacity operations, and sales by food
processors are about normal.

However, firms producing consumer durables,

chemicals, Industrial equipment, paper and paper products, and wood
products still face depressed orders.

Manufacturing inventories are at

desired levels as production schedules have been closely adjusted to the
flow of incoming orders.
April.

Capital spending plans have changed little since

A Louisville industrial collection agency reports both an increased

volume of business and a smaller percentage finally collected.
Employment in the District has increased slightly since April,
with gains centering in smaller firms engaged in service activities.

Most

larger industrial firms have had little change in employment; some have
permitted employment to drift lower with attrition.

Despite an increase in

the number of people working, unemployment continued at a high level as
high school and college students sought summer jobs.

Even though

unemployment is high, a sizable number of job vacancies exist.

The St.

Louis Post-Dispatch carried about 11 pages of "help wanted" ads in its
Sunday editions in early June covering a wide variety of jobs from

those requiring much skill, training or education to those with less rigid
requirements*
Throughout the District, the demand for commercial and residential
construction remains weak.

According to the Home Builders Association,

residential construction in the St. Louis area was only 15 percent of
normal in May.

Prices of existing homes are drifting lower, with discounts

often reflected in liberal financing terms accepted by the seller to close
the contract.
Outstanding loans have risen moderately at both large and small
District banks since April.

Advances to business firms, particularly food,

liquor and tobacco manufacturers and companies providing services, have
expanded.

Real estate loans also have increased.

Delinquencies, although

still not large, have risen, and some bankers feel that the financial
condition of smaller commercial customers has deteriorated.

More attention

is being given to managing loan portfolios.
Many District farmers remain in financial difficulty.

The average

ratio of debts to book value of farm assets has reportedly changed only
slightly over the past year.

With high interest rates, low grain prices

and rising costs of operation, the debts have become more burdensome.
the other hand, livestock producers have benefited from wide profit
margins, and weather conditions have been favorable for planting.

On

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District's econony entered the month of June in essentially
the same weak condition that we have reported for the last several months.
some areas the situation has actually taken a turn for the worse.
shutdowns have devastated the district's metal mining.

In

Recent

Cold and wet weather

have delayed field work and crop development, therety furthering the woes of
district agriculture.

Moreover, manufacturing remains depressed and consumers

are still reluctant to purchase homes and durables.

The only bright spots in

our gloony economic assessment are improved prices for some kinds of livestock
and stronger vehicle sales.

Metal Mining
District iron production has been sharply curtailed in recent months
because of weak demand for steel, and district copper output has been cut back
severely as a result of sagging copper prices.
Most district iron mining companies announced shutdowns this spring
or

lengthened

seven

out

of

previously-announced
eight

companies

have

shutdowns.
or will be

In

northeastern

shutting

down

Minnesota,
operations.

Announced closures range from two weeks to 5 1/2 months and may, of course, be
extended.

In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, all four iron mines have tempo-

rarily or indefinitely stopped production.

According to a Department of Inte-

rior official, if the mines, which produce 90 percent of the nation's iron
ore, adhere to announced schedules, 1982 production will decline 25 percent
from 1981 levels and will be down 35 percent from 1979 levels when production
hit

its peak.

District

copper mines have also shortened production hours.

The Upper Peninsula's one large copper mine went from a four- to a three-day
work week in early June, and is planning a six-week closure beginning around
July 1.

In Annaconda/Butte, Montana, where copper production has been declin-

ing since 197^, the state's largest copper mine was permanently closed earlier
this year.

There are rumors that the remaining mine will be closed if prices

continue to weaken.

According to company and Department of Interior offi-

cials, if the firms, which mine 7 percent of the nation's copper, adhere to
their announced shutdowns, district copper production in 1982 could decline by
as much as one-third from 1981 levels, and h2 percent from 1979, the industry's last good year.
These cutbacks in district metal production have caused serious local
unemployment problems.
down 18 percent
1979-

District metal mining employment was 17,500 in March,

from a year ago and 2k percent from the peak attained in

Moreover, given recent shutdowns, unemployment in these industries is

undoubtedly

higher than indicated by the March data.

Overall unemployment

rates in the Upper Peninsula, northeastern Minnesota, and Annaconda/Butte this
spring were 19 percent,

percent, and 11 percent, respectively.

According

to labor market analysts, many unemployed miners have almost exhausted their
benefits, and Minnesota state leaders are considering a special program for
laid-off workers in the northeastern part of the state.

Energy Mining
The district's energy mining sector has also felt some adverse impact
from the nation's soft economy, but it has been relatively mild compared to
metal mining.
In recent years, gas and oil drilling has been one of the fastest
growing

segments

of

the

district's

economy.

Exploration

and

production

employment

in Montana and North Dakota increased

from 6,900 in 1979 to a

current level of 16,900, and these two states currently account for 2 percent
of all U.S. crude petroleum production.

In 1982, however, exploration activ-

ity is expected to be down from a year ago, in part due to the past decline in
crude oil prices.

In May, for example, there were only 85 active rigs in

these states as compared to 198 a year earlier.
However, this slowdown may only be temporary.

At least, that is the

view of an official for a Minneapolis company doing oil exploration in Montana
and North Dakota.

He expects activity to pick up, particularly

increases in petroleum prices continue.

if recent

Moreover, because of the considerable

lead time between exploration and actual production, the slowdown in exploration has not had a marked effect on oil and gas production.
District coal production, which employs 3,500 workers in Montana and
North Dakota and accounts for 9 percent of the nation's output, has also been
reduced somewhat.

An analyst for a St. Paul-based railroad that hauls western

coal indicated that the recession has slowed the growth in coal usage.
so, he predicts

that

total

1982 western

coal tonnage will

Even

still show an

increase over 1981 levels.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing remains weak.

Forty-nine percent of the manufacturers

responding to a University of Minnesota survey said their new orders declined
in the three months ending in May, and nearly as many ( M percent) said production declined also.
Montana

director,

for

The forest products industry continued depressed.
example,

operating at 60 percent
percent of capacity.

stated

of capacity

that Montana sawmills are

A

currently

or less, and paper mills at about 75

Agriculture
District agricultural conditions remain gloomy.
not improved and remain well below prices of a year ago.

Grain prices have
Furthermore, due to

wet and cold weather in May, field work and crop development in the district
have been delayed.

These delays are expected to reduce yields somewhat, even

though the weather improved significantly in June.

One encouraging develop-

ment has been the strengthening in some livestock prices.
May

cash prices at South St. Paul

Between April and

for slaughter steers and hogs rose 7«3

percent and 13.5 percent, respectively.

Feeder cattle prices, however, were

essentially unchanged.

Transportation
A strike against a trunk airline carrier took place in May and June;
however, it did not constitute a major disruption of air service.

On May 21,

3,600 members of the International Association of Machinists struck Northwest
Airlines over wages and work rules.
whelmingly

rejected a company

On June 8, the striking workers over-

offer and a prolonged

strike

seemed

likely.

However, a tentative agreement was reached on June lU and ratified by over 90
percent of the union members on June 16.

Although the strike did not appear

to significantly disrupt area air transportation, Northwest Airlines did lay
off about 1,700 workers.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending has shown veiy limited signs of recovery.
Minneapolis/St.
general

Paul retailers and bank

merchandise

sales

as

directors

"soft," particularly

continue to
for

characterize

consumer

Directors also indicate that home sales remain depressed.

Large

durables.

However, retail

sales have improved somewhat from April's weather-depressed levels.
tion, motor vehicle sales are showing signs of life.
sales managers reported
light

trucks;

strengthening.

and

in

In addi-

In early April, regional

ingproved domestic motor vehicle sales, primarily of
early

June,

one of these managers

reported

further

His view is that we are well past the bottom for motor vehicle

sales in this area.

Finance
Reflecting the softness in the district econoiqy, directors continue
to report weak loan demand and deteriorating loan quality at district banks.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Business conditions in the Tenth District appear to be firming

somewhat, and attitudes about the future appear to be slightly more optimistic.
Retail sales gains have been stronger recently, and are expected to improve
further in the months ahead.

Inventories are well under control, with the

possibility of some additions to retail stocks in the third quarter.
prices are generally stable.

Input

Housing activity continues to be weak, as are

savings inflows to thrift institutions.

If excessive moisture conditions

continue, it would have the potential of harming the winter wheat crop and
hindering the planting of other crops.
commercial banks is generally flat.

Loan demand at Tenth District

Deposit growth is mixed, with NOW

accounts the primary source of growth beyond seasonal patterns.
Retail Trade.

Most retailers in the Tenth District report sales increases

in the 2-9 percent range between the first five months of last year and the first
five months of this year.

Sales improved substantially in April and May of

1982, especially apparel and softgoods; durable goods sales remained weak.
Merchandise costs have stabilized in recent months, resulting in few price
increases at retail.

Tight controls and improved sales have brought inventories

well within desired levels.

Some slight inventory buildup is anticipated in

the third quarter of 1982, as purchases of merchandise increase to accommodate
expected sales gains in the last half of the year.
Purchasing Agents.

The majority of purchasing agents contacted in the

Tenth District report input prices have remained stable or decreased slightly
compared to a year ago.
this year.

Prices are expected to remain stable for the rest of

All firms contacted are continuing to trim their inventories and

plan to maintain very low inventory levels for the remainder of the year.

Input

availability is not a current problem in the District, but could become one if
more suppliers go out of business or, in light of current capacity utilization,
the economic recovery occurs at a greater pace than expected.
Housing Activity.

Realtors and builders in the Tenth District report

generally weak sales and stable prices.

Second quarter housing starts have

dropped 25 percent in Kansas City from last year, but they have risen moderately
in other areas—with an increase of over 20 percent in Oklahoma City.
are stable or up moderately—3 or 4 percent at most.

Prices

Sales are generally

moderately weaker than last year, varying from down 10 percent in Kansas City
to up marginally in Oklahoma City.
price range.

Sales are weakest in the $95,000 to $185,000

Supplies of building materials are adequate and inexpensive.

Builders warn, however, that a sudden rise in construction activity will cause
severe supply bottlenecks.
Housing Finance.

Officers at Tenth District Savings and Loan Associations

lament the continuing decline of savings inflows—down as much as 50 percent from
last year.

The 30-month CD has proven an effective vehicle, however, propelling

modest boosts for competitive institutions.

Officers fear that the recent

upsurge in interest rates forebodes a renewed exodus to money market funds.
Most associations are sticking to portfolio loans, but some report an unexpected but modest pickup in market rate mortgages from very low levels.
One officer, however, dismissed the upswing as a mere seasonal flurry, and most
associations are unwilling to commit funds past 30 days.

Loans made at market

rates are at interest levels of 16 1/2 to 17 percent, with little anticipation
of a near-term decline.

Agriculture.

Some areas in the Tenth District have received an excessive

amount'of moisture from the heavy rains occurring over the past several weeks.
This situation has delayed both the harvesting of the winter wheat crop and,
in turn, the planting of some fall crops, particularly in southern Oklahoma.
In northern Oklahoma and Kansas the harvesting of winter wheat is soon to begin.
No adverse effects on the quality of the wheat are reported.

Some hail damage

has been reported, but overall wheat conditions are estimated from fair to good
at this time.

Bankers in Nebraska report favorable progress being made in the

planting of spring crops despite the cool weather.

Recent improvement in cattle

and hog prices has had a positive impact on the income of livestock producers in
the Tenth District.

However, bankers report no signs of livestock producers

increasing their production capability.
Banking Developments.

Reported loan demand is generally characterized as

flat throughout the Tenth District.

Several banks in Oklahoma indicate that

commercial and industrial loan demand has recently increased.

However, in con-

trast to 1981 and the first quarter of 1982, the source of this strength is in
nonenergy related businesses.
as is agricultural lending.
arising from credit cards.

Real estate lending is down throughout the District,
Consumer loan demand is mixed with most activity

Several bankers note that the overall quality of their

outstanding loans has deteriorated, and some are obtaining additional collateral
and restructuring loan terms.

Deposit growth at Tenth District banks is mixed.

Most bankers contacted report some growth in NOW accounts, but few new accounts
are being opened.
CD's.

Those banks expanding loans are also generally issuing large

Virtually no growth is reported in all saver certificates, and most other

categories of deposits are following their typical seasonal pattern.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Manufacturers
Eleventh District.

are

cutting

production

and

employment

in

the

Inventories of oil field equipment are excessive and

imbalances are expected to persist, although the number of active drilling
rigs recently increased.
tapered off in May.

Growth in business loans, which had been rapid,

Savings and loan associations report slower deposit

outflows and increases in mortgage loan closings.
construction

continues

strong

and

housing

The pace of commercial
starts

are

increasing.

Department stores report moderate increases in sales, but sales at auto
dealerships are down.

Farm incomes remain depressed.

Texas employment
continues

to

rise

because

increased
of

in May, but

layoffs

in

energy-related manufacturing and in mining.

the number

transportation

equipment, and

Job losses in these industries

are partially offset by employment gains in nonmanufacturing
particularly

services.

The

number

of

unemployed

inquiries

from

industries,

other

states

concerning employment possibilities is down from recent months.
The

layoffs

in

mining

reflect

low

drilling

rates

characterized the oil and gas industry for several months.

that

have

But the number

of drilling rigs operating in Texas increased slightly at the beginning of
June, the first uptick since last year.
time is needed to establish a trend.

Industry sources say that more

If drilling does increase, it is not

expected to rise rapidly.
Faced

with

low

manuf acturer s are cutting

sales
output.

and

excessive

inventories,

Producers whose

chief market

District
is the

petroleum industry have made particularly large cutbacks.
firms

anticipate

Suppliers

of

production.

that

their

commercial

inventory

problems

transportation

will

equipment

Some of these
last

are

all

also

year.

reducing

Output of petrochemicals, apparel, and commercial electronics

remains low.

Petroleum refineries report rising production and capacity

utilization.

Firms that produce electronics for defense have large order

backlogs but report a decline in the pace of new orders.
Commercial bank loans to businesses increased at a slower pace in
May than in April, but the cumulative rise in loans this year to date is
twice the average increase in the past five years.

Loans increased for

mining, services, petroleum refining, apparel manufacturing, and commodity
dealers.

The increases in loans to apparel manufacturers and commodity

wholesalers

were

attribute

the

committed

funds

prices.

rise

Loans

percentage

unseasonally

by

in

loans

drilling

to all other

decreases

were

large.

Respondents

for mining
companies
industries
for

loans

to

the

responding
declined
for

at

commercial

takeout
to

of

rises

in May.

construction

banks

previously
in gasoline
The

and

largest
chemical

manufacturing.
Deposits
April.
of

at

commercial

banks increased

faster in May than in

The cumulative rise in deposits this year is more than twice that

the past

five years.

A

rise

in time

deposits more

than offset a

continued runoff in demand deposits and a fall in savings deposits in May.
The rate of decline in deposits at savings and loan associations
has slowed since April.

Mortgage loan closings

remain below last year's levels.

are up moderately

but

The pace of commercial construction continues at a high level,
and there are sufficient projects underway to sustain this pace for some
time.

But

the

cumulative

square footage of new, additions, and major

alteration projects for this year is well below last year's

cumulative

total, and the number of announcements of new projects is declining.
Housing

starts

are

up

14 percent below year-ago levels.

strongly

from

April,

but

remain

Builders describe the current level of

activity in some areas as a "profitless boom" because they are providing
reduced interest rates and other incentives to buyers.
Department stores report moderate increases in sales from yearago levels.

Because of the unusual number of layoffs in Texas, they expect

the pace of sales to change little this summer.
up

well,

but

Inventories

are

sales

of

home

trim, and

furnishings

price

discounting

Apparel sales are holding

and

appliances

and

promotions

are

slow.

proceed

at

seasonally normal levels.
New car dealers report that sales declined after General Motors'
low interest rate finance program ended in May.

Foreign car dealers said

that this program stimulated comparison shopping at their stores.
of

this

year's

models

will

soon

be

delivered,

and

dealers

The last
expect

inventories to be sufficient for a moderate pace of sales this summer.
Farm incomes remain low, in spite of rises in livestock profit
margins.

Prices for feed grains are 23 percent below year-ago levels, and

heavy rains in May will further cut net revenues as farmers replant or
absorb crop losses.

Cattle prices are up as ranchers have cut back on the

quantity of beef supplied to market.

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The preponderance of evidence suggests that the Twelfth District
economic recession still has not ended.

Consumer spending picked up in

May and early June at both department stores and new car dealerships.
Homebuilding also showed welcome improvement.

But the large inventory of

unsold homes—aggravated by the growing number of foreclosures—suggests
that the homebuilding recovery may not be sustained.
commercial construction is slowing.

Meanwhile,

In the manufacturing and mining

sectors, a number of industries are undergoing a new wave of production
cutbacks.

In the agricultural sector, crop and livestock prices have

increased recently, but net farm income still is expected to be down again
in 1982.

At Twelfth District banks, business borrowing has been

increasing in June due to corporate cash flow problems, and bankers are
seriously concerned over the growing number of nonperforming loans.
Consumer Spending
Respondants report a pickup in retail sales in May and early June.
This improvement is noted for both department stores and automobile
dealerships selling new cars.

Sales of used cars, on the other hand, are

reported to be slowing, perhaps reflecting consumer willingness to make
more expensive new car purchases.
have improved modestly.

Even furniture sales are reported to

Department stores have had to engage in heavy

promotional efforts and sharp price discounting to bolster sales, however,
and profit margins are reported to be extremely slim.

Moreover, although

inventories have been reduced, stocks are still reported to be higher than
desired and retailers are being very cautious about, placing orders for
replacement and new-season merchandise.

Even large supermarket chains are

reported to be engaging in food "price wars," another indication of the
highly competitive price environment existent throughout the consumer
sector.
Manufacturing and Mining
Orders and prices in many basic Twelfth District manufacturing and
mining industries have continued to decline in recent weeks, forcing
further production cutbacks and layoffs.

Especially hard hit have been

the mining and primary metals industries—such as aluminum, steel, copper
and silver—where prices have dropped to new recession lows.

The copper

and silver industries in Arizona, Utah and Idaho are estimated to have cut
mine production to only about 50 percent of capacity.

While employment in

the lumber segment of the forest products industry has stabilized, the
paper industry continues to cut back production.

In both California and

Washington, the aerospace equipment manufacturing industry has continued
to register further overall declines in employment as growth in defenserelated payrolls has been insufficient to offset continued layoffs in
commercial aircraft and electronic equipment programs.

The Boeing Company

in Seattle has experienced a new wave of order cancellations from domestic
and foreign airlines and still further cancellations are threatened.

If

those cancellations materialize, another 15,000 aerospace workers could be
laid off in that state by year-end.

On a favorable note, the recent

strengthening of world oil prices is expected to arrest any further
cutbacks in such energy programs as oil drilling and oil shale
development.
Construction and Real Estate
Homebuilding in the Twelfth District finally appears to be picking
up.

But regional housing starts had dropped to a post-World War II low in

April, and residential construction remains extremely depressed.
Moreover, sales of new and existing homes also reached a post-World War II
low in April, and respondants report no subsequent pickup.

On the

contrary, they describe the residential sales market as "completely dead."
They also report a sharp increase in foreclosures.

Until the large

inventory of unsold homes is reduced, respondants are doubtful that a
significant homebuilding recovery can be sustained.

Meanwhile, developers

of commerical properties are now experiencing the same kind of serious
financial distress experienced earlier by home builders.

Developers are

finding it increasingly difficult to sell or rent new projects, given
rising vacancy rates and the growing unwillingness of pension funds and
insurance companies to invest in commercial property.
Agriculture
Prices for such important Twelfth District agricultural crops and
livestock products as citrus fruit, apples, hay, rice, potatoes and cattle
have risen recently.

But despite this increase—resulting in part from

some pickup in export demand—agricultural prices generally continue to
lag behind the level of a year ago, while farm input costs are up sharply.
As a result, the agriculture industry expects to experience its third
consecutive annual decline in net income in 1982.

Bankers report that

numerous farmers, who already are heavily in debt, are finding it
increasingly difficult to obtain additional financing.

Adding to their

cash flow problems, equity in agricultural real estate—which usually
supports agricultural production financing—has not been appreciating
owing to the high cost of financing and poor commodity prices.

As a

result, a growing number of farm properties are for sale at distressed
prices.

Financial Institutions
Data for the first two weeks of June indicate that bank credit growth
in the Twelfth District has picked up substantially relative to growth
reported in April and May.

Most of this growth can be attributed to a

resumption in business loan demand, with only very modest growth in
consumer and real estate lending.

Banks report strong business loan

demand despite borrowers efforts to reduce reliance on debt by postponing
and scaling back projects, reducing inventories and selling assets.
Bankers appear very concerned about the level of nonperforming business
loans, particularly to the construction, forest products and aerospace
industries.

They are reviewing new credits very carefully and are

particularly cautious regarding repurchase transactions following the
Drysdale default.

