CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

September 29, 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*
Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.]

Overview.

The economic retrenchment reported earlier this summer appears to

have slowed or stabilized in August and September, but District reports continue to
show almost no indications of recovery.

Consumer spending remains cautious, and after

a disappointing back-to-school season retailers as well are ordering with prudence.
Manufacturing activity is widely described as deteriorating:

new layoffs are reported;

capital spending plans have been further deferred; and inventories in many industries
are mounting.

Residential construction shows signs of improvement in a few Districts,

but commercial building activity is still on the wane.

Abundant agricultural supplies

threaten to depress many crop prices, thereby reducing net farm income even further
despite more favorable conditions for livestock producers.

In the financial sector

demand for both business and consumer loans in most Districts is characterized as soft,
while deposit growth remains sluggish.

Most Districts are not optimistic regarding the

outlook for recovery in 1982.
Retail Sales.
recovery is underway.

There is virtually no indication that a consumer-led economic
Back-to-school and total retail sales are generally reported as

sluggish or disappointing.

Sales of soft goods continue to outperform such consumer

durables as household furnishings, and new auto sales remain depressed.
Caution seems to be the key trait in the retail sector. Despite slow-rising retail
sales, due in part to buyer uncertainty about jobs and still high interest rates, merchants
are apparently satisfied with inventory levels.

Retailers have been trying to keep a

tight rein on inventories and are buying cautiously for the December holiday season
and winter.

Scattered signs of optimism for faster-growing retail sales later this year include
reports from Boston and Philadelphia that a strong post-Thanksgiving selling season is
expected and from Kansas City that merchandise cost and profit margins are stabilizing.
Chicago, on the other hand, finds orders of goods for the winter season considerably
below normal and store closings increasingly frequent; Dallas notes a faster-than-usual
deceleration of sales following the back-to-school selling period.
Manufacturing.

With the exceptions of Dallas and New York, most Districts

describe a further slowing of industrial activity in September. Production, employment,
orders, and shipments are weak, and additional layoffs and shortened workweeks are
reported.
Cleveland finds that manufacturing activity has yet to trough and the outlook
for the steel industry is dismal.

Inventories of oil-field equipment continue to climb;

Dallas and Atlanta report that petroleum refineries and chemical plants are operating
far below capacity.

With the exception of defense-oriented industries, orders at most

manufacturing firms have contracted further.

Defense contracts are shoring up

electronics, aerospace, and related manufacturers in Dallas, San Francisco, Atlanta, and
St. Louis.

Chicago observes that imports, aided by the high value of the dollar, are

taking a growing share of the markets for machine tools and farm and construction
equipment.
Capital spending plans are conservative at best.

Low demand for the services

of plant location advisors in Atlanta and Chicago suggests little new capital expansion
for some time.

San Francisco reports scant response to the recent decline in interest

rates from corporate investors.
Construction and Real Estate.

Residential construction evidences some signs of

improvement in several Districts, but the nonresidential sector continues to decline
slowly almost everywhere.

The number of building permits issued and of new homes

sold has increased in several areas, particularly Dallas and Atlanta.

Lower mortgage

rates have attracted more buyers to the housing market, but most are waiting to see
whether rates continue to fall or stabilize before they purchase.

Realtors claim the

industry needs a 12-13 percent "stable" mortgage rate before activity perks up
substantially.
Commercial construction is no longer supporting the rest of the construction
sec tea* to the extent it did earlier in the recession. In the Cleveland District industrial
construction is in a state of "depression"; only St. Louis reports any improvement in
commercial building activity.

The market for office space remains soft to weak.

Agriculture. Substantial stocks, expected large harvests, and weak demand have
caused prices of most field crops to fall sharply.

In the Minneapolis and Kansas City

Districts late plantings and delayed maturation of crops have given rise to fears of
frost damage. Large grain harvests in the Midwest threaten to overtax storage capacity.
Higher costs and lower prices render increasingly remote the possibility of
substantial debt reduction for the farm economy in 1982.

Atlanta finds growing

indications that farm bankruptcies and liquidations will rise in coming months.

Bright

spots in the farm economy do exist, however. Hog producers and tobacco farmers are in
a position to take profits, and lower feed costs should benefit the entire livestock and
poultry sectors.

Nonetheless, net income for the farm sector as a whole is likely to

be below that of 1981.
Financial Conditions.
business lending soft.

Reduced inventories and low utilization rates are keeping

Philadelphia, however, notices an increase in such lending and

attributes it to distress borrowing.

Dallas reports a similar rise but points instead to

greater stability as the cause. Other Districts characterize business loans as flat or down.
Although isolated, there are reports of increased consumer borrowing in the
aftermath of declining interest rates.

Kansas City finds improved loan quality as well.

San Francisco, in contrast, witnesses a sharp increase in delinquencies and foreclosures.
Deposit growth remains sluggish.
the 7- to 31-day certificates.

Atlanta and San Francisco observe little interest in

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Still no signs of a recovery in the First District.

Retailers

continue to exceed modest sales goals, but only through extensive
promotional activity.

Bargain hunting is very prevalent.

The

manufacturing situation has improved to the extent that more firms reported
sales which are "bumping along the bottom" than reported further declines.
Planning for 1983 is based on the assumption that current sales and order
rates continue for another six months.

However, most of the manufacturers

contacted this month felt that payrolls and inventories had been brought
down to levels consistent with current sales rates.
Retail
Most retailers in the First District continue to report sales
exceeding their expectations, expectations that have been severely tempered
by the recession.

Bargain-hunting is very much in evidence, making

promotional activity a critical element in maintaining sales.

No contacted

merchants believed the July tax cut or Social Security increases were being
spent in their stores yet.
One discount retailer reported sales in August up 13 percent over a
weak August last year, and cited extra promotional activity this year as an
important reason for the improvement.

A store selling appliances and other

consumer durables reported sales over the last 60 days flat to plus 5
percent compared to last year.

Although this was the worst 60 days so far

in 1982 (the sales increase for the year to date is in double digits),

their market share has continued to rise.

Promotional activities and

careful comparison-shopping by customers have both worked to their
advantage.

A general merchandiser in the Hartford area reported "fair"

performance, citing sizable but very bargain-oriented responses to
promotions.

A clothing and hardgoods merchant operating nationwide largely

through catalog sales was contacted for the first time this month.

They

have averaged 30 percent annual sales growth over the last five years, and
are "mystified" by August and year to date sales more than 40 percent above
last year.
The retail inventory situation is mixed.

Several stores reported

that they are buying cautiously for the Christmas season to keep
inventories down and retain flexibility.

Others are building inventories

to improve customer service and "make volume happen."

One of the

"cautious" buyers expressed concern that widespread weak buying will
discourage production, and goods will not be available if needed later.
All the firms contacted are expecting an improved fourth quarter and
a strong Christmas season.

But all said they would have to work to get the

customers inside their doors.
Manufacturing
Most of the manufacturers contacted described the present situation
as one of "bumping along the bottom."

Included in this group were

manufacturers of machine tools, small appliances, automotive products,
computers and products for the home.

Several firms in printing-related

fields reported further declines in the late summer months.
on whether domestic or overseas sales are weaker.

Firms divided

Canadian sales of

printing equipment were reported to be particularly weak.

Sales of

productivity Improving equipment are holding up better than other sales,
according to a machine tool manufacturer and a producer of packaging
equipment.

A computer manufacturer expects a strong response to a new

product advance, although overall sales are expected to be flat.
With few exceptions firms do not look for a recovery in their own
industries within the next six months.

Budget plans are being developed

assuming a continuation of the present situation.

However, most of the

firms contacted feel that inventories and employment levels are generally
consistent with current sales volumes and they do not plan any further
corrections.

This contrasts with the responses last month, when even firms

with stable orders were making additional cutbacks.

It also contrasts with

the responses to a recent survey of local purchasing agents; this survey
shows firms continuing to reduce inventories and payrolls.
Professors Solow, Eckstein, Samuelson, and Houthakker were available
for comment this month.

The first three share similar views concerning the

state of the economy and how the Fed should respond to it.

They all

believe that the economy is dangerously weak and could deteriorate further
before finally turning around.

None envisions a particularly robust

recovery.
Eckstein is particularly alarmed by the recent surge in unemployment
insurance claims.

Samuelson bases his pessimism on declining production,

weak auto sales, and sagging consumer confidence.

Solow fears that the

widespread gloom in the business community could become a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
In light of their sobering assessments, Solow, Samuelson, and
Eckstein all recommend that the Fed should exceed its money growth targets

in the near future.

Samuelson thinks above-target growth should continue

until a recovery is clearly evident.

Eckstein has reluctantly concluded

that the Fed should explicitly raise its 1983 Ml growth target to 6
percent.

None of the three economists have strong feelings about achieving

growth targets for the other monetary aggregates.
Although sensitive to the risk and costs of rekindling inflation,
all three believe that without a further drop in interest rates the risk
and costs of severe economic decline would be even greater.

Solow and

Samuelson maintain that the Fed has already established its credentials as
an inflation-fighter which would not be seriously jeopardized by
above-target money growth under such distressed economic conditions.

As

evidence of this credibility, Samuelson pointed out that financial markets
have strengthened considerably in recent weeks in spite of a widespread
perception that the Fed has eased.

He concluded that any moderation in

inflation gained by strict adherence to monetary targets would be small and
clearly not worth unemployment in excess of 10 percent.

Yet, he did advise

the Fed to bring money growth within targets at the first signs of
"credibility erosion," such as increasing long-term interest rates.
In contrast to the other three economists, Houthakker believes that
a modest recovery is already underway and, consequently, no emergency
measures are needed to bail the economy out.

He would keep Ml growing at a

5 percent annual rate for the foreseeable future.

He is unconcerned about

recent upward "blips" in Ml growth as long as it is brought within range by
the end of the year.

He also thinks that the recent tax increase played a

major role in reducing interest rates and that additional deficit-reducing
measures would promote further rate reductions.

Second District—New York

The rate of economic deterioration in the Second District
appeared to be slowing in August and September.

While it is still too

soon to tell when the recovery will begin, economic conditions do appear
to be less bleak than they were in our last report.
improved slightly.

Retail sales have

Construction activity has held steady with the

residential sector still in the doldrums and nonresidential building
strong.

In manufacturing, layoffs have continued but generally were

smaller than in previous months and some recalls occurred.
of a major steel facility offset other plant closings.

The reopening

Business leaders

still expected no significant upturn before the end of the year.
Consumer Spending
Retail activity improved slightly from July's low level but has
only now returned to year-ago levels.

Merchants had hoped for larger

gains from back-to-school shopping and so were somewhat disappointed.
Nonetheless, sales were actually better in the Eastern region than
elsewhere around the country for at least some of the national retailers
contacted.

Apparel remained one of the stronger lines; the slump in

big-ticket items like furniture and appliances showed no signs of
ending.

Stores intended to continue heavy promotions and aggressive

pricing to move merchandise, and were restraining their own buying until
signs of an improvement appear.

Inventories tended to the high side at a

few stores, but stocks were not expected to pose problems.
Construction and Real Estate Activity
The construction picture was essentially unchanged from that
reported over the last six months.

Residential construction remained

depressed in much of the District.

Some builders expressed hope,

however, that the usual autumn increase in demand for new homes to be
delivered in the spring will manifest itself again this year.

While the

recent decline in mortgage rates has not had a stimulative effect on new
home building, it has sparked some renewed interest in the purchase and
renovation of existing homes.

Home prices have generally held steady in

recent months.
Nonresidential real estate activity remained strong with the
outlook still cloudy.

Projects currently underway were viewed as

sufficient to maintain construction employment at current levels for at
least the next few months.

But softness in the office market was still

evident in the New York City metropolitan area with vacancy rates up
marginally and rents stable or down slightly.

Consequently, developers

were reluctant to make long term commitments and were expected to
continue to postpone some groundbreakings until the economy revives and
the office market tightens.
however.

New startups have not disappeared entirely,

Projects begun included office complexes in Queens and on long

Island, a shopping center in Rochester, and a large truck stop in Buffalo.
Business Activity
Business leaders cited conflicting evidence on whether the
economic slowdown in the District was bottoming out.

These mixed signs

marked at least some improvement from the pervasive deterioration
observed in August.

Permanent shutdowns occurred at plants producing

computer circuits and paper products, as well as at the Courier-Express,
a major newspaper in Buffalo.

In addition, layoffs continued in a wide

range of industries, including autos, chemicals, electronics, office
equipment, and machine tools.

But the workforce reductions appeared to

be generally small relative to those of the past couple of months.
Moreover, a few firms, even in some of these same industries, indicated
that their businesses had finally stabilized and that some had even
recalled workers.

Another encouraging sign was the reopening of a major

steel facility, surprising employees who had been worried that the plant
would be phased out altogether, despite company assurances to the
contrary.
Outlook
Business leaders remained skeptical of any significant upswing
before year-end, but overall the pessimism did not appear as deep as in
August.

Although our contacts reported that many businessmen across the

District still forecast stagnation or even further deterioration into
1983, more now saw a glimmer of hope for early next year.

One survey of

upstate companies' plans for the fourth quarter found that the majority
expected to maintain stable employment levels through the rest of the
year, and that those hoping to hire new workers slightly outnumbered
those anticipating workforce cuts.

As for retailers, many feared that

the expected resurgence in consumer spending would be thwarted by concern
over continued weakness in the economy.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from David Jones (Aubrey G. Lanston
& Co.), Robert Stone (Irving Trust), and Alfred Wojnilower (First Boston
Corp.)[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Jones:

The recessionary U.S. economy has, in all likelihood,

not yet hit bottom.

Consumer psychology has deteriorated sharply.

Businesses are continuing to try to cut back on spending on inventories

and plant and equipment.

There is increasing emphasis on cost cutting

measures including wholesale layoffs of white-and blue-collar workers.
It may well be that interest rates, particularly in the longer term
corporate bond and mortgage markets, must fall 200-400 basis points
further in order to set the stage for recovery.

Further declines in

interest rates, particularly in the longer term areas, are likely to be
limited by the clash between heavy Federal government borrowing and
desperate businesses seeking to borrow long to repay short-term debt.
The Federal budget deficit for fiscal 1983 could climb to $160-170
billion.
The income velocity of money is likely to fall far below its
normal 3 percent growth trend both this year and next.

The Fed's current

tentative Ml target for 1983 leaves virtually no room for economic
recovery.

Given this prospective drop in velocity growth, the Fed might

consider raising the upper limit of its tentative 1983 target for Ml
growth, from 5 1/2 percent to perhaps 6 1/2 or 7 1/2 percent.
Stone;
course.

It seems to me that monetary policy is exactly on

It is appropriate that the Fed persist in its efforts to limit

the growth of the money supply.

But given the state of the economy, the

existence of serious financial problems, and the continuing uncertainties
surrounding the interpretation of the money supply, it is also
appropriate that the Fed be pragmatic and flexible in its approach to
limiting its growth.
The System has earned a good deal of credibility among market
participants, and I think there is little danger in losing it by being
flexible in its approach to controlling the aggregates.

Wojnilower:

Reports from sources in industry continue grim as

to both current business conditions and attitudes toward the future.
They do reflect, however, considerable disinflationary momentum.
Institutional investors assume that the summer's Federal Reserve
actions mark a fundamental shift away from money-supply rules toward an
employment-oriented policy focused on interest rates such as is believed
to have prevailed before October 1979.

The stock market advance

resembles the similar rather brief and spectacular bull markets that used
to occur toward the end of recessions when the economy was seen as
bottoming and the Federal Reserve as guaranteeing stable or falling
short-term rates until the fact of sustainable recovery had become
statistically certain.

As a result the financial community is quite

complacent that all will turn out well, and tension in regard to
potential default problems has subsided to an amazing degree.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Indications from the Third District are mixed but point to continued weakness
in the local economy overall.

Conditions in the manufacturing sector still show no

conclusive signs of a turnaround, and retail sales are sluggish at best.

In the banking

sector, loan demand has risen and a drop in interest rates is reported. The home building
industry, despite a drop in mortgage rates, remains in very poor shape.
The outlook for some recovery in the next six months is generally optimistic,
but cautious, across all industries.

Both manufacturers and retailers are certain that

improvement will occur, but are planning on it being slow and late starting.

Bankers

expect a hesitant recovery, as well, with further distress borrowing pushing up loan
volume.
CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE
The housing market in the Third District remains mired in the slump that has
plaqued it for well over a year now, according to area real estate brokers.

Industry

contacts report some recent improvement in market conditions, highlighted by a dip in
mortgage rates to the 14 to 15.25 percent range. Buyers, however, apparently still view
rates as too high to buy. Traffic through new and older homes is up a little, but sales are
still below year-ago levels by as much as 50 percent. In addition, nearly all current sales
are of previously owned homes. As a result, housing starts are at a virtual stand still as
builders react to stalled sales and declining new home prices.
MANUFACTURING
Respondents to the September Business Outlook Survey report that business
conditions in the local manufacturing sector are unchanged from August. Third district
industry continues to exhibit the lingering weakness that has been evident for the last
seven months. While reports of improvement in manufacturing conditions have been on

the rise recently, there are still no firm indications that the industrial sector has begun
to really recover. New orders and shipments show modest growth, their first gains since
June, but shipments have again outpaced new orders and forced producers' backlogs down
further. Cutbacks in both working hours and the factory work force are reported again
this month, and widespread reports of stock level reductions indicate that liquidation of
manufacturing inventories has not yet showed.
Survey participants are still highly optimistic that a recovery will occur
within six months, but appear to be maintaining a cautious stance while awaiting further
signs of strength. Nearly 80 percent of the businessmen polled are looking for improved
conditions over the next six months.

New orders are expected to take off, and, with

shipments projected to show slightly less growth, growing backlogs and longer delivery
times are foreseen.

Producers say the anticipated spurt in activity between now and

March will push payrolls and working hours upward and bring inventories into check. But,
reflecting continued caution, there is little stock building planned, and capital spending
increases will be kept to a minimum.
Industrial prices are holding steady again in September, having shown little
inflationary movement at all since April.

Flat input and finished good prices are

reported at well over 80 percent of responding firms this month.

As for the next six

months, the projected turnaround in manufacturing activity is expected to rejuvenate
inflation but manufacturers foresee only moderate increases in both the cost of raw
materials and the prices they charge for their own products.
RETAIL
Department store sales, which appear to have stabilized somewhat since the
last Redbook, are mixed. The uncertainty about jobs and income that has kept consumers
away from retail outlets all summer continues to put a damper on spending. Retail sales

volume is now running from about one percent below to slightly above that of a year ago,
but well below the expectations of merchants. Retailers had been looking for a "back to
school" surge in September to pump up sales. Current reports, however, have these soft
goods moving sluggishly and most other lir es showing even less life.
Looking ahead, weak sales volume is expected to linger on until a projected
holiday surge in December.

End-of year forecasts are in the 1 to 4 percent range. A

Director of this bank, however, notes that small gains over last year's fourth-quarter
sales will not be a strong positive signal, as last year's sales were less than robust.
Nevertheless, contacts are "guardedly optimistic" that a weak recovery will finally take
hold in three to four months, and that sales will climb by two to five percent above yearearlier levels by early spring.

Merchants remain cautious about inventories, currently

lean and generally below last year's levels, and plan to maintain the present tightness for
at least the next six months.
FINANCE
Third

District

bankers

report

improved

loan

activity

in

September.

Commercial lending inched upward this month, pushed along at least partly by increased
distress borrowing that outweighed the recent shift toward long-term debt. According to
banking contacts, the volume of business loans is ahead of year-ago figures by as much as
11 percent, slightly better than lenders had anticipated.

Retail loans, held down by

design for most of this year, have increased recently in response to lower interest rates,
but are still well below last September's levels.

As for the future, indications that

recovery will be weak have changed bankers' outlooks for Third District lending
activity. More distress borrowing is now expected to keep C<5cl loan volume on the rise in
the near future, and growth in consumer loans is also projected to continue as long as
interest rates don't begin to rise again.

Area bankers have lowered their prime rate to 13.50 percent during
September and foresee it dropping further if the recovery continues to sputter. Lenders
are now predicting that the prime may go down to 12 percent before levelling off. The
expected timing of the trough in interest rates has been pushed back into early 1983
when the projected recovery is forecast to be underway.
Deposit flows in the Third District show a few signs of minor slippage. Time
deposits are not as strong as in recent months, but are still 10 to 12 percent higher than a
year ago. Demand deposits are reported to be mixed, with some bankers reporting a loss
of deposit dollars to various interest bearing assets, including the new 7-31 day time
deposit.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary. Economic conditions and the outlook in the Fourth District remain
bleak.

Unemployment is high.

Survey results and leading indicators suggest continued

sluggishness in economic activity.

Capital goods production is unlikely to recover until

next year. The steel industry remains in depression. Weakness continues in construction
with few signs of improvement.

Retailers are cautious, expecting slow sales gains.

Municipal employment and creditworthiness have fallen.
Unemployment.

Labor markets in the District remain weak. Unemployment

rates continue higher than the national rate, but are demonstrating no clear trend.

In

Ohio, the unemployment rate (s.a.) was 12.7 percent in August, up 0.3 percentage points
since April.

Among the District's eleven major SMSA's, unemployment rates (n.s.a.)

in July ranged from 9.1 percent in Columbus to 18.2 percent in Youngstown, and most
SMSAs had rates about 2 percentage points higher than the national rate.
District Outlook.

Continued sluggishness in District economic activity is

suggested by leading indicators and our latest survey of manufacturers.

An index of

leading indicators for the Pittsburgh SMSA posted its fourteenth consecutive monthly
decline in July.

An index of leading indicators for the Cleveland SMSA rose in July

but has declined in eight of the last twelve months. Results from our September survey
of Fourth District manufacturers indicate District manufacturing activity has yet to
trough.

New orders and shipments are expected to expand, but at a slower rate than

in August.

Manufacturers continue to liquidate inventories at about the same rate as

in August.

Contractions in employment and hours worked are expected to be less

severe than in August.

Capital Goods.

Capital goods production continues to weaken with no

recovery seen until next year.

A producer of recording instruments for the natural

gas industry reports a sudden drop in orders. A large diversified capital goods producer
reports his backlogs are low and there is "complete disarray" in capital goods markets
with little prospect for recovery in the next six months.

A major bank expects the

lag between an upturn in economic activity and an upturn in real expenditures on
capital goods will be longer than usual in this cycle and will not occur much before
the second half of 1983.
Steel.

Current conditions and outlook in the steel industry remain dismal.

Output remains extremely weak, with producers operating at about 40 percent of
capacity. Workers continue to be furloughed. Republic Steel has cut exempt employee
salaries 7 percent effective October 1 and is planning to layoff about 13 percent of
currently working non-union employees in early autumn.

One major producer reports

that the steel market "is on hold," with no meaningful improvement expected until the
fourth quarter. Another major firm reports that "near-term cutbacks in auto production
and continued declines in capital goods production are depressing steel demand.

A

slowing of steel-user inventory liquidation should produce moderate improvement in
fourth quarter steel demand. Steel mill inventories will be liquidated through year end
and into early 1983." A medium size steel producer reports his orders fell 20 percent
in August after some improvement in June and July.
Construction.
improvement.

Weakness continues in construction with few signs

of

A builder describes industrial construction as being in the "depths of

depression" and showing no signs of improving.

He looks fex* industrial, commercial,

and highway construction to start growing in second quarter 1983.

A director reports

several office building construction projects nearing completion have not yet been able
to attract permanent financing.

A home building executive reports strong customer

interest but weak sales because of a wait-and-see attitude toward interest rates. Fixed
rates on mortgages in the Cleveland area have been lowered to about 15 percent and
variable rates are in a 14 percent to 15 percent range but there is still very little
consumer response. Some thrifts are not encouraging loan activity because of continued
deposit losses and are worried that they w'U not be able to roll over the maturing All
Savers Certificates, now 5 percent to 6 percent of total deposits, in light of intense
competition.

They expect little let-up in their earnings and net worth squeeze.

Moreover, some point out they own the highest proportion of non-productive assets in
years because of repossessed houses.
Retail Sales. Retail sales are weak but some growth is expected. A national
retailer of general merchandise reports consumer outlays are slow, but a regional retailer
of do-it-yourself building supplies says his sales are still holding up.

A department

store executive is cautiously optimistic about Christmas sales and has ordered more
merchandise for fourth quarter this year than last.

A banker observes that the saving

rate has jumped but consumer debt has increased only slowly, so prospects for recovery
in consumer outlays are promising.

An economist with a national retail chain

headquartered in this District still expects consumer spending to lead an economic
recovery, but revival will be smaller and later than usual.

He expects real PCE this

quarter to increase only 0.5 percent from last, but a larger increase in fourth quarter
if the saving rate recedes to 6 percent, interest rates decline further, and retailers
continue to price aggressively.

An economist with an auto producer is also cautious

about near-term prospects. He expects total new car sales in fourth quarter to increase
only 6 percent from this quarter's dismal 7.8 million a.r., partly because high interest
rates on instalment loans remain a constraint on sales. He expects that dealer rebates
will be sufficient to reduce inventories of 1982 models over the next few months.

Municipal

Finance.

Tight

employment and creditworthiness.

fiscal

conditions

have

reduced

municipal

Local governments in Ohio reduced employment by

1,600 non-school employees in August while public schools and colleges
employment by 2,700 workers.

reduced

Cleveland expects to furlough about 100 workers soon.

A municipal bond dealer reports that the market views municipal debt in Ohio as not
as good as in many other areas of the country, and most issues have been downgraded
a

notch,

reflecting

general

economic

conditions

and

federal

grant

reductions.

Nevertheless, he believes the quality of debt in Ohio is generally good, and the debt
is being received favorably in the market.
had difficulty issuing or servicing its debt.
weaknesses

in the

fiscal positions

and

He knows of no local government that has
In contrast, a major banker reports that
financial

information

municipalities are hampering their access to capital markets.

systems

of

some

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Fifth District business activity remains generally weak, with little
substantive evidence of any significant improvement in recent weeks.

Manu-

facturers report some further declines in shipments, orders, and order backlogs.

Reports suggest, however, that there may have been some increase in

employment and only a very slight rise in inventories.

The retail sector was

perhaps the weakest recently with general merchandise sales off somewhat.

There

are reports of stirrings in the early stages of homebuilding projects, but many
houses remain on the market and sales activity has picked up little, if at all.
There are no apparent trends in bank lending activity as reports from around the
District are conflicting.

On balance, total crop production prospects in the

District changed little during August.

Manufacturing
In the manufacturing sector shipments, new orders, and order backlogs
all declined somewhat over the past month.

There were scattered reports of

improvement in those measures, however, and there is no clear pattern either
by industry or location.

Inventories were virtually unchanged as stocks of

materials were steady and finished goods on hand rose only very slightly.
Nonetheless, nearly half our respondents find inventories above desired
levels.

The employment situation was also mixed.

Responses suggest a net

increase in total manufacturing employment, but quite a few establishments
continue to report employment on the decline.
hours worked per week continued to fall.

Also, the average number of

Prices at the manufacturing level

apparently rose more broadly than in the past several survey periods.
and equipment capacity remains well above current needs.
generally viewed as about right.

Plant

Expansion plans are

Considerable optimism continues to charac-

terize our manufacturing respondents.

As a group, they expect economic con-

ditions nationally and within their respective markets to improve over the
next two quarters.

They are slightly less enthusiastic about the prospects

for the level of production in their own firms, but even these remain generally
positive.

Retail Sales
Responses from the
to get on track.

retail sector suggest that retail sales have yet

Our survey indicates further declines in total sales and

in relative sales of big ticket items since the last survey.

One respondent

terms it the worst one month decline in his more than thirty years of experience.
Inventories were unchanged to up slightly.

Surprisingly, respondents, on

balance, report inventories and the number and size of outlets as inadequate.
Also, this group is divided on the future course of the economy.

There is

no generally held view as to the direction of activity over the next six months.

Housing and Construction
There is very little evidence of any significant change in housing
and construction since the last report.

There are scattered reports, however,

that activity or at least the contemplation of activity is being revived, if
slowly.

Most Richmond directors expect housing starts to be little changed

to somewhat higher over the remainder of the year despite the recent easing
of mortgage rates.

Several points are made to support this view.

unsold houses, new and used, remain on the market.

Builders are

Many

reported to have been buying interest rates down into the 13-13HZ range in
recent months with little effect.

Some feel that rates will have to demon-

strate some stability at lower levels before there is a significant response.
In some areas commercial construction is still giving a boost to the
industry, but this is less generally the case than a few months ago.

The Financial Sector
Our directors report loan demand little changed to down somewhat in
recent weeks.

In the business loan area, inventory reductions and a lack of

expansion activity have contributed.
reducing debt and increasing savings.

Consumers seem to be concentrating on
Deliquencies are reportedly normal to

low suggesting that consumers are managing their finances cautiously.
Bankruptcies remain a concern.

Most Richmond directors from the

financial sector expect little improvement, and perhaps some further deterioration, in bankruptcy rates.

Agriculture
September 1 estimates of 1982 output pointed to much smaller crops
of tobacco, peanuts, and cotton than in 1981, due to both reduced acreage and
lower yields per acre.
as last year.

Feed grain output is forecast at about the same level

The soybean crop is expected to be at a record level, however,

showing a sizable gain over 1981.
Flue-cured tobacco prices have been stronger in recent weeks and
have averaged 6 percent above the year-ago level for the season to date.
Marketings have been down, however, so the value of gross sales is running
only 2 percent above a year earlier.

The projected increase in production

expenses, plus the additional marketing fees required by the new tobacco
program, suggest that tobacco producers will realize little profit from the
1982 crop.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Late summer

economic

conditions in the Sixth District remain weak.

Consumer spending patterns show no increase from mid-summer. Employment conditions
are worsening. Falling grain and soybean prices threaten to reduce farm income further.
Only the lower-cost sectors of the tourist industry show improvement over last year
or earlier this season.

Virtually the sole harbinger of recovery in the region's economy

is construction, which has begun to realize a previously predicted upturn.
Employment and Industry.

Regional labor markets display further signs of

deterioration in August and September. Reports of layoffs and plant shutdowns combined
with preliminary, partial employment figures indicate the likelihood that the District's
unemployment rate rose again in late summer.

Alabama's August unemployment rate

climbed to 14.1 percent (S.A.).

Layoffs have recently been announced in such diverse

industries

rubber,

as

pharmaceuticals,

food

processing,

shipbuilding,

agricultural

chemicals, paper, lumber, textiles, apparel, electrical and agricultural machinery, steel,
aluminum, and coal.

At some companies, such as McDermott, the large offshore

construction firm headquartered in New Orleans, layoffs extend to white-collar personnel.
Even firms which traditionally try to retain employees through periods of slack demand,
such as Stockham Valves and Fittings and American Cast Iron and Pipe, have furloughed
workers.

Although respondents are generally optimistic that the recession has passed

its trough, almost none have plans to increase hiring in the next few months.

Since

the Red Book employment panel is weighted toward the most successful manufacturing
firms headquartered in the District, this response does not augur well for the region's
near-term employment outlook.
Orders at regional pulp and paper mills are weak, and paper inventories in
Tennessee are termed by one observer as "exploding." Aluminum and steel inventories

remain at high levels in Louisiana and Alabama, respectively.

A spokesman for the

petrochemical industry in Louisiana reports that no chemical processing companies in
the state have expansion plans at present. In fact, most plants are operating substantially
below capacity.

One encouraging sign in Florida is that phosphate rock and fertilizer

inventories have dwindled significantly.

T >e first-half downtrend in capital spending

appears to be continuing in the third quarter.

General Electric postponed indefinitely

plans to build a $1.5 billion plastics plant in Alabama.
Consumer Spending. August taxable sales were up moderately (in real terms)
over last year in Alabama, Georgia, and Tennessee but down in Florida, Louisiana, and
Mississippi.

Retailers report generally flat back-to-school sales.

Although hopeful of

improvement by the Christmas season, they are ordering conservatively and holding
inventories taut.

Consumers, too, are widely reported to be very cautious.

Sales of

big-ticket home furnishings remain weak, reflecting the depressed housing sector, while
first-time purchases of such new products as microwave ovens, video recorders, and
personal computers remain strong.

Auto sales still appear to be sharply below last

year's levels. Factory incentive plans are proving less effective for southeastern dealers
than earlier customer rebates, and the tax cut has not spurred car sales.

Dealers also

link weak August-September sales to consumer uncertainties regarding employment,
interest rates, and 1983 car prices.

Dealers are ordering new models cautiously.

Construction and Real Estate.

According to our survey of building codes

departments, real estate firms, and savings and loan institutions (S&Ls), housing has
begun to improve slowly.

Codes departments report a slight rise in August building

permits for single-family residences and a moderate increase in some areas during the
first half of September.

Building permits for "additions" remain strong. S<5cLs indicate

that loans are up somewhat.

Commercial sales and leasing remain slow but steady.

Even more encouraging are reports from realtors that home sales are finally improving,

especially in Atlanta, Jacksonville, Knoxville, and Nashville.

However, slower growth

areas as well as much of Alabama and Louisiana have yet to pick up.

Moreover,

realtors and thrift officers repeatedly state that mortgage rates need to fall to 12-13
percent before the market really gets moving. Many potential home buyers are reportedly
postponing purchases to see if rates decline further or stabilize.

Aside from these

qualifications, the mood in the District is definitely more positive than earlier this
summer.
Tourism. Tourist industry representatives and partial statistics indicate that
higher priced sectors of the industry continue to languish; moreover, the bright spot
of earlier reports—the World's Fair—has continued the decline reported in August.

If

average daily attendance does not increase, the Fair will not reach the break-even
level of 11 million visitors.

Fair officials, however, remain optimistic.

Across the

District, less expensive facilities, such as campgrounds and state and national parks,
are enjoying sharply increased usage, especially by in-state visitors, whereas hotels and
motels have fewer guests, and convention business, particularly in Atlanta, is off from
last September.

Florida and Louisiana remain the weakest areas.

New Orleans' most

popular restaurant reports that this summer was the worst in its history.

Respondents

continue to attribute Florida's poor performance to recession here and abroad and to
the World's Fair; in addition, many have begun to suggest that the October 1 opening
of Disney World's EPCOT is postponing travel to the state.
Agriculture.

Farm income prospects have become decidedly more dismal in

recent weeks. Soybeans produce about two-fifths of the region's noncitrus crop income.
Prices have fallen 10 percent in the past month, reducing prospective soybean income
by $350 million and dropping the estimated total 13 percent below last year's droughtreduced level.

Prices of most other crops have also declined recently, leaving tobacco

as the sole bright spot with prices averaging 9 percent above last year.

Income

prospects of livestock producers have been bolstered somewhat by recent price gains
for hogs and calves.

On balance, however, aggregate net farm income in the District

will be lower than in 1981, and debt problems of farmers will grow more severe.

A

major lender reports that an increase in "oreclosures of relatively large Mississippi
Delta farming operations is already occurring.
Finance. A telephone survey of Sixth District banking and thrift institutions
regarding the new 7- to 31-day small time deposits reveals little consumer interest in
these accounts, which only the larger institutions have offered.

Because alternative

instruments which yield competitive rates and/or offer substantially the same maturity
are available, our contacts believe no market exists for this service.
a defensive move to maintain customer relationships.

They view it as

The Sixth District's experience

with these accounts suggests that third-party transaction privileges and much smaller
minimum deposits are necessary to elicit adequate consumer interest.
Panel of Economists. Our panel of state forecasters and academic, banking,
business, and investment economists continue to approve of current monetary policy,
finding it conducive to moderate recovery without rekindling inflation.

A smaller

majority recommends monetary growth in excess of targets, while nearly one-third of
those polled urge a rapid return to within-target growth.

Virtually all feel their state

is near the trough of the business cycle, with no signs of recovery and some of further
deterioration.
recovery.

The majority, revising their previous outlook, foresee a later, weaker

All respondents mentioned lower, stabilized interest rates as critical to

inducing increased consumer spending; a majority also regard GNP growth as important
to overcoming consumer resistance.

There is no clear consensus among those surveyed

regarding the recent drop in business loan demand, but bank economists note that recent
corporate loan demand has been better here than in the nation.

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Summary.

The expected upturn in economic activity has not

developed in the Seventh District.

Purchasing managers in Chicago and

Milwaukee reported further declines in shipments, orders, output,
inventories, and employment in August with no indication that September would
see improvement.

State and local governments are also cutting staff.

Projections of demand for motor vehicles and steel have been reduced again
for September and the fourth quarter.

Although some producers report a

levelling off in orders, most capital goods producers have laid off
additional workers and more plants have closed.
with no help from "back-to-school" buying.

Retail sales remain slow

Although lower interest rates

have not helped housing materially, some improvement in "attitudes" is
reported.

Expected record corn and soybean harvests will keep prices low and

increase financial pressures on the farm sector.

However, mainly because of

lower feed costs, the outlook has improved for livestock farmers, especially
hog producers.

Also on the upside are sales of grain storage bins and

equipment to handle the excess production.
procurement orders is providing a few jobs.

A scattering of defense
Inflation continues at moderate

rates with heavy discounting in wholesale and, to a lesser extent, in retail
markets.
Forecasts Reduced.

District businessmen and lenders are losing

hope that a revival in activity will occur in the remainder of 1982.
Particularly for capital goods and heavy construction, doubts are increasing
that a recovery will be manifest before mid-1983 at the earliest.

Lower

interest rates will not have as large an impact as in earlier cycles because

of substantial unused capacity, financial stress, and abysmal morale.

Even

service industries such as medicine, advertising, and law note the effect of
hard times.

However, firms specializing in bankruptcy procedures—accoun-

tants, lawyers, and liquidators—are doing a booming business.

Complaints of

past due accounts, business and consumer, are much more common than in past
recessions.
Employment and Wages.
continue at high levels.
cutting staff.

New claims for unemployment compensation

Many employers, including governmental units, are

New hires generally are held to the minimum necessary to fill

essential slots.

Help-wanted ads bring a flood of resumes and some employers

prefer to fill openings by transfers from within or on personal
recommendations.

Many companies have frozen or reduced salaries this year.

Where increases have been granted, the 7-8 percent range predominates, down
from 9-10 percent in past years.

Current plans are for much smaller

increases in 1983.
Consumer Expenditures.

Retailers reported disappointing sales of

most soft and hard goods in August and September.
promotions did not bring the normal response.

"Back-to-school"

Nevertheless, children's

merchandise—clothing and toys—is generally doing better than adults'
merchandise.

Appliances, carpets, and other home furnishings are especially

weak, a trend attributed, in part, to reduced sales of houses.
and service and video games continue to be star performers.

Auto parts

Larger chains

report favorable delinquency experience, but more careful monitoring of
accounts has been necessary.

Because of slow sales, retail inventories are

adequate to excessive, and ordering of goods for the winter season is well

below normal.

Closings of stores and fast food operations are increasingly

frequent, and few new outlets are being added.
Capital Expenditures.
full swing.

The recession in business equipment is in

Layoffs in many plants have reached 20 to 50 percent of the peak

force, with high seniority hourly workers and white collar types affected to
a much greater extent than in earlier postwar recessions.

Some farm and

construction equipment plants will be closed for most of the fourth quarter
with reopening tentatively scheduled for January.
plants are closed indefinitely.
reopen.

Most rail freight car

One heavy truck plant is closed and may not

A machine tool producer sees no pickup in the current low level of

demand until late 1983.

Imports are taking a growing share of the markets

for machine tools and farm and construction equipment, helped by the high
value of the dollar.

Export demand is restricted by limited availability of

government financial aid, compared with foreign competitors.

Low demand for

services of plant location advisers, architects, and design engineers
suggests that the capital spending slump will be deeper and longer than in
earlier cycles.
Motor vehicles.

Some auto and truck plants are closed to cut

inventories at a time when production is usually at high levels to supply
dealers with new models.

On September 1 stocks of 24 domestic models

exceeded 100 days supply, an unprecedented situation.

Price incentives have

been pushed to move the large carryover of 1982 models—and some 1981s.
Meanwhile, various imported models are in short supply.

Even the new

domestic compact trucks, strong sellers earlier in the year, have slumped in
recent months.

Steel.

One forecast of steel shipments for 1982 has been reduced

to the 60-65 million ton range, lowest since 1958.
continues at extremely low levels.

Demand for steel

All products are weak, but structurals

and heavy plates for capital goods are "terrible."
plummeted in an unprecedented fashion.

Oil field steel has

The only improved demand categories

are ordnance and grain bins.
Defense Procurement.

The principal facilities devoted exclusively

to defense procurement in the Seventh District are a tank arsenal, an
electronic counter-measures plant, and the Rock Island Army Arsenal.

In

addition, District companies have obtained orders for small naval vessels,
armored cars, personnel carriers, fuel trucks, special rail cars,
communications equipment, aircraft engine parts, and a variety of other
components.

Overall, however, this region is not sharing proportionately in

the defense buildup.
Agriculture.

Projected record corn and soybean harvests, as in

1981, will exceed utilization and augment already burdensome carryover
stocks.

Corn and soybean prices have declined sharply in anticipation of the

expected surplus production and are expected to remain well under the low
year-ago levels.

Many District crop farmers will remain in the grip of a

cash-flow squeeze, partly reflecting the small proportion of farmers eligible
for government price supports on their 1982 crops.
farmers have improved.

Prospects for livestock

High prices and low feed costs have generated large

profits for hog farmers.

Cattle prices have weakened in recent weeks, but

low feed costs and reduced finance charges suggest that cattle feeders will
be able to cover production costs.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District changed little during
August and early September.

Retail sales were about the same in real terms

as in June and July, after adjusting for seasonal influences.

Orders and

production at most manufacturing firms contracted further, but many service
firms reported improved business.

Also, construction activity increased

moderately in August and early September from earlier depressed levels.
Crop harvests will be large, but selling prices for many farmers are below
production costs.

On the other hand, most livestock and dairy operations

have been profitable.
Retail sales, adjusted for both price increases and seasonal
differences, were virtually flat in August and early September at about the
June-July level.
annual rate.

In nominal terms, sales were up at a 3 or 4 percent

Automobile sales rose slightly from the June-July pace,

though they remained below the level of a year ago.
greater for used cars than for new models.

This improvement was

Department store sales have

changed little in real terms since early in the summer, though consumer
preferences shifted toward higher quality goods and away from "fad" items.
Inventories at department stores rose, reflecting earlier purchases of
stock in anticipation of improved August-September sales; however,
inventories are not considered a major problem.
moderately since the earlier summer months.

Grocery sales have risen

Merchants are currently expecting a moderate improvement in sales
during the coming Christmas season.
pent-up demand.

They believe there is significant

They also cite the improved financial condition of

consumers, in terms of both disposable income and volume of liquid
savings.

Further, the recent decline in interest rates and the rise in

stock prices are likely to stimulate an increase in consumption.
Industrial activity in the Eighth District contracted during
August and early September, with the exception of defense, food and
livestock feed production.

Most other manufacturing firms, both large and

small, reported declines in orders.

Production schedules were trimmed in

order to prevent a build-up of inventories, and employment decreased at
firms producing consumer durables, chemicals, aluminum, steel, industrial
equipment and wood products.

A major chemical firm offered early

retirement incentives to 1,900 salaried employees to facilitate staff
cuts.

A collection agency for industrial companies reported that

collections in August were 23 percent below normal.
In contrast, service firms in the District reported an improvement
in activity.

Business was particularly good at repair shops for

automobiles, air conditioners and televisions.

A computer service company,

operating at capacity, noted that the demand for processing medicare claims
has risen.
business.

A restaurant and a fast-food chain reported excellent
A printing shop also claimed business was near capacity.

A

casualty insurance company experienced a moderate increase in business.

Construction activity, which has been severely depressed in the
District, improved slightly since July.

Homebuilders in the St. Louis area

report increased traffic through model homes and a slight upturn in sales
to about 20 percent of normal.

Lower interest rates, an increase in

consumer disposable incomes, the rise in stock prices and several special
public bond issues (which provide mortgage funds to home buyers at
subsidized rates) have been beneficial for residential sales.

Despite the

depressed conditions, unions representing both plumbers and electrical
workers obtained a $2.32 an hour increase in wages recently by maintaining
tight control on entrance into the unions.

Commercial construction, which

has been less depressed than homebuilding, also improved moderately in
August and early September.
Weather has continued to be favorable, and crops in the Eighth
District are excellent.

For many farmers, however, selling prices are less

than production costs, leaving them with a net loss for their efforts.
With the current level of interest rates, many farmers are finding it
difficult to service their debts.

On the other hand, relatively favorable

feeding margins are benefiting hog, cattle, dairy and poultry producers.

The Ninth District econony has remained depressed.

The construction

industry continued in the doldrums, with the only signs of revival appearing
in

nonbuilding

construction

(work

facilities, and energy projects).

on

highways, bridges,

sewer and water

The weak manufacturing, mining, and lumber-

ing industries reported in the last Redbook did not improve in August or early
September.

Consumer spending remained weak.

Farmers were still troubled by

falling crop prices, and an early frost could substantially reduce their crop
yields.

As a result of these continued weaknesses in the real sectors, bank

lending in the district remained sluggish.

Construction
District construction activity remained depressed.

In the second

quarter, for example, construction employment, which accounts for approximately 5 percent of district nonagricultural employment, was down 3 percent
from a year earlier and 22 percent from the second quarter of 1979, construction's last good year.

Nonbuilding construction has started to revive, but

its impact has not been sufficient to offset the decline in the other sectors.
Nonresidential Building.

Weak commercial and industrial building has

been holding down nonresidential building.
accounts

for about

60 percent

Commercial and industrial building

of the district's nonresidential

building.

According to F. W. Dodge, during the first seven months of this year, the
dollar value of district nonresidential contract awards was down 8 percent
from a year earlier and 13 percent from the first seven months of 1979*

Conversations with builders, industrial developers and realtors from throughout the district confirm the shrinkage in contract awards.
describe commercial and industrial building as slow.

Most of them

For example, the market-

ing director of a large Minneapolis builder says that his firm's business this
year is down about 50 percent from a year ago.

Commercial and industrial

building activity is still considered good, however, in Billings, Montana, and
in St. Cloud and Rochester, Minnesota.
An

immediate pickup in commercial and industrial building is not

likely because excess space exists and interest rates are still too high.

Our

contacts think that many businesses do need additional space and that now is a
good time to obtain it; new commercial and industrial building prices are
presently very attractive.

But interest rates, they believe, are still too

high for businesses to take advantage of favorable construction prices.

Two

executives with large Minneapolis builders indicate that long-term interest
rates would have to drop another two percentage points and stay down for
several months for any significant pickup in commercial and industrial building to occur.

Also, for certain types of commercial and industrial building,

excess space is a problem.

The current vacancy rate for office buildings in

the Minneapolis-St. Paul suburbs, for example, is 15 percent, more than twice
the 6 to T percent rate that realtors consider normal.
Residential Building.

Residential building has also been very weak,

and recent home sales suggest no immediate improvement.

The number of dis-

trict housing units authorized by building permits during the first six months
of this year was 23 percent below the number authorized a year earlier and 56

percent below the number authorized in the first half of 1979.

Homebuilding

is not likely to pick up soon, because consumers have simply not been buying
homes.

According to the Minneapolis Board of Realtors, August home sales in

Minneapolis and its suburbs were down 28 percent from a year ago.

Although no

immediate rebound is likely, homebuilding could pick up in several months.
Our Bank directors and district realtors indicate that the recent interest
rate declines have substantially increased shopping, if not buying.
Nonbuilding.

In contrast to residential and nonresidential construc-

tion, nonbuilding construction, although still depressed, has shown signs of
reviving.

During the first eight months of this year, contracts for highways,

bridges, and sewer and water facilities in Minnesota and the Dakotas were
still 21 percent below their level in the first eight months of 1979, but they
were 11 percent above their level in those months last year.

This component

got an additional boost when contracts were let earlier this year for a $1.2
billion coal gasification plant in North Dakota.

Other Industrial Activity
The weak manufacturing, mining, and lumbering industries reported in
our last Redbook have yet to show any evidence of recovery.

The slowdown in

manufacturing orders and production appears to have continued, and district
firms have still been curtailing operations and laying off workers.

For

example, the district's only auto assembly plant closed for a week in midSeptember, and a large Wisconsin manufacturer of heating and cooling equipment
recently laid off 250 workers.
August

and

early

September,

Also, lumber production remained depressed in
and

although

some

iron

mines

production, others have extended previously announced shutdowns.

have

resumed

The district was fortunate that the recent rail strike disrupted very
little industrial activity.

Minneapolis-St. Paul business executives have

actually been more upset by the prospect of lost revenues due to the NFL players' strike.

In Minneapolis, this strike could prevent a planned reduction in

a hotel and liquor tax which was imposed to pay for our new $55 million domed
stadium.

Consumer Spending
Consumers' reluctance to spend has slowed the recovery of auto and
other retail sales.

Major Minneapolis-St. Paul retailers and our Bank direc-

tors report that back-to-school sales were disappointing.
recent declines in interest
relieved
sales.

the previously

Furthermore, the

rates and increases in stock prices have not

reported

sluggishness

in furniture and automobile

One major Twin Cities retailer calls August furniture sales "lousy."

And a regional sales manager for a large domestic automobile manufacturer
indicates that recent developments have not spurred car sales.

In fact, his

firm's sales in Minnesota and the Dakotas declined more than seasonally between July and September.

Agriculture
Declining crop prices have continued to trouble district farmers.

An

announcement in August by the USDA, that corn and soybean harvests would be
larger than expected, pushed down already weak crop prices.

Between July and

September, cash prices for soybeans, corn, and wheat in Minneapolis declined
12, 8, and 5 percent, respectively.

Livestock prices
increased
feeder
remained

have

the attractiveness

cattle
at the

prices

at

high

level

exhibited a mixed pattern.

of

their

feeding

livestock,

midsummer

reached

this

levels.

summer.

Lower

which

has

Also,
Increased

crop

helped

hog

prices
to

prices

slaughter

keep
have

cattle

supplies, however, have pushed the prices of these livestock down; and in midSeptember in South St. Paul, they reached their lowest level in 18 months.

In addition to price problems, district corn and soybean farmers also
have major concerns about the weather.

Due to wet weather delaying spring

planting, district crops are maturing later than usual.

Normally, for exam-

ple, about 50 percent of Minnesota's corn crop is mature by mid-September.
This year only 23 percent is ready for harvest.

A frost in the next few weeks

(a distinct possibility) could substantially reduce yields.

Although reduced

yields in the district would ease the storage problem discussed in our last
Redbook, they would not significantly affect prices because the district's
share of total U.S. production of corn and soybeans is small.

Thus, until

crops are harvested, district farmers are faced with the possibility of a
bleak scenario:

low crop prices, which are virtually certain, and poor crop

yields which will depend on the vagaries of the weather.

Bank Lending
As reported in our last Redbook, these weaknesses in the district
econoEjy continued to be reflected in sluggish bank lending.

In mid-September,

lending at district member banks did not increase from its weak level of early
August.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY

Overview.

Business conditions in the Tenth District are mixed with only

hints that a weak recovery is under way.

Retail sales are growing slowly and

the pressures to decrease inventory have declined.

Purchasing agents, however,

are still attempting to decrease inventories and do not anticipate increases in
prices until next year.

While savings and loan associations are still having

problems, recent declines in interest rates are improving their situation.
Lower interest rates are also improving sales of expensive houses, but lower
priced house sales still languish.

Without a severe frost a large harvest of

corn and soybeans is assured, continuing the downward pressures on crop prices.
Both loan demand and deposit growth in the Tenth District are flat.

There are

some reports that the decline in loan quality has stabilized.
Retail Trade.

Retail sales grew moderately in the Tenth District during

the first eight months of 1982 as compared with the same period last year.
of the sales gains came in apparel and softgoods during July and August.
chandise costs remain stable as do profit margins.

Most

Mer-

Inventories are slightly

higher than expected but are not causing concern heading into the fall and
Christmas selling seasons.

District retailers expect continued growth in

sales during the rest of the year.
Purchasing Agents.

Tenth District purchasing agents report input prices

have risen from 2 to 6 percent during the past year.

Prices are expected to

remain stable for the remainder of the year and to begin increasing early next
year.

All firms contacted are decreasing inventories.

A few firms are experi-

encing slightly longer lead times on purchases, but input availability is not

considered a major problem in the Tenth District.

All firms continue to have

excess capacity, and a few have laid off workers recently.
Savings and Loan Activity.

Savings inflows at Tenth District savings

and loan associations are advancing but have still failed to lift many institutions out of a net outflow position.

Most officers at those associations

expect higher inflows for the rest of the year.

District associations continue

to commit funds to blended rate mortgages for existing customers.
to first time applicants, however, remain at very low levels.

Commitments

Officers quote

rates on blended mortgages averaging 13 1/2 percent and rates on first time
conventional loans averaging 15 1/2 percent.
one to two percentage points since July.

These mortgage rates have fallen

Officers at most associations expect

rates to drop one more percentage point by the end of the year.
Home Builders' Associations.

Tenth District home builders' associations

indicate that housing starts are showing slight increases over last year's
levels, with single-family units doing considerably better than multi-family
units.

Sales of new homes in the $150,000 and higher bracket are increasing,

but sales of lower priced homes continue to be sluggish.

Inventories of new

homes are at very low levels, with no change expected until the signs of
economic recovery are more definite.
plentiful in the Tenth District.

Building materials are, for the most part,

However, some shortages are occurring for

some types of lumber.
Agriculture.

Crops are maturing at a rate only slightly behind normal in

most areas of the Tenth District.

Harvesting of corn is well under way.

Soybeans,

though, are still maturing and harvesting is expected to begin in the next two
weeks.

The possibility of an early severe frost threatens areas in Colorado,

Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska with potential damage to soybeans and grain
sorghum of 25 to 50 percent.

Parts of Nebraska have already been exposed to

light frost—but with little damage.

Some shortages of grain storage capacity

are beginning to appear throughout the Tenth District.

Higher prices for hogs

have improved the financial condition of producers, but very little expansion
of hog production is being reported thus far.
Banking Developments.
District.

Overall loan demand is steady throughout the Tenth

Business loan demand is declining primarily due to the slowdown in

oil and gas exploration.

Lower rates are causing a modest increase in real

estate and automobile loan demand, however.
low.

Agricultural loan demand remains

The deterioration of loan quality which has been observed over the last

year seems to be stabilizing.
decline in loan quality.

Only a few bankers are experiencing a modest

The prime rates charged by the banks surveyed range

from 13 1/2 to 15 1/2 percent.

The range in August was 14 to 15 3/4 percent.

Most bankers do not expect an increase in rates during the next month.
Overall deposit growth at Tenth District banks is flat.

Several bankers

report strong growth in existing NOW accounts, but very few new accounts are
being opened.

Almost no growth in All Savers Certificates is reported.

Most

bankers are not concerned about the possible loss of these funds at maturity.
One banker reports the cancellation of a planned repurchase agreement account
due to the position taken by the FDIC that holders of repurchase agreements at
the failed Mount Pleasant Bank and Trust Company have no claim to government
securities pledged to back up the agreement.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Economic
Residential

signals

construction

construction activity

from

the Eleventh

is returning

is slowing.

District

are

still

mixed.

to a healthy pace, but commercial

Renewed downward pressure on drilling

activity is keeping overall manufacturing production low despite increasing
defense expenditures.

Loan growth at commercial banks is shifting from the

business

sector

toward

the

consumer

sector,

and

deposits

at S&L's

are

growing.

Retailers are cautiously optimistic about the fourth quarter even

though current sales are weak.
Texas housing permits rose to a near-record high

in July.

The

increase was concentrated in apartment construction as investors reacted to
a tight rental housing market.

Although single-family permits declined in

July, they remained above year-ago levels and respondents indicate that new
home starts picked up again in August.
Commercial construction activity is in what is expected to be an
extended

decline.

nonresidential

Announcements

construction,

are

of
off

office

projects,

sharply.

Retail

the
and

bulk

of

industrial

construction is climbing, but the value of these projects is comparatively
small.

The decline in nonresidential construction should be gradual since

many projects will not be completed until late 1983 or 1984.
The unemployment rate in Texas declined to a seasonally adjusted
6.7 percent

in August, down from 7.0 percent

suspected, however,

that

the decline

in June and July.

is a result

of unemployed

leaving the labor force and misleading seasonal adjustment factors.

It is
workers
Total

nonagricultural employment fell 0.4 percent from July to August as the five
major industries in durable goods production all registered declines.
The number of operating drilling rigs is still falling, and the
seismic crew count, a leading indicator of drilling activity, has resumed
its downward

trend.

Both the number and total footage of wells drilled

fell for the second consecutive month.
natural

gas

demand.

Thus, many

Low oil prices

energy

companies

are

are decreasing
lowering

their

projected expenditures for exploration during 1983.
Production in the manufacturing sector generally appears to have
stabilized

at low levels.

Most

firms have already made

cutbacks in production and employment.

the necessary

Petroleum refineries and chemical

plants are operating at roughly two-thirds of capacity and are expected to
continue at that rate.

A sharp August drop in steel orders for commercial

construction was partially offset by an increase in orders for residential
construction.
climb.

However,

Conditions

unchanged.

inventories

in

the

of oil field equipment

electronics

and

apparel

continue to

industries

are

Electronics sales are being supported by the defense industry,

and orders for apparel products are less than the seasonal norm.
Outstanding loans at commercial banks in the District increased
1.1 percent in August, up from a sluggish 0.1-percent gain in July.
growth for the year-to-date is substantially above average.

Loan

Business loans

at large weekly reporting banks declined slightly for the first time in 15
months, due

partly

to

lower

inventory

financing

needs.

Increases

in

consumer and real estate loans account for the major part of the increase
in total loans in August.

Total deposits at member banks were virtually

unchanged as time deposit growth offset shrinking demand deposits.

Deposits at federally insured S&L's surged upward by 1.0 percent
in July.

The increase was led by a 4.9-percent jump in the dollar volume

of CD's of $100,000 or more, although
increased.

other nonpassbook

deposits also

Total mortgage loans outstanding for construction increased 2.0

percent in July while nonmortgage consumer loans jumped 2.3 percent.
Department

store sales were below expectations

for August and

appear to be falling off faster than usual following the back-to-school
selling period.

Sales were greater in August than in July.

The dollar

volume of sales is 4 percent ahead of last year at this time.

Reorders of

fall merchandise are low, and orders for the Christmas season are being
delayed.

Department store managers are trying to keep a reserve of "open

cash" in case Christmas
devaluation

of

substantially,

the
and

significant declines.

sales exceed current expectations.

peso
stores

has
in

reduced
San

sales

Antonio

and

in

the

Houston

The recent
Border

areas

also

report

In addition, some firms are wondering how to collect

on outstanding debts owed by Mexican Nationals.
New
incentives

auto

sales

to dealers.

imported models.

dropped

in

The slowdown

early

September

is evident

despite

in both

factory

domestic

and

As a result, inventories have begun to creep up again.

Respondents attribute the sales decline to continued high financing costs
and the imminent introduction of next year's models.
sell well, and demand for auto servicing remains high.

Used cars continue to

TWELFTH DISTRICT—SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy continues to struggle with recession
conditions.

Consumer spending in August was down or flat in nominal terms

relative to a year ago and does not appear to have responded as yet to
recent declines in interest rates or lower Federal taxes.

Commercial

construction is joining residential construction as a depressed industry,
although there are exceptions to this weak construction picture in certain
areas of the District.

The aerospace and electronics industries, although

weak, continue to be reliant on military spending for their remaining
strength.

In the agricultural sector, the picture is highly varied, as

bumper crops in certain commodities depress prices but boost processing
activity, while other areas—such as potato processing—have suffered
severe cutbacks in activity.

The most notable developments in banking in

the District are the widespread reports of loan delinquencies and
foreclosures, and the rapid spread of "sweep" types of consumer deposit
accounts.

There appears to be little response of corporate investment or

finance activity to the recent decline in short- and long-term interest
rates.

Consumer Spending
The recent declines in interest rates have not sparked a recovery of
consumer spending in autos, housing or department store sales.

All four

major department stores in the Los Angeles area, for example, report
nominal sales for August below that of a year ago.

Although there is

increased optimism in the automobile and housing sectors, reports of
increases in activity are spotty.

In Bakersfield, California, for example,

several dealerships report sales nearing "profitable" levels, particularly
for the larger size vehicles.

Throughout the District, however, continued

high levels of unemployment hamper consumers' spending enthusiasm.

The

State of Washington, for example, has a persistent 12 percent unemployment
rate.

Even in the normally busy harvest season in California's Central

Valley, unemployment rates are in the 12 to 17 percent range.

The

conservative spending attitudes of the District are also reflected in the
relative strength of maintenance-type activities such as automobile service
and home improvement companies.

Consumers prefer to fix their old items

rather than buy new ones.

Manufacturing and Mining
Twelfth District manufacturing and mining activity continues to be
depressed.

The recent resurgence of gold prices has raised hopes of

increased activity in Nevada, the country's largest gold producing state,
but there has been little actual production response.

Similar hopes abound

in Idaho's Silver Valley, but major mines such as the Bunker Hill Mine
continue to operate at low capacity, with 4,000 of its 5,000 workers still
laid off.

The aerospace industry would be at extremely depressed levels

because of heavy order cancellation were it not for military contracts.

As

it is, many plants in the industry are closed or operating only 3 or 4 days
per week.

Boeing is considering consolidating its 727 and 757 divisions,

which would reduce its workforce still further.

In a recent survey of

Twelfth District Directors, little optimism was expressed that the recent

declines in interest rates and Federal taxes would spur corporate sales or
change corporate investment and inventory behavior in the near term.

Much

of District industry apparently has taken a "wait and see" attitude toward
these developments.

Construction and Real Estate
The level of depression of the housing industry varies widely in the
District.

In Idaho, housing starts in August were 45 percent below the

level of a year ago.

In Los Angeles, a large overhang of unsold homes

reflects the continued weakness of that market.

In stark contrast to the

general housing picture in the District, however, Alaska reports an
increase in single-family residential construction permits of 47 percent
over last year and a sevenfold increase in multi-unit permits.

Commercial

construction is reported throughout the District as "weakening" or "quiet,"
suggesting that this one prop to the recession-weary construction industry
is gradually giving way.

Agriculture
Until there is a revival in the housing industry, the weakness in the
District's forest products industry can be expected to continue.

Overall,

the lumber industry is operating at less than 70 percent of capacity,
supported in part by sales of logs to Far Eastern customers.
in other agricultural products depends upon the commodity.

The picture
In Idaho, 2

potato processors recently closed plant s, laying off 1,200 workers.

In the

grain and grape markets, bumper crops are severely depressing prices.
These developments, coupled with recent reductions in agricultural price

supports, have severely hampered growth in farm income.

In contrast,

California tomato canners are working 24 hour shifts handling increased
production.

Financial Institutions
The savings and loan industry continues to suffer in the Twelfth
District, although there is increased optimism that declining interest
rates will brighten the picture over ensuing quarters.

Consumer "sweep"-

type deposit accounts, whereby bank and savings and loan association
depositors can enjoy the features of money market funds, have been widely
introduced and are expected to be popular, although costly to the financial
institutions.

In contrast, the enthusiasm for the new 31 day accounts

seems to be reserved.

Loan demand is very slack and a recent survey

suggests that the declines in long-term interest rates have been
insufficient to prompt many borrowers to convert short-term to long-term
financing.

The most prominent development in the financial services area

is the startling increase in loan delinquencies and foreclosures.

This

phenomenon is widespread, but typified by the report of one bank that
delinquent loans had risen to 6 percent from one and one-half percent a
year ago.

The overhang of seller-financed housing debt adds to

apprehension about these developments.

