CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

February 2, 1983

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.]
Outlook and Overview
The outlook seems considerably brighter compared to the December
Redbook.

Most Districts report definite signs of improvement in economic

activity, or at least judge that improvement is imminent.

Least optimistic

are Richmond and Dallas (both reported "little change" recently), Cleveland
("the bottom may be near") and Kansas City ("recovery to get underway during
the second or third quarter").

Retail sales (ex-autos) are brisk and expected

to remain strong in most Districts.
large models, are improved.

Sales of domestic automobiles, especially

Manufacturing activity is mixed, with improved

orders from the automotive, electronics and housing sectors, while only the
business equipment sector continues to decline.
fallen to desired levels in most sectors.

Inventories appear to have

While further declines are more

likely than increases, there is no indication that declines would be sharp.
Residential construction continues to improve as sales of new and pre-owned
homes have been boosted by mortgage interest rate declines.

Agriculture

remains a weak spot with farm income down and many farmers in financial
difficulty.

Bank lending activity is generally flat; business loans are

expected to stay flat while consumer loans are expected to improve.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales (ex-autos) in most Districts are brisk and are expected
to remain strong.

January department store sales were especially good in

Philadelphia ("off to a flying start") and in Cleveland ("a fundamental
upswing in demand").

Exceptions were Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco,

where either sales showed less strength or retailers were cautious about the
outlook.

Sales of non-auto consumer durables were generally weak except in

Atlanta, where they have been spurred by a resurgence in housing.

Some

Districts report retail sales have benefited from unseasonally warm weather,
but Chicago reports warm weather has hurt apparel sales.
Automobile sales, especially of large domestic models, are improved in
most Districts.

Dallas reports sales of imported cars remain low.

Atlanta

notes that sales have been assisted by exceptionally low financing rates
("5.9-6.9 percent and even as low as 2.9 percent").
Manufacturing and Mining Activity
Industrial activity is mixed, suggesting that a trough may have been
reached.

Most Districts report orders and activity up at some firms but down

at others.

Orders have improved for automobiles and trucks, defense and

consumer electronics, and products to construct and furnish new houses.

Some

improvement in orders for steel are reported but steel plant shutdowns
continue to be announced.
shutdowns reported.

Mining continues very weak, with additional mine

Business equipment manufacturing is probably the weakest

sector, with additional declines in sales and production expected for 1983.
Inventories
Inventories seem to have fallen to desired levels in most sectors, but
declines remain more likely than increases.

Retail inventories are lean and

at desired levels almost everywhere but there is little sentiment for
increasing them.

Some manufacturers continued to cut inventories in January

while others had already reached their desired inventory levels.

Few

manufacturers plan to build inventories, even those with rising orders.
Inventories of oil drilling supplies remain excessive, and Richmond reports
many manufacturers1 inventories are well above desired levels.

Construction and Real Estate
Residential construction continues to improve.

Most Districts report

sales of new and pre-owned homes have been spurred by declines in mortgage
interest rates, and permit issuance and housing starts have increased.
Exceptions are Southern California, where the unsold inventory is still large;
Philadelphia, where "housing starts remain stalled and new home prices
continue to drop;" and Richmond, where the pace of the housing recovery has
moderated in recent weeks.

Chicago reports house construction has benefited

from unusually mild weather.
There are scattered reports of improvement in non-residential
construction, but Chicago expects a downturn.
Agriculture
Farmers continue under pressure.

Farm income has fallen in several

Districts and farmers are reported having difficulty repaying loans.

Chicago

reports agricultural land prices 20 percent below their late-1970s peak.

The

payment-in-kind or crop-swap program is expected to achieve a high farmer
participation rate in several Districts, reducing production expenses in 1983
and increasing crop prices in 1984.

Suppliers of seeds, fertilizer,

pesticides, and fuel are expected to be hurt by the program.
Finance
Bank lending activity is mixed.

Several Districts describe business

loan demand as relatively flat, with little growth expected in the next few
months.

Consumer loan demand, commented on by only three Districts, is flat

or up slightly, with near-term growth expected as consumer optimism improves.
Minneapolis reports demand for new agricultural credit is low but demand for
farm debt refinancing is greater than normal.

Demand for mortgage loans is

reported up in a few Districts, and the 30-year fixed rate loan is the most
popular.

Conventional mortgage rates edged up in January in Atlanta.
The new deposit accounts differ sharply in popularity.

The money

market deposit account (MMDA) has been marketed aggressively and has achieved
rapid growth.

Atlanta reports very little attrition from these accounts

following expiration of bonus interest rates.

Estimates of the share of MMDA

deposits that are "new" money to the institution range from 15 to 60 percent.
Public response to the Super NOW account seems to be uniformly
unenthusiastic.

Kansas City attributes the apathetic response to weak

promotion, consumer confusion, and MMDA competitive superiority because of
higher yields and lower service charges.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON
Reports from First District businesses were generally more positive
than they have been in some months.
among manufacturers.

The change was particularly marked

At the time of the last Red book survey, none of the

manufacturers contacted saw any evidence of a recovery; however, several
now report a definite pickup in orders, while others describe conditions as
"a little better".

For some firms, there has been no improvement; but

among those contacted, even these have no immediate plans for layoffs.
Reports from the retail sector are mixed, with the Christmas season
described as both "outstanding" and "disappointing".

Retail inventories

are said to be lean.
Retailing
Retailers in the First District gave mixed reports on sales in the
Christmas season.

Comparison shopping and competitive pressures increased

the importance of promotional activity, with some adverse effects on profit
margins.

Inventories are generally at satisfactory levels.
One department store in southern New England expressed

disappointment at five percent sales growth in December; widespread
discounting reduced gross margins.

A medium-price chain reported 9 percent

growth for its New England stores in December, a considerably better
performance than their stores elsewhere in the nation.

An appliance and

audio-video electronics chain in the Boston area had an "outstanding
high-teens" increase over last year's sales and an even greater growth in
profits.

The stores with the "outstanding" and "disappointing" sales both

attributed their results to careful comparison shopping.

Store results

were fairly uniform across product lines, although sales of television and
video-related products and kerosene heaters were especially strong.

Sales

were more concentrated in the last few days before Christmas than they were
in previous years.
Inventories are lean, and goods are reported to be available as
needed from suppliers.

Merchants say they are planning for a continuation

of their own recent performance over the next half year, and are stocking
accordingly.
Manufacturing
In marked contrast to last month when no one saw any sign of an
upturn, three or four manufacturers report significant increases in
orders.

Several others report that the decline has stopped and that orders

appear to be a little stronger, but the improvement is too small to be
interpreted as evidence of a recovery.

A few firms see no change for the

better and even further declines in orders and backlogs.

A similar pattern

is apparent in a recent survey of New England purchasing agents.

About

half of the purchasing agents reported that orders and backlogs did not
change in December; however, for the first time in over a year more agents
reported that orders and backlogs increased in the month than reported
decreases.
Among the firms contacted, the most encouraging report came from a
manufacturer of castings.

A spurt in activity in a variety of areas -

defense, automotive and sporting goods - has caused this firm to revise
upwards its profit estimates for 1983 three times.

A manufacturer of home

furnishings has seen a pickup in orders for carpeting; previously this
product was described as a "disaster area".

Sales for furniture and other

housing-related products also seem to be improving.

The other firms

reporting an upturn in sales were machine tool firms, for which the auto
industry is the largest customer.
Firms in which there appears to have been a slight improvement, but
one too weak to be considered evidence of a recovery, include manufacturers
of energy-related capital goods, printing supplies, replacement auto parts,
and optical instruments.

Firms which reported no improvement or further

declines were a supplier of precision materials to basic industries and a
machine tool manufacturer.
The firms contacted were generally satisfied with their inventory
levels; they described their customers' inventories as very low and one
machine tool maker reported that buyers have started to request rapid
delivery.

Most firms do not plan any more layoffs and two of the firms

reporting an upturn have cautiously started to rehire people.

The one auto

assembly plant in New England has recalled half its workforce.
Several firms emphasized how "lean and mean" they had become.

They

expect to enjoy good profits when the recovery gets underway; however,
there is an awareness that other firms are also mean and lean and that
caution in building inventories and rehiring workers will slow the
recovery.

All those contacted expect the recovery to be modest.

However,

several of the firms reporting at least a faint pickup in activity are
capital goods producers and had previously said they did not expect a
recovery in their own operations until the second half of 1983 or later.

Professors Eckstein and Houthakker were available for comment this
month.

Professor Eckstein believes the recovery has begun.

But the

recovery will be weak because, however strongly the other components of GNP
grow, sluggish investment spending, state and local government outlays, and
net exports will restrain overall growth.

This recovery, unlike other

postwar recoveries, will not rekindle inflation, stirring our fears of a
runaway boom.

Both this year and next, Eckstein expects inflation to

average about 5.5 percent.

"The recovery deserves to be nursed."

He

"can't argue for a large decline in short-term interest rates, but bond
rates are much too high."

With low inflation bond yields should fall, but

the problem is to "sustain the recovery with a reasonable management of the
aggregates to avoid frightening the credit markets."
Houthakker has no complaints so far about the course of mometary
policy.

He suggests that the Fed might use some measure of credit as a

guide for policy until Mi's adjustments are complete.
believes the recovery is at hand:
highest of any quarter in 1982 —

Houthakker too

"fourth quarter final sales were the
the increase in final sales is more

important than the decline in GNP."

Despite December's favorable CPI

report ("a fluke"), there appear to be no signs of improvement in the
inflation rate, and one must look very hard to see much improvement in the
rate of wage increases.

Houthakker expects that unit labor costs will rise

2 or 3 percent in 1983.

As a result, inflation could average 3 percent

next year, but 1983's fourth quarter inflation rate may rise to 4 percent.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

In recent weeks, the Second District economy showed a few more signs
of improvement, suggesting it has hit bottom and is beginning to turn up.

The

retail sector experienced moderate gains in December, and January sales
substantially outpaced the year-ago level.

Lower mortgage rates stimulated

home sales and builders were fairly optimistic about prospects for the
spring.

Some new nonresidential construction projects got underway even

though the office market remained soft.

Manufacturing continued to be

generally depressed, but business leaders found some indications that activity
in that sector may be starting to pick up.

In sum, the outlook has brightened

somewhat.
Consumer Spending
Retailers finished December with stronger-than-expected sales, and
the gains continued into the new year.

Heavy promotional efforts helped boost

January's volume substantially over the level of a year ago, when inclement
weather severely depressed activity.

Apparel, housewares, and consumer

electronics all moved well, but big-ticket items like furniture still
attracted little attention.
most stores.

Inventories were generally at desired levels for

Merchants were somewhat cautious about the outlook, but some had

increased their buying plans modestly in anticipation of gains in the spring.
Construction and Real Estate Activity
Additional signs of recovery appeared in the residential real estate
market.

Sales at several large condominium projects were spurred by lower

mortgage rates, as were the sales of existing homes.

Citing a recent increase

in the size of mortgages eligible for Federal insurance, developers announced
plans to construct a large luxury rental building in Manhattan.

The increased

eligibility was also expected to make possible the construction of some
long-planned residential complexes which had experienced financing
difficulties.

District builders were fairly optimistic about the months ahead.

The nonresidential real estate market also improved.

Despite

continuing softness in the office market, ground was broken for two new office
towers, one in downtown New York City and one in Westchester County.
Developers announced plans for other office and mixed use projects, although
no starting dates have been set.

In addition, construction was reported

underway on a new resort development in one upstate New York community and
plans for another are under discussion.

Brokers did not report an increase in

leasing activity but were hopeful that a pickup would materialize soon.
Business Activity
Although the manufacturing sector generally continued to operate at a
very low level, business leaders observed a number of signs that activity may
be starting to pick up.

Several of our contacts were encouraged by the

recalls of automotive workers around the District.

Tool and die producers

were reported to be receiving a rising number of requests for bids.

In other

industries such as instruments and ball bearings, expanding production at some
firms offset small workforce or pay cuts by others.

While the planned

shutdown of a major steel facility in one area threatened to send the local
unemployment rate up sharply, plants in other parts of the District were being
kept open by the transfer of ownership to local management groups or foreign
companies.

The nonmanufacturing sector continued to hold up well.

In

Buffalo, which has been particularly hard-hit by the slump in manufacturing,

the financial and business services industries were doing quite well due to
the area's growth as a regional banking center.
Outlook
Business leaders have begun to sense that the economy has finally hit
bottom and are now hopeful that the recovery will get underway during the
second quarter.

One source of the rising optimism was an increase in average

weekly hours in most of the District.

Our respondents generally believe that

longer workweeks will be followed two or three months from now by increases in
employment.

However, one employment official who forecast an upswing also

expressed concern that the recovery could be weak and short-lived.

As for

capital spending, none of our contacts saw an imminent rebound, but one was
encouraged by the record level of expenditures planned for 1983 by a major
manufacturer in upstate New York.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from David Jones (Aubrey Lanston & Co.),
James O'Leary (U.S. Trust), and Albert Wojnilower (First Boston Corp.)
[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Jones:

The economy appears to be poised for a stronger-than-expected

bounce-back in the early months of 1983.

The recent surge in new orders

provides an upward momentum that will likely be strengthened by rising
consumer demand, paced by spending on autos and housing.

This should, in

turn, trigger the restocking of business inventories, following an excessive
inventory liquidation in the final quarter of 1982.

At the same time,

however, there is a possibility of near-term upward pressure on interest
rates, particularly longer term rates.

This will stem partly from the fact

that a stronger-than-expected recovery and the related step-up in inventory
accumulation will lead to an unanticipated pickup in consumer and business
credit demands.

More immediately, the Federal government's huge borrowing

demands are likely to prove more difficult to manage, particularly if the Fed,
as suggested by recent remarks by Chairman Volcker, moves to reassert monetary
discipline.

The expected near-term spurt in interest rates is likely to

temporarily depress economic activity around mid-year.

This could result in

an uneven recovery pattern in 1983.
0'Leary:

The fear of an ultimate heating up of inflation remains

strong in the fixed-income markets and it is a powerful force toward keeping
real intermediate- and longer term interest rates high.

This fear is nurtured

by the huge Federal deficit and the conviction that political pressures for
economic expansion will cause the Fed to keep credit excessively easy for too
long a time.

The markets are nonetheless impressed that so far the Fed is not

following the feared pattern.
We appear to be in the early stages of a general business recovery,
but until there is clearer recognition that this is in fact the case, it would
be appropriate for the Fed to continue cautiously to encourage lower interest
rates and general business recovery.

By spring or certainly by early summer,

my guess is that the path of recovery will be sure enough that the authorities
should begin to slow down the rate of increase of the monetary base and bank
reserves.

This will provide assurance that the Fed is not going to make the

mistake of staying too long with an expansionary policy.

Hopefully the move

can be made gradually enough to avoid any run-up of short-term rates.
Actually, it should help to reduce long-term rates somewhat further.

Wojnilower:

Anecdotal contacts suggest, even more strongly than do

the fragmentary statistics, that the economy has begun to expand.

With the

exception of capital goods manufacturers, attitudes among business executives
have become distinctly more optimistic.
This improvement in the economic climate, coupled with official and
private statements warning of the danger of re-inflation, has produced
widespread market sentiment that interest rates will not decline much more if
at all.

This makes interest rates prone to sporadic increases until it

becomes clear that the economic recovery will be anemic or, even better from
the standpoint of the bond market participants, nonexistent.

A collapse in

oil prices would be a countervailing force that would significantly depress
interest rates and, in the shorter run, also the economy.

Recent contacts

with individuals having exceptional high-level familiarity with the situation
suggest they share the general uncertainty—and the hope, but also lack of
conviction, that an orderly and sustainable agreement on a lower market price
in the $28 to $30 per barrel range might be reached.

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District reveal an overall improvement in local
economic conditions in January. Area manufacturing has posted minor gains this month
while industrial prices remained stable. Retail sales are doing well, encouraged by
favorable weather conditions and successful promotions. In the financial sector, both
business and consumer loans are up. Mortgage rates have dropped further, bringing new
life to the real estate market.
Third District contacts foresee a slow but sustained recovery for area
business. Upswings in both manufacturing activity and department store sales are
projected by industry spokesmen, but a hint of caution is evident in their plans. Bankers
are expecting further growth in retail loan demand but predict that commercial lending'
will flatten out by midsummer.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
The turnaround in the Third District housing market has continued over the
past two months. With conventional mortgage rates declining to a range of 12.50 to
13.50 percent, sales have firmed up considerably. Following an "almost normal"
December, volume in January is up between 20 to 50 percent on a year-to-year basis.
Most activity is still in the pre-owned home market. As a result, housing starts remain
stalled and new home prices continue to drop. Brokers indicate, however, that a dip in
rates below 12 percent this spring would give sales of new houses a shot in the arm.
MANUFACTURING
Third District manufacturing activity is showing marginal improvement in
January, according to the most recent Business Outlook Survey. New orders posted their
biggest gains since last March, and shipments registered a smaller but significant

increase. On the negative side, local factory employment plunged further this month,
according to the survey, and the average workweek was pared again.
Looking ahead, respondents' prognoses for the economy remain bullish.
Nearly 9 out of 10 of the executives polled in January are forecasting a business pickup
within six months. New orders and shipments are expected to show major improvement
by midsummer, along with factory payrolls and working hours. Light growth in
inventories is still planned, but only marginal capital spending increases are likely.
The slowdown in inflation, evident for most of last year, has carried over into
1983. Survey results indicate that industrial prices in January are unchanged from
December levels. Moreover, inflation is expected to remain at reduced levels for at
least the next six months. Only half of this month's respondents, the lowest portion in
seven years, anticipate higher prices by July for either raw materials or finished goods.
RETAIL
Department store sales in the Third District have gotten off to a flying start
in 1983. Year-to-year sales gains of 15 to 18 percent are reported. Retailers attribute
much of the current strength to unusually cooperative weather and across-the-board
promotional activity. Moreover, current sales are being compared to depressed levels
last January. Nevertheless, sales are much better than merchants had anticipated.
Retail contacts have become slightly more optimistic about future activity.
Sales are projected to maintain their brisk pace into midsummer as consumer sentiment
improves. By July, volume should be 5 to 6 percent over the previous year, resulting in
some real dollar gains if inflation stays low.
Retail inventories have been trimmed again in January. Stock levels are now
well below those of last year and are in better shape than many merchants had

expected. Retailers are still planning "conservatively", though, expecting to keep
inventories tight over the next six months.
FINANCE
Third District lending activity has improved modestly since the last
Redbook. Commercial loans, edging upward since December, are ahead of year-earlier
levels by about 8 percent, and are pretty much in tune with bankers' expectations. On
the consumer side, retail loans have grown slightly again this month. Lower interest
rates and a greater willingness on the part of bankers to lend, have helped boost
consumer loan volume. Area lenders foresee loan activity turning mixed in the near
future. Projections of a slow recovery, increased long-term borrowing by corporations,
and minimal retail and industrial stock levels point to flat activity for commercial loans
over the next six months. Even with such sluggish improvements in economic conditions,
however, consumers' attitudes are expected to improve, encouraging further retail loan
growth.
The prime rate charged by banks in the Third District has been cut to 11.00
percent since the last Redbook. Although they expect the prime to be cut another 50
basis points by the end of the second quarter, banking contacts say the decline in interest
rates is slowing because credit markets are reacting to uncertainties about the direction
of Fed policy.
Deposit flows in the Third District have been significantly affected by the
introduction of the Money Market Deposit Account. Heavy volume in the new account,
termed a "bonanza" by one local banker, has pushed time deposit levels up as much as 30
percent over a year ago. Representatives from several large commercial banks report
that 25 percent to 35 percent of MMDA deposits is new money, attracted from Money
Market Funds and some of the smaller thrift institutions in the District.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Economic conditions remain dismal in the Fourth District but

scattered signs suggest the bottom may be near.
rising.

Unemployment is high and

Leading indicators and survey results suggest manufacturing activity

may have reached its trough.
showing strength.

Parts orders from the automotive industry are

Inventories probably have not yet bottomed.

The steel

industry remains in difficulty, but orders have improved recently.
sales were strong in January, but bank loan demand is mixed.

Retail

Some gains are

reported in construction but farmers continue in difficulty.
Labor Market Conditions.
to rise through December.

Unemployment is extremely high and continued

The December unemployment rate was 14.5 percent

(sa) in Ohio and 12.9 percent in Pennsylvania.

The District's eleven major

SMSAs' unemployment rates (nsa) in November ranged from 9.4 percent in
Columbus to 22.5 percent in Youngstown, and averaged 3.3 percentage points
above the national rate.

Ohio's employment is down 11 percent from a year ago

in durable goods manufacturing and 5 percent in non-durable goods
manufacturing.

Some scattered rehiring is reported in consumer durable goods

industries and primary metals, but additional plant closings continue to be
announced.
Outlook.

Leading indicators suggest a further decline in economic

activity in Pittsburgh but a bottoming in Cleveland.

An index of leading

indicators for the Pittsburgh area registered a tiny increase in November
following 17 consecutive monthly declines.

A similar index for the Cleveland

area drifted down in October and November to a level only slightly above its
April 1982 low.

Manufacturing.

Manufacturing activity may have reached its trough.

This bank's survey of Fourth District manufacturers shows firms expected new
orders and backlogs to increase in January after having been unchanged in
December.

Shipments were expected to rise after having fallen in December.

Inventories were expected to fall after having been unchanged in December.
Employment and hours worked were expected to rise slightly after having fallen
substantially in December.

A survey of Cleveland area purchasing managers

shows new orders are flat while production and employment are falling less
rapidly than a month ago.

The survey shows inventories of raw materials,

supplies, and finished goods continue to decline.
Capital Goods.

Parts orders from the automotive industry are showing

strength but capital goods industries are generally flat, and inventories
probably have bottomed.

A major producer of parts for the capital equipment

industry describes its inventories as "extremely lean" and "below normal even
considering the low level of sales".
further".

The firm says inventories "can't be cut

Rather than rebuild inventories in anticipation of sales, the firm

plans to "scramble to fill orders as they arise".

The need to scramble will

be strongest in auto parts, where demand is coming back sharply, and to a
lesser extent in truck parts.

Heavy duty truck orders bottomed last July and

have been showing some strength in the last few weeks.

In contrast, no

turnaround is in sight for agricultural and construction equipment.

The firm

does expect a turnaround next summer in orders for equipment to manufacture
electronic components for personal computers and defense items, because their
customers' order backlogs are rising now.

The firm is building a bit of

inventory now in anticipation of that summer upturn.

The company will recall

small numbers of employees to its auto parts plants this quarter, and expects
a large increase in employment in a plant that makes defense electronics
equipment.

Another supplier to capital goods producers reports orders are
increasing.

Orders for refrigeration equipment components are up strongly in

the last two months to 40 percent above the year-ago level.

Orders for

gaskets and seals for transportation and non-electrical machinery are also up
in the last two months.

A division that supplies the machine tool industry

remains flat at a very low level.
aerospace remain flat.

Orders for automotive aftermarket and

Inventories will be increased some in the two

divisions with strong orders but this will be more than offset by continued
reductions of inventories in the other lines.
A major producer of bearings reports a modest upturn in orders in the
last three to four weeks, most notably from the automobile industry but some
also from other industries.

Nevertheless the firm will continue to reduce

inventories this quarter, although at a slower pace than in fourth quarter.
The firm expects their employment to be flat this quarter.
Steel.

The steel industry remains in great difficulty.

Producers

continue to operate at very low rates and to report large losses.

In

continuing efforts to cut costs, additional production facilities have been
closed, and a major firm has imposed its second 5% cut in non-union salaries
in seven months.

However, signs of improvement in orders and production have

surfaced in recent weeks.

A large steel producer that has been operating at

only 30 percent of capacity reports a late January surge in orders from the
automobile and construction industries at a rate equivalent to 60 percent of
operating capacity.
Retail Sales.
sales.

A major department store chain reports strong January

The firm's real sales are up about 2 1/2 percent (quarterly rate) in

the November-January fourth fiscal quarter from the third quarter.

January

sales apparently held at the November-December level, without seasonal

adjustment and without unusual promotions.

The retailer views this

development as a "fundamental upswing" in demand.

The chain's inventories are

lean in all lines and the ratio of inventory to sales is lower than anytime
since early 1981.

No inventory building is planned for first quarter but

there may be an unplanned inventory runoff if their suppliers can't keep pace
with sales.
Agriculture.

Farmers continue in difficulty.

An estimated 5% of Ohio

farmers are on the brink of bankruptcy or foreclosure because of low crop
prices, high interest rates, and falling land prices.

Another 5% are in

difficulty but are being carried by their lenders, and another 15% will be in
similar difficulty if low crop prices persist this year.

Two directors

express concern that the proposed crop swap program would hurt livestock
producers and suppliers of agricultural fertilizers, pesticides, seed, and
machinery.
Construction.
reported.
homes.

Some pickup in house sales and construction is

The stock market rise has strengthened the market for second

A construction company reports increased contracts and requests for

bids on $25 - 100 million size projects for local governments.
Commercial Banking.

Loan demand is mixed.

A large Cleveland bank

reports a decrease in commercial loan demand in the last eight weeks, but
lending officers expect improvement.

Residential mortgage lending is showing

a very small increase recently, but consumer lending is flat.

Smaller banks

report increases in consumer loan demand in response to lower interest rates.
Banks in Cleveland have aggressively marketed the money market demand account
and are having a strong response, but marketing of the Super-NOW account has
not been aggressive.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND
Overview
Once again, there was little change in Fifth District business
and economic conditions over the month, although reports vary from area
to area and from sector to sector.

Overall, the manufacturing sector

softened somewhat with new orders and order backlogs down slightly, but
with inventories down significantly.

On the other hand, retail sales

activity has apparently firmed in recent weeks, although this improvement
is not evident everywhere in the District.

Reports further suggest that

the housing industry, and the construction sector more generally, is
continuing to make modest gains in both construction and sales.

Loan

demand is steady generally, but with residential mortgages doing better
than other categories.

Expectations are neutral to positive.

If there

is any consensus, it seems to be that improvement is on the way but not
immediately, perhaps in the second quarter.

The Manufacturing Sector
The past several weeks have been a mixed bag for Fifth District
manufacturing establishments.

On balance, new orders, order backlogs,

the length of the average work week, and material inventories declined
slightly.

Finished goods on hand and employment were down broadly while

shipments rose narrowly.

Inventories and current plant and equipment

capacity remain well above desired levels at a number of the establishments surveyed.

Prices continued generally stable, although several

respondents report receiving lower prices compared to last month.
There is no clear pattern of performance by industry or area.
It appears, however, that the building materials and textile sectors
may have done somewhat better than average while the primary metals group

seems to have fared slightly worse.

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending appears to have strengthened in recent weeks
although there are spots of continued weakness.

The strength that exists

appears to be primarily in general merchandise lines and, in some cases,
automobiles.

There is little evidence of any pickup in non-auto consumer

durables.
One respondent suggested that retail activity had definitely
picked up in his area, but that an unusually large portion of sales was
for cash.

Consumer credit

was not keeping pace.

activity, and particularly installment lending

Another respondent remarked, however, that in his

area sales continued weak and that consumer savings' activity was up
markedly.

Housing and Construction
The preponderance of evidence suggests that the housing recovery
in the District is continuing, but that the pace has moderated in the
past few weeks.

It seems likely that inadequate allowance for seasonal

factors may be at fault.

Most reports continue to indicate the commercial

and industrial sectors are much improved.

The Financial Sector
Lending activity, apart from residential mortgages, is showing
few signs of life according to our respondents in the financial sector.
Short-term business loans are stagnant and expected to remain that way
over at least the rest of the first quarter.

The same is essentially true

for consumer lending except that there is some expectation of a modest
improvement over the near term.

Expectations
Looking out over the next six months, most of our respondents
are quite positive in their expectations.

A large majority of manufac-

tures surveyed, for instance, expect improvement nationally, locally,
and in their respective firms over that period.
enthusiastic, but generally positive.
in these expectations.

Retailers are less

The time frame appears critical

Respondents in the financial sector foresee

little increase in loan activity this quarter, but look

forward to a

consumer and mortgage lending pickup in the April-June quarter.

Even

then, however, there is little expectation of significant improvement
in business lending.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Signs of recovery in the Southeast remain sporadic, but most respondents
foresee imminent improvement. Banks and thrifts are not losing funds deposited in
new money market accounts despite mid-January rate reductions. The retail sector
shows ongoing strength since the holidays. Sustained upward trends in construction are
generating resurgence in some housing-related industries, but the clouded situation in
agriculture is adversely affecting farm-related manufacturing. The upturn in tourism
is localized, but industry spokesmen convey a strong conviction that broad improvement
is forthcoming. A review of the economic prospects of individual southeastern states
will appear in the February issue of this Bank's Economic Review.
Employment and Industry. Manufacturing evidences intermittent signs of
improvement, but widespread concern over employment persists. Orders at regional
carpet mills are rising substantially relative to this time last year, and executives
expect an excellent second half. Textile manufacturers, however, are more cautious.
Fearing a sudden reversal of economic conditions, they are lengthening hours rather
than recalling laid-off workers. Wood producers report a slight increase in orders and
express encouragement regarding declining interest rates, but few have plans to expand
capacity unless more signs of sustained recovery appear. Inventory depletions have
spurred the recall of 700 workers at an Alabama steel mill, but 1,000 remain on
indefinite layoff, and a Louisiana aluminum plant will close this week, idling 550 workers.
The unemployment rate in two states declined in December but rose in three others,
including Florida, where it now approaches the double-digit level prevalent in every
other District state except Georgia.
Conditions in the chemical industry are more uniformly negative. The
industry's inventory-to-sales ratio has recently edged higher; domestic producers fear

serious encroachment of market share by low-cost, foreign imports; and federal programs
to reduce farm acreage are likely to diminish demand for fertilizer even further.
Fertilizer plants in Louisiana and Tennessee and phosphate mines in Florida furloughed
still more workers in January.
Consumer Spending. Our most recent survey of District retailers indicates
healthy conditions in this sector. Taut holiday season inventories and brisk sales,
relative to last year and to the nation, are responsible for depleting stocks of
merchandise. January sales were better than expected. In particular, some retailers
report that resurgence in the housing market is stimulating purchases of furniture and
appliances. Respondents expect slow gains in sales this quarter but an acceleration in
the spring. January auto sales grew faster in the District than in the nation. Despite
this performance, competitive pressures have led regional dealers to reduce auto loan
rates to 5.9-6.9 percent and even as low as 2.9 percent. Although such financing
requires a hefty 25-30 percent downpayment, it is reportedly stimulating floor
traffic and purchases.

Construction. Mortgage activity appears lively. Realtors report a marked
increase in traffic and sales during the last two months, reflecting perhaps some release
of the "pent-up" demand for houses. Lower rates are attracting a greater number of
first-time, middle-income buyers and are reducing activity in adjustable mortgage loans
(AMLs). Demand is strongest for conventional, fixed-rate, 30-year loans, rates of which
currently range from 12 3/4 to 14 percent. Consumers are seeking to "lock in" lower
rates out of fear that they may rise again, and, in fact, conventional mortgage rates
are edging back up. Thrift officers report that discount points on FHA and VA loans
have jumped several points over the last two to three weeks, reaching as high as nine
points in the last week of January. If rates stabilize at current levels, realtors and

thrift officers anticipate an overall increase of 25-30 percent in mortgage activity
through the spring.
A survey of building permit departments indicates that issuances of singlefamily building permits continued to improve during January. Builders that "haven't
been seen in a year" are now paying for permits. Still, some of the district's local
economies remain in the doldrums. Columbus reports no changes in permit activity,
and Chattanooga contacts observe that recovery is just beginning. Construction activity
is probably most depressed in Birmingham, especially in the suburbs; some building
inspectors have been laid off. Commercial permit activity remains unchanged in most
of the District.
Tourism. A survey of industry representatives reveals little change in
conditions other than seasonal declines during December and January. Convention travel
remains soft. Lodgings spokesmen expect a sluggish first quarter but hope for national
economic recovery to trigger local improvement by the second half at least. Yearend increases in air passenger traffic of major District-based carriers are more the
consequence of discounted fares, which have reduced profit margins, than of incipient
economic turnaround^ Still, airline officials report that advance bookings are running
substantially ahead of this time last year. EPCOT remains the bright spot, but its
benefits have yet to extend beyond Orlando to Miami and south Florida.
Agriculture. An unusually heavy harvest volume has contributed to a downturn
in Florida's citrus prices. Late December flooding in Louisiana and Mississippi did
little damage to winter wheat crops. The District's winter wheat acreage is down 9
percent from last year but remains well above previous years. Participation in the
new Payment-in-Kind and other acreage reduction programs is not likely to reduce
production significantly because farmers tend to idle marginal, low-yield lands. With
existing large stocks, the small production decline may not result in substantial price

strengthening. In January egg prices rebounded 7 percent from their 8-year low in
mid-summer. Price stabilization and declining feed costs augur better returns for
poultry producers this year. Recent hog price strength reflects continuing small supplies
of pork. However, increases in breeding stock and farrowing intentions suggest that
an expansion of supply is beginning. Lower feed costs and higher prices portend a
second consecutive year of profits for hog farmers in 1983.
Finance. A survey of banks and thrifts in the District indicates little
attrition in money market deposit accounts after the expiration of the original premium
offers on January 13 and 14, 1983. All organizations contacted express amazement at
the inertia surrounding the accounts in view of the sharp drop in rates from over 20
percent in some cases to 8?-10 percent currently. In addition, institutions polled report
that consumers have little interest in the Super NOW accounts. Only half of the
institutions contacted are offering the Super NOWs, and most of these are doing little
or no advertising to boost them.
Panel of Economists. The majority of economists polled endorse the Federal
Reserve's monetary policy of paying less regard to Ml because of technical factors.
Most business economists on the panel regard Ml as an unreliable measure. Only a
few state forecasters express concern that recent rates of money supply growth could
rekindle inflation. Respondents hold no consensus regarding projected 1983 GNP growth
although none is strongly optimistic. A narrow majority of the panel doubts that the
recession reached its nadir in the fourth quarter of 1982, but most see at least some
signs of recovery. Panelists most frequently cite construction and auto sales as sectors
exhibiting signs of recovery, but improvement appears uneven across the District.
Respondents expect Georgia, Florida, and Mississippi to surpass or at least equal the
nation's rate of rebound; they expect Tennessee, Alabama, and Louisiana to recover at
a slower and weaker pace.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

The fourth quarter brought further declines in economic

activity in the Seventh District, but some faintly encouraging developments
began late in 1982 and have continued in January.

The overall decline in

employment appears to be levelling off and some callbacks of laid-off workers
have been announced, principally in the automotive sector.
improved modestly, from a record low.

Steel orders have

Residential activity has been

improving, from a very depressed level, and the uptrend is expected to continue.

Scattered defense orders are helping some hard-pressed companies.

Inventory liquidation appears to be coming to an end with some rebuilding in
prospect.

Discounted prices are firming up in some wholesale markets.

Finally, unusually mild winter weather has boosted morale, held down heating
bills, and permitted pouring of foundations for new housing in January—a most
unusual development.
On the negative side, the record slump in producer goods demand is still
underway with no recovery in sight.

An unusual number of business activities

are being liquidated—factories, retail stores, and trucking operations.

New

hiring remains at a very low rate.

State and local governments are grappling

with unprecedented budget deficits.

Agriculture, plagued with low prices and

a huge overhang of crops, faces another bleak year, but PIK introduces a more
optimistic outlook for 1984.
Mild Weather.

Through mid-January, heating degree days in major District

centers have been about 20 percent below last year and 12 percent below normal
(the average for 1940-70).

Milder weather has about offset increases in

natural gas and electricity prices for most users.

Nevertheless, many house-

holds are delinquent on utility bills, and there are strong pressures to

provide subsidies and/or stop shutoffs of service.

The absence of the extreme

cold and storms of most recent years may cause some seasonally-adjusted data
to appear strong.
Inflation.

During the past year, wholesale prices have been discounted

over a broad range of items, heavily in some cases such as steel.
producers must raise prices if they are to remain in business.
concessions, labor costs continue to rise.
affected by short production runs.

Many

Despite some

Productivity has been adversely

Gasoline and heating oil prices continue

to soften, but some wholesale prices are beginning to "firm up", most notably
residential building materials.

Because most list prices have remained

stable, it is probable that neither the discounting of prices nor the recent
firming will be fully reflected in the price indexes.
Employment.

In late 1982 total payroll employment was the lowest since

1975 in Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa, and the lowest since 1971 in Michigan.
Manufacturing employment was the lowest since 1940 in Illinois and Michigan,
and the lowest since 1949 in Indiana.

The decline in employment appears to

have slowed, and there have been scattered callbacks of laid-off workers.
Many plants will stretch work weeks rather than hire workers if demand increases.

Reductions in force are still being announced in usually stable

sectors, such as public utilities, hospitals, insurance, and state/local
government.

Companies that have drastically cut overhead staff to lower

breakeven points will be reluctant to rehire, even if work pressures build up.
Steel.

Orders for steel have increased somewhat in the past several

weeks, mainly from the auto sector.

Inventories of steel users are low and

their operations depend on very short delivery schedules.

Steel mill

operating rates have improved, but remain below breakeven points.

Motor Vehicles.

First-quarter passenger car production schedules are

one-third above last year, and light truck schedules are up moderately.
Orders to suppliers have increased—steel, engines, tires, moldings, and
fasteners etc.

Demand for full-sized, fully-equipped models has increased to

the point that some models are in short supply, but production must be limited
to satisfy CAFE ratios.
Capital Goods.

It looks like a bad year for machinery and equipment of

virtually all types, for many the worst since the 1930s.

Operating rates are

so low at some plants that work cannot be scheduled efficiently.

There is a

large supply of finished mobile equipment for agriculture, construction, and
transportation, and much used equipment is idle and available for purchase.
Some diversified capital goods producers have shrunk operations to small
fractions of peak levels and plants are still being closed and dismantled.
Some historically strong companies that have defaulted on debts hope for a
pickup in demand to avoid formal bankruptcy.
Construction.

Home building has been trending upward for several months

and the rise is expected to continue.

Favorable weather is permitting con-

struction to proceed at an unusual pace.
unsold units.

There is no significant inventory of

Nonresidential construction will be down significantly this

year.
Consumer Purchases.

Auto sales have increased in the past two months.

Partly this reflects more favorable finance terms, but dealers say that the
underlying tone of the market has improved.

General merchandise sales,

especially apparel, have been hurt by unseasonably warm weather.

Never-

theless, there was little overhang of goods at retail because merchants had
been ordering very cautiously for the past six months.

A life insurance

company reports that one-third of the funds withdrawn recently by policy
holders have been used to pay living expenses.
Government.

All five district states have serious budget problems.

Michigan, particularly, is in desperate straits.

Revenues have fallen below

expectations, federal grants have been reduced, income support burdens have
increased, and various essential public works projects are scheduled.

In some

states with constitutions forbidding deficits, accounting subterfuges have
hidden the extent of the problem.
be, raised.

Income and sales taxes have been, or will

Scheduled property tax relief may be postponed.

municipal services, including schools, must be slashed.

State grants for

With municipal unions

attempting to increase or maintain salary scales, further personnel cuts are
probable.

In summary, the state and local sector will be a drag on any

recovery in the private economy in 1983.
Agriculture.

Conditions are still very depressed in agriculture.

However, the recently announced "payment in kind" (PIK) program provides
optimism for the longer-term perspective.

A high level of participation in

PIK and other programs limiting crop acreage is expected.

With acreage

reduced substantially, marked declines will occur in farm purchases of seeds,
fuel, fertilizer, and pesticides.

The price response this year to reduced

acreage may be limited, but with far more farmers eligible for price support
benefits, cash income in 1984 is expected to improve considerably.
District farmland values continued to erode in the fourth quarter.

Since

the downturn began in the fall of 1981, values have declined nearly a fifth to
the levels of the late 1970s.
volume.

Farm real estate transactions remain at a low

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Economic activity in the Eighth District showed signs of
improvement during December and January.

Consumer spending increased,

continuing a trend that began last fall.

Industrial production and

employment changed little on balance from earlier depressed levels, but a
few manufacturing firms reported that orders began to strengthen around the
turn of the year.

Some businessmen have become more optimistic about

economic developments in 1983, noting the recent improvement in sales, an
accompanying decline in inventories, greater after-tax incomes, lower
interest rates and more stable prices.
Within the District, economic activity has varied.

According to

Southwestern Bell's index (based on measures of employment, trade and
construction), business activity in Arkansas recently was 4.3 percent below
year-ago levels, while in Missouri activity changed only slightly.

In

Arkansas, a relatively large share of the work force is engaged in
manufacturing, which was severely affected by the recession, but in
Missouri employment is more diversified in trade, transportation, public
utilities, financial services and government.
Automobile sales in the District have been relatively strong.

Six

of eight dealers reported sales improvement in December and early January.
At two large dealers, sales in December were the best for that month in
over 10 years, with year-over-year jumps of 27 and 25 percent.

Both the

larger American cars and smaller foreign cars have been moving well, and

one dealer reported that used car sales were particularly vigorous.

Two

dealers added salesmen and repairmen to handle the increased volume.
Sales in the District also increased for both new and existing
homes during December and early January, according to respondents.

One

realtor noted that, once a house sells, another sale is stimulated, since
the seller then has funds and needs a place to live.

Sales of new homes in

the St. Louis area were 66 percent higher in early January than in the like
period last year, but were still about half of normal, according to the St.
Louis Homebuilders Association.
Sales at major department stores in the Eighth District were 6.2
percent larger in December than in December 1981, a gain of about 2.5
percent after adjusting for merchandise price increases.

Some smaller

clothing stores and outlets specializing in automobile and tractor parts
experienced even larger year-over-year gains.

In the first four weeks

after Christmas, sales at major department stores, aided by unseasonally
good weather, were about 9 percent higher than during the corresponding
year-earlier period.

Two restaurant chains also reported relatively large

receipts in December and early January.
Performance in the industrial sector has been mixed.

Firms

producing industrial equipment, chemicals, wood products and metals had
slightly lower orders, production and shipments in December and early
January than in the fall.

On the other hand, firms producing consumer

durables, defense goods, shoes, food, synthetic fibers, paper and boxes
noted an increase in activity.

Orders and shipments rose faster than

production at a number of firms, and inventories declined.

Most capital

spending plans were unchanged in December and January, but a few companies
stretched out completion dates.

Federal Express set records in December

for the number of packages handled.

A company dealing in motivational

programs for businesses reported an increase in new accounts, usually an
indicator that business will improve.
The efficiency of many industrial firms improved during the
recession, permitting them to remain profitable at relatively low levels of
operation.

Break-even points were reduced by pruning excess personnel,

closing marginal facilities, liquidating unprofitable lines and applying
stringent cost controls.

As sales pick up, profits are expected to rise

rapidly.
At most businesses in the District, employment was reported to be
virtually unchanged since early December.
to trim staffs through attrition.

A few firms, however, continued

In addition, International Paper laid

off 200 woodhaulers, a steel foundry idled 500 workers, and Pyro Energy
laid off 250 coal miners.

On the other hand, International Harvester

recalled 800 workers at a foundry in Louisville, American Greeting Card Co.
hired 300 workers in Arkansas, and Carrier Air Conditioner brought back 700
employees in the Memphis area.

Chrysler and General Motors announced plans

to hire 3,2 00 and 900 employees, respectively, in the St. Louis area.
According to a private consulting group, over two-thirds of the firms
surveyed paid a holiday or year-end bonus to employees even though in many
cases profits had declined.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Signs

of

recovery

continue

to

appear

in the Ninth District.

In

December and January, consumers increased their spending on homes, autos, and
general merchandise

and were willing to

spend on winter recreation.

This

spending sustained the revival in lumbering and in some manufacturing industries.

In addition, good prospects are now reported for some district com-

puter manufacturers, and other manufacturers seem to think the worst is behind
them.

Unfortunately, significant parts of the district econony have yet to

get any relief.
were

cutting

back

In January, manufacturers
operations,

and

metal

another round of layoffs and shutdowns.

supplying industrial goods still
mining

continued

to

totter

from

The Administration's new farm program

might bolster farm income in the future, but at year-end it was reportedly
down from a year earlier in most of the district.

Furthermore, bank lending

remained weak in January, which indicates that, overall, the district economy
has not yet begun to recover.

Consumer Spending
The most convincing signs of recovery in our last Redbook report were
pickups

in home and auto sales, and these sales have continued to

expand.

According to the Minneapolis Board of Realtors, home sales in Minneapolis and
its suburbs were up 16 percent from a year earlier in the fourth quarter and
remained better than a year ago in early January.
managers

for the nation's two largest auto manufacturers

December sales were up around 3 5
January

Likewise, regional sales
report that

their

percent from a year earlier and their early

sales were greater than a year ago.

This Bank's directors confirm

these sales gains; they say that home and auto sales in their communities have
been good recently.
General merchandise

sales also

have continued

to improve.

After

sales revived in October, a post-Thanksgiving slung) threatened the recovery,
and retailers hoped that a late December sales spurt would let them better
their 1981 holiday sales.

They were not disappointed.

Two large Minneapolis-

St. Paul department stores report that their December sales were up about J
percent

from a year earlier.

their early January sales.

In addition, both retailers are pleased with

According to a Montana director, sales of general

merchandise have been good recently in his state too.
Consumers
Montana, where

have

been

spending

on winter

recreation

as well.

In

snow arrived early, the last really good ski season was in

197^-75, and according

to the Montana

Department

of Tourism,

the

1982-83

season should top it.

In Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin, and the Upper

Peninsula of Michigan, snow didn't arrive in many areas until late December,
so the ski season got off to a late start.
operators
good.

report brisk business

But where there is snow, ski area

in January, and they

expect

it to remain

In late February, for example, the Birkebeiner cross-country ski race

in northwestern Wisconsin is expected to draw a record 8,000 participants, and
all available lodging within two hours of the race site is alreacty- reserved.

Industrial Activity
Our last Redbook report noted that the pickup in consumer spending
had just started to carry over into the industrial sector, and this transfer
has continued.

Reflecting

recent

mills have either resumed or

increases

in home sales, several lumber

stepped up their operations, a Montana labor

market analyst reports.

And large manufacturers of residential temperature

controls and windows report that their recent orders have been about 15 percent ahead of a year earlier.
Prospects appear to be good for some other district manufacturers
too.
Paul
year.

Due primarily to increases in defense orders, a large Minneapolis-St.
computer manufacturer

plans

to hire an additional

1,200 people

this

Due to increases in commercial orders, another computer manufacturer

plans to expand its work

force 8 to 10 percent this year.

The district's

largest computer manufacturer, whose sales of computer accessories suffered
last year, reports that a turnaround

looks near:

declining but have not yet begun to increase.

its sales have

stopped

A large manufacturer of house-

wares and another of adhesives and packaging materials voice similar views.
District

manufacturers

declining business.

supplying

industrial goods, however, report

A Minneapolis-St. Paul manufacturer of industrial filters

says business has been soft lately, and this firm has continued to lay off
workers.

A southern Minnesota manufacturer of electric generators laid off 71

workers in January.

In Michigan's Upper Peninsula, a manufacturer of heavy

construction equipment, which once employed 2,000 workers, laid off its remaining 200 workers when it permanently shut down in January.
Recent

developments

in metal mining have not been hopeful either.

Our last Redbook report noted that two iron mining companies were planning to
recall workers in early 1983, but these recalls have been largely offset by
recent layoffs.

The closing of Bethlehem Steel's Lackawanna, New York, facil-

ities resulted in 900 Minnesota iron miners being laid off for eleven weeks.
In the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, another 700 iron miners were laid off in

January.

Also, the Upper

Peninsula's one large copper mine remained

shut

down, and the Anaconda Company announced that it would permanently cease all
copper mining in Montana by June 30, which will idle 700 workers.

Agricultural Conditions
The recovery

has continued to evade the farm sector too.

Of the

bankers responding to our late December Agricultural Credit Conditions Survey,
8l percent said that farm income in their communities was less than a year
earlier in the fourth quarter of 1 9 8 2 .
The new payment-in-kind
relief to district farmers.

(PIK) program, however,

should bring

some

Much of the farm income decline stems from large

stocks of farm commodities depressing prices.

In Minnesota, for example, corn

stocks currently are at a record level and are up 27 percent from a year
ago.

The PIK program is designed to reduce stocks by decreasing plantings and

paying farmers in commodities.

The program may not raise prices much until

1984, but the grain that farmers will receive and the production expenses they
will save should boost their 1983 income.

PIK, however, could reduce farmers'

purchases of seed, fertilizer, and other production inputs this year.
The more farmers participate in it, the more the PIK program will
reduce stocks and eventually raise prices, and participation in the district
may be quite high.

In Minnesota's second largest corn-producing county, for

example, officials estimate that farmers controlling 80 to 90 percent of the
corn acreage will be enrolled in the PIK program.

This is about twice the

participation in last year's program, which was only U3 percent.

Financial Conditions
Although signs of recovery continue to appear, bank lending has yet
to reflect any overall recovery in the district economy.

In January, bank

loans at both city and country banks were essentially unchanged from their
weak December levels.

At city banks, this weakness stemmed from the slack in

overall business activity, and at country banks it resulted from poor agricultural conditions.
Agricultural

Forty-four percent of the bankers responding to our latest

Credit

deposit ratio low.

Conditions

Survey

considered

their

year-end

loan-to-

Furthermore, much of the recent loan demand at rural banks

has not been for new credit, but rather to refinance debt that farmers can't
repay.

Seventy-eight

percent

of

the

survey's

respondents

indicated

that

demand for farm debt refinancing was greater than normal in the fourth quarter.

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Business firms in the Tenth District are expecting a slow

recovery to get underway during the second or third quarter of 1983.
stable prices are expected to rise slightly as 1983 moves along.
are generally lean and are likely to remain so in the near future.

Recent

Inventories
Farmers

and agricultural lenders are somewhat more optimistic about conditions in
the agricultural sector, due partly to the expected response to the newly
announced farm program.

Loan demand at commercial banks is generally flat,

while deposit growth is up because of strong growth in the new money market
deposit accounts.
Retail Trade.

All respondents indicate that nominal sales for 1982 as a

whole were slightly higher (5 percent or less) than those in 1981.

Sales in

the final quarter of 1982 were between 5 and 10 percent higher than a year
earlier.

The strength in retail sales has come mainly in soft goods, with big-

ticket items still very weak.

Prices, which were stable during the last three

months of 1982, are expected to remain stable or rise slightly in 1983.
Retailers seem to be generally satisfied with the low level of their inventories.
They expect sales to be sluggish in the first half of 1983 and to improve
slowly after that.
Purchasing Agents.

All purchasing agents report that prices of a wide

range of materials inputs (e.g., steel, aluminum, rubber, plastics) have
stabilized over the past three months.

Agents expect prices to remain stable,

inputs to remain accessible, and lead times to remain short during the first
quarter of 1983.

With the economy expected to pick up in the second quarter,

firms anticipate suppliers may reestablish previously rescinded price hikes

and eliminate current discounts.
and longer lead times.

They also anticipate some spot shortages

Thus far, however, purchasing agents are not expanding

inventories to accommodate the increase in demand they foresee.
Automobile Dealers.

Automobile dealers are guardedly optimistic about

the chance for increases in auto sales during the next few months.

November

1982 was reported as a very good month, but sales were flat to only slightly
higher in December 1982.

Despite trim inventory levels and lower interest

rates, there has been no rush to greatly expand stocks.

Some dealers remain

fearful of the potential adverse impact on interest rates of looming large
federal deficits.
Agriculture.

Cattle feeders are currently doing well and making a

profit, according to Tenth District bankers.

Winter wheat conditions in the

southern part of the District are poor-to-fai'r, and little grazing of cattle
is reported.

Bankers and farm borrowers are enthusiastic about the 1983

Payment-In-Kind (PIK) program, with high participation anticipated.

District

bankers report that some nonfarm rural businesses view the PIK program as just
another government subsidy, and are concerned about its negative impact on
demand for the products and services they sell to farmers.

Others look forward

to an improved farm economy as a means to helping their own financial situation.
Loan paydowns by District farmers on their agricultural production loans have
generally been disappointing.

Bankers in some areas of the District report an

80 percent loan rollover rate with 60 percent of the farm borrowers making small
and/or slow paydowns.

Many farmers have sold their crops at prices below the

cost of production to generate cash flow, rather than holding the crop in
anticipation of improved prices.

Although 1983 has not yet revealed evidence

of improved conditions for the agricultural sector, a more optimistic mood by
farmers and lenders is beginning to build.
Banking.
District.

Loan demand is reported to be generally flat in the Tenth

Demand for real estate loans is up slightly, but demand for

consumer, agricultural, and commercial and industrial loans is flat.
Virtually all respondents indicate that loan quality is stable, although one
banker reports a rising number of defaults on energy-related loans.
Prime rates charged by the banks surveyed vary from 11 to 14 percent,
with most falling in the 11-12 percent range.
basis points since last month.

Rates have fallen around 50

Roughly half of the bankers surveyed expect a

further decline of 50 basis points in coming weeks while the other half expect
no change.
Deposit growth is up at Tenth District banks, due in large part to
strong growth of the new money market deposit accounts.

Demand deposits are

steady to slightly up, while conventional NOW accounts are steady to slightly
down.

Large CD's and money market and small saver certificates are down somewhat.
All of the banks surveyed are offering the new money market deposit

account and the new Super-NOW account.

Public response to the former is

characterized as strong, while response to the latter is characterized as weak.
Three explanations are given for the apathetic response to the Super-NOW account:
weak promotional campaigns, consumer confusion, and competitive superiority of
the money market deposit account (higher yield, lower service charge).

Bankers

report that as much as 60 percent of the funds flowing into money market deposit
accounts are coming from outside their institutions.
a much lower percentage for Super-NOW accounts.

Preliminary data suggest

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

Overall, the Eleventh District has shown little change since the
last Redbook, but

some movements have occurred.

Growth

in residential

construction, auto sales, defense contracting, and electronics

equipment

manufacture has continued, as have declines in office building, and total
manufacturing.

Oil and gas drilling resumed

November and December.

its decline after rising in

Texas' unemployment rate remains high for Texas,

but well below that of the nation.
In residential construction, builders are increasing inventories
in anticipation of strong Spring demand.

More permits for single family

homes were let in the fourth quarter of 1982 than in any comparable period
since the late 1970's.
later this year.

But builders fear an increase in interest rates

Apartment construction is climbing in some areas but is

slow in others.
Domestic auto dealers report that December's healthy sales pace
is holding

and

they

expect

it

to

continue

into

the

second

quarter.

Inventories stand at desired levels and traffic is good for new domestic
autos.

Sales of imports and used cars remain low.
Retailers

are

cautious

for Spring, budgeting

below last year's unspectacular sales volumes.
but

profits

are

below

promotions and discounts.

expectations

to meet or fall

Inventories remain on plan,

because

of

forced

increases

in

Sales of consumer durables are flat but expected

to rise in the wake of housing market growth.

Credit sales as a proportion

of total sales are above a year earlier.
S&L's attribute their increases in total deposits to the Money
Market

Deposit

Account

(MMDA).

Some

of

these

deposits

are

clearly

temporary, though, attracted by high introductory rates.

S&L rates on MMDA

and Super NOW accounts are 1.5 to 2.0 percentage points above comparable
commercial bank rates.

S&L's plan to invest heavily in residential and

commercial

chiefly

real

residential

estate,

mortgage

loans

in Texas.

and

Demand

interim

remains

construction

strong

financing

for
for

residential developments.
All
increases

in

Seasonally

deposit

categories

December,

adjusted

but

demand

at

most

of

deposits

commercial
the
and

banks

growth
large

was

time

showed
only

savings deposits.

seasonal.

deposits

declined, but their fall was more than offset by a whopping

strong

actually

increase in

Total loans grew slightly thanks, largely, to a big jump

in real estate loans.

Loans to business fell.

The Texas drilling rig count showed a normal seasonal decline in
January,

following

increases

in

February decline won't be merely

the

fourth

quarter.

An

anticipated

seasonal, though, but will reflect the

slow pace of economic recovery and the uncertain outlook for oil prices.
Manufacturing production continues to decline, but there are some
signs of recovery.
Sales

of

some

A General Motors assembly plant recalled 600 workers.

defense

and

some

consumer

electronics

are

although demand for industrial electronics remains depressed.
of defense electronics

doing

well,

Production

should increase on schedule as manufacturers here

expect to remain unaffected by defense cuts.
mills is low and output levels unprofitable.

Capacity utilization at steel
Sales of construction steel

are level and respondents expect declines later this year.

Suppliers to

the drilling industry report a slight uptick in drill bit sales in January,
but sales of other drilling-related products remain low and inventories are

excessive.

Export

sales

are

a

source of strength

because drilling

has

declined less abroad than in the United States.
The Texas labor market changed little in December.

At 8 percent,

the state's unemployment rate hovered in an area where it has remained for
several

months.

Nonagricultural

employment

retail trade, oil and gas extraction,

and

did

lumber

increase
and wood

slightly
products

and
were

among the stronger gainers.
According to a survey of Eleventh District agricultural
about

bankers,

twice the number of farmers who normally go out of business in the

second half of a year went out of business
This departure rate is expected
months, as farm loans mature.

in the second half

of 1982.

to increase still more in the next three

TWELFTH DISTRICT ~

SAN FRANCISCO

The economy of the Twelfth District remains depressed, with unemployment
rates above the national average, but for the first time in several months
there are a few signs of cautious optimism.

Automobile and home sales are up,

for example, and there are reports of increased retail sales activity".

The

overall picture remains bleak, however, with the region's major sectors still
deeply depressed.

Depository institutions are actively pursuing their newly

acquired deposit-taking powers and aggressively promoting the accounts with
above-market deposit rates and special bonuses.

These developments have

increased overall costs of funds by between 25 and 100 basis points according
to a special survey by this Bank.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales appear to be picking up slightly in some areas, even after
accounting for inflation.

In California's Central Valley, for example, one

sales report suggested a 9 percent increase over the year, and in the Los
Angeles area, sales in November, December, and the first week of January were
up 8, 7, and 13 percent respectively over the year before.

Retail sales of

franchise operations are generally reported to be up slightly or flat, and
there are some reports of active automobile sales.

The tempo of retail

activity varies considerably, however, with the Pacific Northwest generally
reporting the most persistent weakness in consumer enthusiasm.

Manufacturing and Mining
The picture in this sector continues to be dominated by the extremely
weak lumber industry.

Although lumber inventories have declined with

concomitant firming of lumber and plywood prices in December, there has been
no general surge in demand as would be required to rescue an industry in deep
recession.

(The Oregon State Homebuilders Association reported the lowest

number of housing starts in 1982 in their history.)

Mining remains w e a k —

particularly copper and coal—but now that silver prices have gone above $11
an ounce some of the mines in North Idaho are reopening.

Aerospace presents a

mixed picture, with relatively strong reports from Southern California, but
with the continued weakness of Boeing's commercial aircraft business retarding
this activity in the state of Washington.

Despite offsetting growth in

military-related employment, observers expect Boeing employment to be down by
a net of 8,000 workers for 1983.

The electronics industry in California and

the Pacific Northwest remains weakened by foreign competition and
disappointing domestic demand growth.

Primary metals manufacture and

fabrication also continue to be weak; the recession in the aluminum industry
has been a major factor in the woes of the Pacific Northwest.

Construction and Real Estate
Recent declines in mortgage interest rates have spurred increases in
construction in many parts of the District.

In southern Idaho, for example,

residential starts in December were up 75 percent over 1981, and nonresidential construction valuation was up 78 percent over the same period.
The substantial increase in FHA mortgage applications throughout the District
supports the prospect of strong recovery if rates stay down.

In certain

areas, however, an overhang of unsold inventory has blunted the effect of
recent mortgage rate improvements.

This is particularly true of Southern

California where, despite increased sales activity, residential construction
remains depressed and the inventory is dissipating slowly.

Agriculture
Generally, agriculture has been troubled by both weak prices and weatherrelated crop damage.

In Idaho, where agriculture is the major economic

activity, weak cattle prices and a frost-damaged potato crop have caused
widespread difficulty; in the latter case, this is the reverse of the
expectations earlier this year when a bumper potato crop was anticipated.
California, cold and wet weather damaged raisin grape and almond crops.
estimated loss is between $150 and $300 million.

In
The

Lettuce and fruit and nut

tree growers have benefitted, though, as the weather has permitted delayed
harvesting of desert lettuce crops and the cold will increase bud-setting on
the fruit and nut trees.

Financial Institutions
The major developments in the District's financial environment have been
the introduction of the Money Market Deposit Accounts (MMDAs) and the socalled "Super-NOW" accounts.

A special survey by this Reserve Bank finds that

the MMDA has been marketed very aggressively with above-market rates and onetime bonuses.

Estimates of the amount of "new" money attracted to these

instruments varies from 15 percent to almost 50 percent, while estimates of
the effect on the overall cost of funds varies from 25 basis points to more
than 100 basis points.

All respondents agreed, however, that by comparison

with the MMDA, the "Super NOW" account has been much less popular.

Mortgage

rates in the District have fallen considerably and are now in the 12.75 to
13.50 percent range, with the standard fixed-rate 30-year mortgage by far the
most popular instrument in most areas.

