CONFIDENTIAL (FR)

CURRENT ECONOMIC COMMENT BY DISTRICT

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff

March 23, 1983

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY page i
First District - Boston page I-1
Second District - New York page II-1
Third District - Philadelphia page III-1
Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1
Fifth District - Richmond page V-1
Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1
Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1
Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1
Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1
Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1
Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1
Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1

SUMMARY*
[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.]
Overview
District reports are nearly uniform in the suggestion that an
economic recovery began shortly after the first of the year.

In most areas

the recovery is being led, in many cases exclusively, by personal consumption
expenditures and residential real estate sales and construction.

Automobile

sales are generally improved relative to year earlier levels, but are not
consistently sustaining the levels reached in January of this year.
manufacturing sector remains spotty.
improving.
most areas.

The

Housing and auto related industries are

Capital goods, on the other hand, remain severely depressed in
Inventories .are generally characterized as light to moderate but

there is no clear pattern of intentions with respect to changes over the near
term.

Despite the improvement in business activity the employment picture

seems to have improved little, if at all.

Banks and thrifts continued to

experience strong deposit inflows, primarily into MMDAs.

Loan

activity is

essentially flat with modest gains in real estate and consumer lending about
offsetting declines in business loans.
The Manufacturing Sector
Manufacturing activity is mixed both nationally and in most districts.

Generally speaking, consumer, automobile, and housing related

industries are showing marked signs of recovery.

Building materials, in

particular, are buoyant and upward pressures on their prices are developing.

Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco all indicated that their
lumber and forest products industries are strengthening.

Chicago reports

some gypsum plants operating six days a week with output above rated capacity.

In the Boston District, housing activity is boosting production of

roofing materials, building parts, wiring, electrical devices, and appliances .
In the Philadelphia and Richmond Districts the strength in manufacturing activity is more broadly based.

New orders and shipments have

zoomed according to Philadelphia, while in Richmond's area there has been
broad improvement in shipments, orders, and order backlogs.
In other areas developments are less encouraging.

Cleveland notes

little change on balance, although steel orders are responding to increased
auto production.

Mills are operating at 50 percent of capacity as compared

to 30 percent some months ago, and the price of scrap is up sharply.

Indus-

trial production remains depressed in the St. Louis District where several
large plant closings are reported.

Energy related industries also remain

weak, and in Chicago's words, "machine tool order backlogs have evaporated."

Consumer Spending
Consumer spending appears to be strengthening on balance, but the
improvement is spotty, both across districts and across the various segments
of the retail sector.

The relatively robust sales of January have moderated,

in some areas because of extreme weather conditions.
sales also varies from district to district.
apparel, seem to be doing well generally.
consistent.

The composition of

Soft goods, particularly

Activity in durable goods is less

Only Richmond, Atlanta, Dallas, and San Francisco specifically

note strength in big ticket items.

New York, on the other hand, reports that

big ticket items remain weak.
Retailers' inventories are modest to trim over all, but there
appears to be no widespread tendency or intention to add to them.

Atlanta

sees stocks at department stores on the rise, responding to brisk sales.
Boston characterizes inventories as high but satisfactory.
New car sales, although up from recent levels, are still below
expectations.

Nonetheless, they are sufficient to have fostered some opti-

mism and have encouraged production among suppliers, with the notable exception of tire manufacturers.

Construction and Real Estate
The most consistent and widespread source of strength is the residential real estate sector.
areas.

Sales of existing houses are up sharply in most

Construction of new structures is beginning to follow, and informa-

tion on applications for and issuance of building permits suggests further
progress in coming months.

In the Minneapolis metropolitan area, home sales

for the first two months of 1983 were up 34Z from a year earlier, while in
the San Francisco District housing starts are running at twice the level of
the comparable period in 1982.

Kansas City describes the situation there as

a boom in housing starts.
Commercial and industrial construction, however, is pervasively weak
and, in many areas, is slowing.

Only St. Louis specifically notes any

strength in non-residential construction.

Banking and Finance
There has been little tendency to date for loan demand to respond to
the gains in economic activity.

Modest and scattered strength in real estate

and consumer lending is offset by continued weakness in business lending.
Even consumer lending by banks and thrifts does not appear to have matched
the gains in consumption expenditures.

It is conjectured that captive

finance companies may be handling some of the new car financing.

The low

level of business lending is attributed to sounder financial positions rather
than to reduced business activity.
Banks and thrifts are continuing to experience heavy inflows of
funds into MMDAs.

Kansas City suggests that other classes of deposits are

actually declining, but that MMDA growth is so strong that it is holding the
growth of total deposits up. There are indications from several areas that
institutions are coming under increased pressure to find outlets for these
new funds and are therefore becoming somewhat more aggressive in marketing
loans, especially in the retail lines.

Agriculture
Despite some improvement, the farm sector remains troubled.
tion costs are moderating and land prices have stabilized.
conditions are good in the Kansas City District, where
higher prices are also helping livestock producers.

Produc-

Winter wheat

a mild winter and

Bad weather has caused

heavy crop losses and delays in planting in the western part of the country
and is expected to lead to price increases later in the spring.

Heavy

participation is generally expected in the PIK program, which will result in
reduced acreage in some crops and areas.

The Outlook
The outlook is generally positive.
January levels is considered transitory.

The failure of activity to match

Many industries still languishing

are expected to feel the upswing before long.

There is little optimism

regarding the capital goods industries, however.

Further, there is little

expectation of significant gains in the; employment over the near term.

There

is some scattered concern over the potential for higher inflation rates.
Recent rises in non-petroleum industrial prices are seen as omnious in some
quarters.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

For retailers and manufacturers in the First District the recovery
seems to have arrived at last.

Retailers report that sales in the first

months of 1983 were well ahead of year ago levels.
relatively high, but still satisfactory.

Retail inventories are

Manufacturers are not as

optimistic, but most have seen improvements in some facets of their
business.

Demand has picked up for housing-related products in

particular.

Exports are weaker than domestic sales, although several

respondents have become more positive about prospects in Europe.
a major problem area, as is South America.

Canada is

In contrast to the retail

sector, inventories in manufacturing are low.
Retailing
Retail sales in January and February were well ahead of last year,
but quite variable.
satisfactory.

Inventories are said to be relatively high yet

Prices are much more stable than a year ago.

A building goods specialty house closed out the 1982 fiscal year in
January with their strongest quarter in several years.

However, a

snowstorm in mid-February cut year-over-year sales growth from 24 percent
in January to 6 percent in February.

Even sales to contractors, which have

been severely depressed for several years, have picked up in the last
couple of months.
A discount department store chain reported February sales gains in
New England ranging from 30 percent in Vermont to 5 percent in Rhode
Island.

Another department store chain, which has been upgrading its

merchandise, reported strong growth "even in Rhode Island" where the
recession has been most severe; for this firm fiscal year 1982 was the best
year ever in terms of sales and profits.
A mail order supplier of clothing and outdoor equipment reported
January and February sales 10 to 15 percent ahead of last year,
considerably below the year's average growth of 30 to 40 percent.

The

slowdown was due to weakness in sales of outerwear caused by a very mild
winter in the Northeast and poor skiing conditions.

Sales of spring

merchandise in the first part of March were back on budget, about 25
percent above a year ago.
These merchants attributed their recent strength to consumer
optimism about the incipient national recovery, the relative health of the
New England region throughout this recession, and their individual appeal
to customers on price or quality grounds.

Several have adjusted upward

their fiscal 1983 plans and budgets, but this has not involved any net
hiring.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturers contacted think they see evidence of a
recovery.

The evidence is strongest for such housing-related products as

roofing, ready-to-install building parts, wiring, electrical devices and
appliances.

The pickup in other areas is much less vigorous.

While

several firms reported increased demand for automotive products, a major
tire manufacturer has seen no increase yet in orders from the automakers.
The tire-maker is confident that its competitors are in the same position.
Orders have increased slightly for semiconductors and electronic
components, furniture for data processing operations, strip steel,
industrial wiring, some types of machine tools, and corporate aircraft.

Orders remain very depressed for commercial aircraft engines, industrial
tools, and many heavy capital goods.
exports.

Domestic sales are stronger than

However, four firms in four different product areas noted that

the European situation is no longer deteriorating.

Canada, on the other

hand, was reported to be a major problem, as was South America.

Concerns

about Canada have been voiced in previous surveys, but never with such
frequency.
Inventories are said to be in good to very good shape.
respondents plans significant inventory reductions.
about being ready to respond to increased orders.

None of the

A couple are concerned
Two firms noted that

increases in their own sales, industrial wiring and electronic components,
may be attributable to their customers' restocking depleted inventories;
these products usually start to pick up later in the cycle.
Until the recovery is more firmly established, manufacturers are in
no hurry to call back workers.
very large layoff in January.

Among the firms contacted, one reported a
Two others reported that work forces are

continuing to fall through attrition.
to begin hiring later in the year.

However, these same two firms expect

Most firms are meeting increases in

demand by having existing staff work longer hours; in the case of the
machine tool firms, an increase in hours means a return to a more normal
workweek.

In the housing and automotive areas, a few workers are being

brought back.

Almost all the current and planned hires are direct labor;

some of the higher technology firms are also hiring engineers.

No one

plans to increase administrative and clerical personnel.
Professors Eckstein and Houthakker were available for comment this
month.

Eckstein believes that real growth during the first quarter may

have exceeded 6 percent.

With such a strong start, growth during 1983

should exceed 4 percent.
to 5 percent."

"The core rate of inflation is heading downward

With continued good luck "the consumer price index may only

increase 3 percent or less during this year, and wage inflation should
continue to decelerate throughout the year."

Eckstein advises the Fed "to

continue to do absolutely nothing for some months."

"As has been the case

since last October, the Fed should devote much discussion to money
aggregates and their targets, but the federal funds rate should not be
changed."

"It's too early to play the monetarist game for real because

adherence to the targets may produce a 15 percent prime rate this year.
With low inflation, real interest rates are already very high.

The Fed

should wait until the money numbers display some rational link to economic
conditions before resuming its monetarist role."
Houthakker believes that real growth will average about 3 percent
this year.

The outlook for inflation this year and next is very

favorable.

This year, unit labor costs and prices should rise only 1 or 2

percent because of high productivity growth and decelerating wage hikes.
Next year productivity growth will be much slower, but the rate of increase
of labor compensation should be much slower also.

Houthakker has been

content with monetary policy to date, but he is concerned that rapid money
growth should not be allowed to continue without explanation.
is the time to return to money growth targets.

Perhaps now

Houthakker notes that the

deteriorating current account in our balance of payments has not depressed
the dollar dramatically because of strong capital inflows.

A return to

money growth targets will not necessarily entail rising domestic interest
rates because these foreign capital flows will not allow domestic interest
rates to get out of line with yields abroad.

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW YORK

Additional signs of an upturn in the Second District economy have
appeared in recent weeks.

Retail sales continued to exceed year-ago levels in

February and showed signs of further strengthening in early March.

Lower

mortgage rates stimulated a decided pickup in the residential real estate
market and builders anticipate a moderate recovery this spring.
nonresidential sector, the pattern was mixed:
some areas but remained low in others.

In the

leasing of office space grew in

In manufacturing, rising orders

spurred some firms to expand production, although many industries have not
seen any improvement so far.

Business leaders have become more confident that

the recovery is getting underway but are unsure how quickly it will gain
momentum.
Consumer Spending
During February, retail activity continued to equal or surpass
year-ago levels.

Heavy promotional activity continued and helped recoup the

sales lost during a blizzard early in the month.
that sales improved further in early March.
goods such as apparel moved well.

Two of our contacts reported

Consumer electronics and soft

Big-ticket items remained weak overall.

However, one respondent noted strength in home furniture and others observed
increases in installment sales.

Inventories were generally at planned levels,

and one department store had raised its desired stocks in anticipation of
future sales growth.

Other merchants also were hopeful that sales would

strengthen further during the spring, but some expressed concern that renewed
consumer caution would limit any gains.

Construction and Real Estate Activity
A decided pickup in the housing market occurred in recent weeks.
Spurred by lower mortgage rates and a widespread concern that rates could rise
again, potential homebuyers were out looking in sizable numbers.

Thus far,

however, there has been only a modest increase in sales of new and existing
homes.

Residential construction activity appeared to be heading up also.

In

Manhattan plans for two large luxury apartment buildings were announced and
several other sites have been cleared for construction.
builders and suppliers were reported to be very busy.

In suburban areas
Respondents anticipate

further improvement through the spring but they noted that higher lumber costs
could push home prices up.
The nonresidential real estate sector continued to strengthen in much
of the District.

A noticeable improvement occurred in the Manhattan office

market where several major leasing deals were signed in the midtown area.
While no major construction projects have been started in New York City since
the last Redbook, construction on projects begun earlier remained strong and
plans for another large office building were announced.
however, activity was mixed.

In suburban areas,

The office markets in Long Island and

Connecticut were soft while inquiries for space rose significantly in New
Jersey.
Business Activity
Reports from business leaders around the District reinforced the view
that manufacturing activity is beginning to turn up.

A variety of firms

experienced increased orders, and with inventories very low, this renewed
business led to sizable backlogs in some cases.

Companies ranging from

electronics producers to suppliers of auto components expanded production.
Some plants lengthened their workweeks, even to the point of adding overtime.

Employment finally stabilized, with recalls and new hiring at some plants
sufficient to offset the workforce cuts still occurring at others.
Nonetheless, our contacts emphasized that many industries have not yet
benefitted from any pickup.

Manufacturers of chemicals and capital equipment,

for example, were noted still to be operating at very low levels, and our
respondents believed it would be some time before any improvement spread to
these industries.
Outlook
Business leaders are becoming increasingly confident that a recovery
is getting underway.

Their main concern now is that the initial upswing may

be too gradual to generate momentum for the longer run because manufacturers
are reluctant to expand until they are sure the recovery is sustainable.

Our

contacts expect many firms to wait for a substantial accumulation of orders
before committing themselves to rehiring workers, rebuilding inventories, or
investing in new equipment.
Financial Panel
This month we have comments from Donald Riefler (Morgan Guaranty
Trust), Francis Schott (Equitable Life Assurance Society), and Robert Stone
(Irving Trust)
[Asterisk:Their views of course are personal, not institutional.]
Riefler:

The recent firming of interest rates is a normal reaction

to the improving economy.

However, the resurrection of M-l as a policy

concern has raised the level of uncertainty in the market about the future
direction and level of interest rates.

In view of the unusual relationship of

M-l to GNP in the last 12 to 18 months and the virtual impossibility of
predicting with any certainty the impact of "Super Now Accounts" on M-l, the
de-emphasis of this aggregate as a policy guide should be reiterated.

Schott:

There has been a major easing of cash flow at thrifts and

life insurance companies.
readily available.

Funds for medium-term bonds and mortgages are

Lenders are still extremely reluctant to make long-term

fixed-rate commitments.

A clash between Federal deficit financing needs and

rising private credit demand is foreseen, perhaps by early or mid-1984.

It is

feared that either inflation will return or else interest rates escalate
again.

An attack on the structural part of the Federal deficit appears to be

the only way to assure a steady supply of long-term funds for private capital
formation.
Stone:
to do it.

Whatever it is the Fed has been doing, it ought to continue

No reduction in the discount rate seems warranted since recovery is

getting under way without it and since given the concern that some people have
over the aggregates, the reaction could turn out to be perverse.

My own view

of the aggregates is that their significance is still not sufficiently clear
to warrant taking any action to rein them in at a time when the recovery is
still in its early stages.

Should the pace of recovery accelerate, and should

aggregate growth remain high, the Fed may at some point have to take action
that would lead to higher interest rates.
do that now.

But it would be very premature to

Hence I repeat the opening sentence:

doing, it ought to continue to do it.

whatever the Fed has been

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA
Reports from the Third District in March indicate the local economy is
expanding. Manufacturing activity has surged ahead substantially since January. Retail
sales rebounded strongly from a disastrous February snowstorm and are quite strong in
early March. Loan activity at area banks is unchanged but deposit levels are up. In the
real estate market, home sales continue to increase and housing starts are slowly coming
to life.
Third District businessmen predict further recovery for area business over the
next six months. Manufacturing contacts are planning for substantially improved activity
by September. Retailers say sales should stay strong through the summer. Bankers are
forecasting miner gains for consumer lending, but stable demand for business loans.
REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION
The housing market in the Third District has entered the spring buying season
by gaining dramatically since January. Brokers report sales volumes up 30 percent to 90
percent over year-ago figures. Mortgage rates are now in the area of 12.50 percent to
13.50 percent.

Realtors note, however, that it is still tough fcr first time bikers to

qualify for the lower rates, keeping an upper limit on sales activity. While most of the
activity is still in previously owned houses, new homes are finally beginning to sell also.
Prices of new homes have firmed up a bit and, although the stock of unsold units is still
somewhat heavy, Third District builders are slowly starting new construction.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturers responding to the Business Outlook Survey say Third District
industrial activity climbed sharply both this month and in February. A robust recovery
for local industry finally seems to be taking hold. New orders and shipments zoomed
ipward, halting the deterioration of producer backlogs and slowing inventory

decumulation. Employee ranks held steady in March (the first month since September
1981 without a drop), as did the length of the average workweek.
Manufacturing activity is widely expected to pick up steam over the next six
months, pushing the present expansion further along. Area businessmen predict that new
orders will continue to soar between now and September causing a widespread buildup in
producers' backlogs. In addition, survey respondents say that by early fall, stock levels
should have turned the corner and begun growing.

Plans for stepped-up production

include enlarging payrolls, extending working hours and, reflecting renewed confidence,
increasing capital expenditures in the next six months.
Industrial prices are mixed in March. Prices received far final products have
held steady again this month but, after four months of stability, the cost of inputs has
crept upward. A return to higher price inflation as business improves is projected, but
not to the levels observed in the late 70s.
RETAIL
Sales growth at Third District department stores has dipped slightly since the
last Redbook, slowing from its fast start this year. The east coast's "Blizzard of '83"
virtually halted sales for several days in early February, forcing many store closings and
countless transportation problems.

The weather, however, has turned very favorable

since then, ami sales in the last four weeks, aided by larger than expected tax refunds,
have recotped most of the early February losses. Current dollar volume is ahead of last
March by 10 to 12 percent, down from January's huge year-over-year gains but in line
with retailers' forecasts.

Most lines are moving well, with activity centered, as

expected, in apparel and other soft goods.

Merchants are counting cm a buildup in consumer confidence to keep sales
moving through the summer. With the economy rebounding and shoppers' balance sheets
in good order, and likely to improve with more tax refunds and a mid-summer tax cut on
the way, retail contacts project year-over-year gains of about ten percent by
September. Store operators, however, are planning to keep inventories in check at least
until consistent sales growth is obvious. Stock levels are presently very trim.
FINANCE
Third District bankers report little change in loan activity in March.
Commercial loan volume, in line with lenders' plans, is about where it was in January,
ranging from even-with to nine percent ahead of a year ago.

Contacts report some

recent cooling of C&I loan demand, however, as rebuilding area businesses cut down on
distress borrowing. Retail loan activity remains above last March's levels as well, but, in
spite of declining interest rates, consumer caution has kept the demand for loans below
bankers' expectations. Banking contacts are forecasting continued sluggishness in overall
loan demand for at least the next six months.

Unlike retailers, they project a slow

recovery, and expect the demand for business loans to be flat, to addition, consumer
confidence will be slower in developing than previously expected, they contend, providing
only a modest boost for consumer loans by September.
The prime rate at banks in the Third District is currently 10.5 percent, having
dropped 50 basis points since the last Redbook. Interest rates have been firming recently
with ipward pressure coming mainly from worries about the federal deficit and Fed
policies, according to banking contacts. Nevertheless, bankers are predicting the prime
will slide another 50 basis points by the third quarter, but caution that some temporary
upward movement is possible before then.

Deposit growth in the Third District has been substantial over the past six
weeks. Demand deposits are currently running as high as seven percent above year-ago
levels; bankers cite approaching corporate taxes and an increased precautionary demand
for money as contributing to the surprising strength in demand balances. The money
market account continues to attract large amounts of new money and keep time deposit
levels high, as well. Current estimates put time deposits 16 percent to 40 percent ahead
on a year-to-year basis.

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

Forecasters in this District expect a moderate national

recovery with unemployment falling slowly and the inflation rate1 rising by
year-end.

Personal consumption expenditure is improving slowly.

Employment

fell and unemployment rates continue to rise in this District but leading
indicators suggest the bottom is near.
change in activity in March.
substantially this year.

Manufacturers in general expect little

Automobile production is expected to rise

Steel producers had sharp order increases in

February but expect no profits until late this year.

Machine tool orders are

improving but shipments and backlogs are still deteriorating.

Loan demand is

generally flat with a few indications of improvement.
National Outlook.

Economists who attended the Fourth District

Roundtable Meeting on March 11 at this Bank scaled up their forecasts of
economic activity from their October forecasts.

The median of 27 forecasts

now shows a 4.3% annual rate of increase in real GNP this quarter, 2.9%, 4.5%,
and 5.0%, respectively, in the second, third and fourth quarters and 4.3% in
the first half of 1984.

None of the 27 forecasts shows negative figures for

any of the next six quarters.
this year (IVQ to IVQ).

Industrial production is forecast to rise 8.2%

The median forecast shows the implicit price deflator

rising at a rate of 4.6% this quarter, slowing slightly for two quarters, and
then accelerating to 5.6% in the fourth quarter.

The median forecast has the

unemployment rate averaging 10.5% this quarter and falling steadily to 10.0%
in the fourth quarter.
Consumer Spending.
slowly.

Personal consumption expenditure is improving

Spending growth on consumer durables this year is expected to be

retarded by high unemployment, reduced unemployment benefits, and high real
interest rates, but boosted by the rise in stock prices and consumers'
improved ability to service debt.

Car and truck sales are not expected to

rebound as sharply as usual for the first year of a recovery, because sales
incentives provided support during the bottom of the cycle.

Also customers

are reported to be hesitant about purchases because of uncertainty about
changes in gasoline prices.

One automotive industry economist expects sales

incentives to be continued after March 31 only for small cars, because large
cars are selling well.
An economist with a major producer of consumer nondurables reports
nondurable goods expenditures are well on the road to recovery.

The

improvement seems fairly widespread across the major components of nondurable
goods and he expects the first quarter to show a 3% real year-over-year gain
in expenditures, the largest since mid-1981.

He also notes some return by

consumers from generic and lower-priced brands to higher-priced brands.

A

major petroleum company expects very little near-term sales response to the
drop in oil prices.

Expenditures on services in the first quarter will be

held down because of the mild winter's impact on sales of natural gas and
electricity.
District Labor Market Conditions.

Employment fell and unemployment

rates in this District rose again in January but leading indicators suggest
the bottom is near.

Unemployment rates reached 13.2% (nsa) in Wheeling, 17.6%

in Pittsburgh, and 18.1% in Erie.

Twenty of 88 Ohio counties have

unemployment rates that exceed 20% and the state average is 14.9%.

However,

factory employment, particularly in the automotive industry, is rising slowly
and announcements of factory layoffs are less frequent than three months ago.

Leading indicators for Cleveland and Pittsburgh rose in December and January,
indicating that the bottom is near in those SMSAs.
Manufacturing.

Results of the March survey of Fourth District

manufacturers indicate little change in activity from the previous month.
Shipments are expected to rise in March, but backlogs, orders, and inventories
are expected to show little change.

Employment and hours worked are expected

to remain at February's level.
The median of ten automotive industry forecasts at this Bank's
Roundtable Meeting shows domestic production of automobiles rising 28% to 6.5
million units in 1983.

Automobile inventories are reported to be low and,

considering current rates of sales and production, are unlikely to rise
excessively.

Dealer stocks, which fell by 360 thousand units last year, are

expected to increase by 150 thousand units in 1983.
Steel-making firms see some improvement in orders and production but
are unlikely to earn a profit until late this year.

Major steel producers

expect domestic consumption of steel to fall by 1% from last year.

One major

producer notes that since 1948 domestic steel consumption generally has risen
only in years when real GNP growth has exceeded 2.7%.

Nevertheless, major

firms expect industry shipments to rise by 20% and production to rise by 35%
as both users and producers partially reverse their sharp inventory declines
of last year.

However, producers are likely to suffer losses again this year

as transactions prices remain well below published prices and recent labor
concessions reduce costs by only $15 per ton.
Steel firms had sharp increases in orders in February, mainly from the
automotive sector, and expect further increases in March, but order levels
remain low relative to capacity.

Mills currently are operating at about 50%

of capacity versus the 30% low during the 1981-82 recession.

Order backlogs

are rising but producers are cautious about recalling workers and restarting
idled facilities.

The price of steel scrap is reported to be up sharply.

The machine tool industry remains depressed with shipments expected to
deteriorate further in 1983 although orders should turn up.

Order backlogs at

current shipping rates are only five months, the lowest in the post-World War
II period.

Backlogs are low more because of the record length (14 quarters)

of the industry's order downturn than because of its depth (87% decline).

One

firm forecasts no recovery in the industry's shipments in 1983 and only a
small recovery in orders.
A major producer of materials for the construction, automotive, and
general industrial sectors whose output tends to be coincident with the
economy reports sales were up in January but were flat in February, except for
February sales gains in fiberglass for the automotive and construction
industries.
Bank Lending.
strength.

Bank loan demand is generally flat with some pockets of

Business loan demand has been generally flat this year but is

showing some signs of strengthening in March.

One banker reports little

borrowing thus far to rebuild inventories.

Some consumer lending rates have

been lowered a little in the past 30 days.

Some banks note no strength in

demand for new car loans and presume the financing is being done by the
manufacturers' credit companies at incentive rates.

Residential mortgage

lending continues flat, except for strength in Cleveland.

A Cleveland bank

reports some strength in home improvement loans, only part of which is
believed to be a response to unseasonally mild weather.
lending in the District is generally flat.

Other consumer

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview
Most available indicators of economic and business activity in the
Fifth District appear to have turned positive in recent weeks.

At a sample of

manufacturing establishments new orders, shipments, and order backlogs have
all improved.

The residential real estate sector is also beginning to move

with both sales and construction having recently begun to show some vigor.
Modest increases in retail sales and in extensions of consumer installment
credit are also evident.

Labor markets have generally firmed with strength

in manufacturing, construction, and agriculture overcoming the seasonal
weakness in the trade sector.

Prices seem generally to have remained stable.

Expectations have improved dramatically since our last survey.

Manufacturing
There was broad improvement in business activity among District
manufacturers judging from our latest survey.

Orders, order backlogs, and

shipments all rose across a wide range of firms and industries.
very few reports of declining activity.

There were

Inventories were nearly flat as a

slight increase in materials about offset a minor decline in finished goods.
A majority of respondents find current stocks near appropriate levels,
although total responses suggest that, on balance, current stock remain
somewhat above desired levels.
Survey responses further suggest a turnaround in the manufacturing
employment picture over the month.

Both employment and the length of the

average work week rose since the last survey, although more narrowly than
orders and shipments.

Several Richmond and branch directors noted instances

of recalls or increases in new hirings in their respective areas.

Current

plant and equipment capacity remains well in excess of present needs, but
there is little sentiment for changing existing expansion plans.
The strength described above appears to be developing rather
generally across industries.

To the extent that differences exist, primary

metals and machinery and equipment are among the strongest with textiles not
far behind.

Paper producers appear to be among the least affected.

Consumption
The evidence from the consumer side is also positive.

General

merchandise sales have continued to firm and apparently have begun to get
support from big ticket items.

Retailers surveyed report a relative increase

in big ticket item sales and our directors associated with financial institutions have noted an increase in consumer installment loans over the past
few weeks.

Retailers further report inventories little changed and employ-

ment down slightly over the month.

Inventories are essentially in line with

desired levels, however, and the employment decline is largely seasonal.

Real Estate and Housing
Most indications are that in the residential real estate sector
activity is picking up rapidly in many areas of the District.

Sales of

existing houses began improving shortly after year end and, judging from
reports on mortgage credit extensions, that improvement is continuing.

In

addition, reports on construction employment and building permits substantiate these recent gains.

Agriculture
Fifth District farm credit conditions in the fourth quarter of 1982
were highlighted by the continuing decline in interest rates and a further
rise in the availability of loan funds at banks.

Farm loan demand generally

remained soft, and requests for loan renewals and extensions increased.

Farm

loan repayment rates continued at a slow pace, despite a modest improvement
over a year ago.

While liquidity pressures on rural banks eased further,

bankers maintained stiff collateral requirements.

Meanwhile, farmland values

rose slightly but remained well below year-earlier levels.

The Outlook
Perhaps the most noteworthy result of our latest survey concerns the
respondents' expectations.

Respondents in both the retail and manufacturing

sectors are nearly unanimous in the expectation that the level of business
activity will improve over the next six months.

Higher levels of activity

are expected at the national level as well as at the respondents respective
market and establishment levels.

There is apparently some concern within the

business community over the prospect of rising inflation, however.

SIXTH DISTRICT - ATLANTA
Evidence of recovery has become more widespread and consistent since
January, and respondents expect this trend to accelerate in most sectors.

Previously

reported improvements in construction and auto sales are triggering inventory and
employment expansion in related industries. Mortgage rates have resumed a downward
trend after rising earlier this year.

Retail sales growth has tapered somewhat, but

many merchants are expanding inventories in anticipation of a resurgence in consumer
spending. Savings deposits at banks and thrifts continue to expand although less rapidly,
and consumer lending has picked up slightly for the first time in months.

The upturn

in tourism is extending to more areas and markets. Farm lenders are less pessimistic
than when previously polled, even though delinquencies and foreclosures are still
mounting.
Employment and Industry.
manufacturing.

More signs of recovery are appearing in

Local orders for auto parts are rising substantially in response to

increasing auto sales. The upturn in construction is stimulating lumber yards to rebuild
inventories and building materials manufacturers to recall workers. Even heavy industries
are beginning to report increases in orders and expansion plans.

A sharp drop in

Florida's February unemployment rate to the single-digit level strongly signals the end
of recession since Florida's cycle lags that of other states. Oil, petrochemicals, shipping,
and aluminum remain depressed, however. A survey of Louisiana petrochemical plants
reveals no significant change in production levels or capacity utilization, but hope
remains that lower costs for petroleum-based raw materials will boost the industry.
Reduced oil prices should also aid Louisiana's Offshore Oil Port, which is now handling
one-third of break-even volume, but they would adversely affect regional synfuel projects,
such as coal gasification.

Consumer Spending.

Retailers report that the upward trend in consumer

spending is continuing but at a slower rate than in January. They cite atypically mild
weather as the reason that the Southeast fared better than the nation in February. A
poll of regional department store officials indicates that most are building "heavierthan-usual" stocks of apparel and appliances, which are moving well. Ordering for most
other merchandise, however, remains cautious.

Car dealerships report increased floor

traffic this month and reviving demand, although sales at Ford's regional dealerships
fell almost 5 percent last month from year-ago levels.

Because of customers' recent

responses to lower interest rates and falling gasoline prices, dealers are expanding
inventories, particularly of large models carrying high profit margins.
Construction.

A poll of realtors reveals high optimism.

running even with or above February levels.

March sales are

Most respondents expect the progressive

improvements of the past months to continue. A survey of building permit departments
indicates that applications appear to be coming in at a faster rate than last month.
Even more depressed cities, such as Birmingham and Chattanooga, are beginning to
report a quickened pace.

Conventional mortgage rates continue to ease after edging

back up in January and early February.

By mid-March the rate structure in Atlanta

drifted down from early February's range of 12 to 13 5/8 percent, with most lenders
at 13 1/4, to a range of 12 to 13 percent, with most lenders at 12 3/4 percent.
Discount points on FHA and VA loans firmed slightly the second week of March.

As

many as 6 3/4 points are being charged on some mortgages.
Finance.

Total deposits at large commercial banks fell slightly last month

relative to the previous month for the first time since last August.

However, buoyed

by money market deposit accounts (MMDAs), savings deposits at banks and thrifts
continued to grow, albeit more slowly than the 26-36 percent rates prevalent at yearend.

Commercial banks report continued uncertainty about the maturity of assets

against which to match this new instrument.
currently favored.

Investments, particularly treasuries, are

Construction and commercial loans should receive a large portion

of these funds once their stability is determined. Growth in corporate and real estate
loans moderated last month after jumping sharply in January.

Consumer loans grew

slowly for the second successive month after a quarter of decline.
pioneering innovation in financial services.

District banks are

Next month a bankers' bank, offering

correspondent services to 50 independent banks, will begin business in Florida.

Two

southeastern banks have entered a joint venture with two other financial firms and a
major publisher to offer national financial services, including home banking and cash
management, through a videotex system. A Georgia bank will offer banking, insurance,
and travel agency services in three Atlanta supermarkets by May.
Tourism. Although improvements in travel and tourism remain concentrated
geographically, reports of nascent recovery come from a widening arc.

For the first

time in months, business travel has begun to pick up, according to industry representatives
polled.

EPCOT is filling central Florida hotels to capacity, and bookings are "solid"

through Easter. Even south Florida's hotels are experiencing rising occupancies relative
to last year, but international tourism remains off.

A strike by Eastern Airlines,

Miami's largest private employer, would exacerbate the area's woes.

It might also

temporarily reverse the growth in passenger traffic at Atlanta's Hartsfield Airport,
which has finally reported the first monthly increase from year-ago levels since
September 1981.

Only in Tennessee and Louisiana have respondents yet to perceive

harbingers of an upturn. Certain markets, such as family tourism and conventions, also
remain soft.
Agriculture.

A survey of farm lenders reveals a continuing climb in

liquidations and bankruptcies relative to a survey taken last fall and to historical norms.
Nonetheless, only a minor portion of the District's farmers face severe insolvency.

Lenders believe less than 10 percent of farmers are undergoing partial liquidation and
less than 3 percent, complete liquidation.

Only one-fifth of farm lenders surveyed

anticipate worsening farm financial conditions in the coming two quarters, whereas last
autumn a clear majority expected deteriorating conditions.

Produce prices are rising.

Excess rains have caused a temporary shortfall in shipments of vegetables, and two
years of freezes have reduced yields and raised costs for citrus growers.

However,

new duties should prevent foreign producers from making serious inroads into Florida's
orange juice market.
Panel of Economists. Most of the bank, business, and academic economists
polled believe the FOMC's monetary policy is consistent with the goals of recovery
and nonaccelerating inflation, but business economists regard money supply growth as
too rapid for the continued restraint of inflation.

No consensus exists regarding the

optimal monetary aggregate on which to focus attention.

The majority of economists

are more optimistic about the strength of national recovery than they were in January,
and state forecasters have made upward revisions in their predictions of state recovery.
However, most bank economists hold the same views about local recovery as in January.
New signs of regional improvement noticed since our last survey are in the areas of
disinflation, business services, consumer spending, and housings and auto-related industry
and some light manufacturing.

In addition, more respondents see amelioration in

construction and auto sales. Economists expect consumer durables, basic manufacturing,
and migration to begin reviving in the next phase of recovery.

Most panelists see no

signs of rekindling inflation, but a few discern such a trend in housing and building
supplies.

SEVENTH DISTRICT—CHICAGO

Summary.

The economic atmosphere in the Seventh District has

improved substantially since the turn of the year.

This is the first time

such a statement could be made unequivocally since the region's deep problems
became manifest in the spring of 1979.

Virtually all sectors have seen

improvement or at least an end to the declines of the past year and a half.
Orders have increased for building materials, steel, nonferrous metals,
appliances, paper, paperboard, and various components.

Retail sales of

general merchandise have improved moderately and airline traffic is booming
in response to bargain fares.

Order leadtimes have lengthened and wholesale

prices have increased for a broad range of hard and soft goods.
demand for capital equipment remains very slow.

However,

Employment, overall, appears

to have stabilized, but there is little hope for a significant near-term
increase.
Caution Remains.
perspective.

Signs of better times should be kept in

Improved sentiment largely reflects a feeling of relief that

the long decline has halted, and perhaps reversed, without the wholesale
bankruptcies that some had feared.

The entire region remains very depressed.

The view is spreading that the problems of the Midwest are chronic, not just
the result of another "cycle."

Moreover, aside from residential construction

and defense (a minor factor here), much of the improvement since December is
associated with the aftermath of the rapid inventory liquidation of 1982,
especially the fourth quarter.

No general resurgence in final demand is

anticipated in the near future.
Business Confidence.

Various surveys of business sentiment indicate

improvement, but this may reflect more a feeling of relief that "we made it"
through the crises than renewed confidence.

Strength in the stock and bond

markets has permitted many companies to greatly improve their balance sheets,
and ruthless cost cutting has lowered breakeven points.

But debt burdens

remain high and most executives are very hesitant in making commitments.

An

"aversion to risk taking" is evident, to a degree unknown since World War II.
Purchasing Managers' Reports Favorable.

In their February reports,

purchasing managers' associations in Chicago and Milwaukee showed gains in
orders and output for the first time since the spring of 1981.
voluntary inventory liquidation' appeared to have ended.

Also,

However, reports of

declining employment continued to outnumber reports of increases.
the most striking development was a sudden surge in prices paid.

Perhaps
Since early

1982 these reports had shown prices declining on balance, an unprecedented
development since World War II.
Wholesale Prices.

Increases in prices are reported for steel, steel

scrap, aluminum, copper, brass, nickel, silver, gypsum board, cement, lumber,
building hardware, paper, and paperboard.

Only oil products and

petrochemicals have continued to decline.

In many cases, earlier declines in

prices and riecent increases were effected by adjustments of discounts from
list that will not be recognized fully in official indexes.

Fierce price

competition and very short leadtimes have reflected excess capacity and very
low order books.

Inventory policies, geared to immediate availability of

goods and soft prices, are being modified as these conditions are reversed.
Consumer Purchases.

A very large general merchandise chain reports

a modest improvement in demand.

Inventories are somewhat slim.

Retail

prices average only 2.5 percent above the year-earlier level, but may be
firming.

Airline travel in February and early March was at least 10 percent

above the year-earlier level, and at a new seasonally-adjusted high.

The

surge in air travel was encouraged by bargain fares, 12 percent below last
year in February.

Employment.

In January, payroll employment in the district was 9

percent below January 1979.
four years earlier.

Nationally, employment was about the same as

In the same comparison, manufacturing employment was

down 27 percent in the district, about twice the deficit nationally.

It is

unlikely that job markets will improve significantly in the months ahead.
Help-wanted ad volume in Chicago in February and early March was 25 percent
below the year-earlier level, and 60 percent below the I960 base.
in other large district centers are similar.

Conditions

Many employers will attempt to

handle any improvement in business without new hirings.

Severance of newly

hired workers can be costly, especially if government regulators or private
litigation become involved.
Capital Goods.
district remains bleak.

The outlook for capital equipment produced in the
A slight rise in sales of small backhoes used in

homebuilding is the only improvement in the construction equipment sector.
Logging equipment is also up modestly.

If the Caterpillar strike (now almost

six months old) is settled, output of earthmoving equipment and related
components will rise.
been depleted.

Large inventories on hand when the strike began have

Hopes for a revival in farm equipment have been dashed by the

government's acreage reduction programs.
to the levels of the 1930s.
to beat the April 1 tax hike.
evaporated.

Rail equipment demand has dropped

Some orders for trucks and trailers were placed
Machine tool order backlogs have virtually

This industry, described by its leaders as "severely crippled",

is seeking protection from imports.

Contracts for factories, warehouses, and

commercial structures indicate a further decline in nonresidential
construction.
Autos.

Sales of auto this year have not been strong enough to

justify planned production schedules, which may have to be cut back.
However, some analysts point out that a growing share of auto output is

for individual orders.

Orders are not counted in reported sales data until

deliveries are made to customers.
Steel.

Orders for steel have risen sharply since year-end, but only

for lighter products required for autos, appliances, and housing.
structurals and plates remain very weak.

Heavy

Order leadtimes on sheet steel,

near zero in January, are now out three months, a situation that may cause
some users to order still further ahead.
Housing.

The housing upswing has considerable momentum.

Large

district realtors report that transactions for existing homes in January and
February set all-time highs for those months.

Contracts for new residential

construction in January in the Chicago area were almost double the low level
of last year.

Repair and remodel work may be at new peaks.

Some gypsum

plants are operating six-day weeks with output above rated capacity.

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

The economic recovery in the Eighth District^ which began around
the turn of the year, strengthened in February and early March.

Favorable

weather contributed to greater retail sales and robust construction
activity.

Orders for manufactured goods have been rising, and shipments of

goods have been inching up.

Inventories are relatively low, a positive

sign for future production.

Total District employment, however, has

changed little from January levels, and, although the price level has been
increasing only moderately, a few respondents are concerned that the oil
price decline is concealing an ominous rise in other prices.

Expectations

are that sales, production and employment will rise in the spring and early
summer, but capital spending plans have changed little.
Sales at department stores in the District averaged nearly 10
percent more in February and early March than in the corresponding period
in 1982, a gain of about 7 percent after adjusting for merchandise price
increases.

Most merchandise sold well, particularly "large ticket" items.

Weather was exceptionally good for shopping this year, unlike last year
when much of the area was blanketed with deep snow.

Merchants also noted

that some customers had received large tax refunds as a result of
overwithholding after the July tax cut.

Automobile sales in the District,

after rising sharply in January, changed little in February and early
March.

Five dealers reported slight increases in sales, while four

experienced declines.

New and existing homes sold well in February and early March.
More sales of new homes were made in February in the St. Louis area than in
any other month in three years, and sales continued at that pace in early
March, according to the St. Louis Homebuilders' Association.

Favorable

reports also were received from other parts of the District.
Residential and commercial construction in most areas of the
District has been relatively strong.

The average size of new homes has

declined, however, reflecting high prices of construction, high mortgage
rates, and a sharp rise in gas heating prices.

Reflecting the pace of

construction activity, lumber sales in the mid-south region have risen,
causing an increase in the price of standing timber.

Several contractors

voiced concern over costs of materials, noting that since last October
board lumber has gone up 20 percent; brick 9, percent; concrete, 7 percent;
and heating and air conditioning equipment, A percent.
Industrial production in the District remained depressed during
February and early March, and several large operations were closed,
including a tire plant, a foundry, a farm equipment plant and a lead mining
facility.

However, most industrial firms, other than those producing

business equipment and farm machinery, reported increases in new orders and
shipments.

Total District employment changed little, since most output

gains were accomplished by improved productivity, and over two thousand
employees were idled by the plant closings.
rein has been kept on inventories.

Managers claim that a tight

Although shipments from many industrial firms are expanding,
reports from transportation companies still present a mixed picture*
traffic at the Memphis harbor declined in February.

River

District rail and

trucking activity reportedly was little changed for most products, although
an increase was noted in grain and lumber shipments*
It appears that many District farmers will participate in the PIK
(payment-in-kind) program of the government.

Farmers believe it is

favorable for them, and it is expected to reduce inventories of
agricultural commodities significantly.

Prices of most crops, however, are

not expected to rise much above support levels.

The sales outlook for farm

equipment and seed is bleak with the PIK program.
The financial condition of savings and loan associations in the
District is improving, although one large association and several others
have been liquidated since January.

With the new money market deposit

accounts, the associations are able to attract funds, and, with the decline
in interest rates since last summer, the associations are now operating at
a profit or much smaller loss.

Reflecting a substantial inflow of money

market deposits in February and early March, the associations have
increased their liquidity, reduced average rates on money market deposit
accounts from 11 percent to 8.5 percent, made and acquired a greater volume
of mortgage loans, and extended more loan commitments.

A survey of 14

financial institutions indicates that check withdrawals from the money
deposit accounts has averaged less than one a month per account.

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District's recovery continues to gain momentum.

The direc-

tors' reports at our March meeting were unanimously optimistic, probably the
most optimistic in several years.

Our directors do not appear to share some

national analysts' view that the February statistics denote a relapse in the
econongr.

January and February advances in retail, home, and

sales were

manufacturing

stronger than the increases that occurred late last year.

The

recovery has also begun to reach the district's two weakest industries—metal
mining and agriculture.

Seven out of Minnesota's eight taconite plants have

scheduled some production this spring, and the new Payment-in-Kind Program has
engendered some optimism in agriculture.
momentum

if auto

sales hadn't

The recovery would have even more

eased and falling oil prices hadn't

curbed petroleum exploration in the western part of the district.

further
Further-

more, district state governments' struggles to balance their budgets suggest
that

considerable

weakness

started to recuperate.

persists

even

though

the

district

economy

has

Lending remains lackluster at district banks.

Consumer Spending
As noted in previous Redbooks, the district's recovery has been led
by consumer spending.

It continues to strengthen.

The largest retailer in

the Minneapolis-St. Paul area reports a definite pickup in department

store

sales in January and February and indicates that they were in fact better than
expected.

Bank directors also report improving retail sales.

In South Da-

kota, for example, some retailers' sales have recently been up as much as Uo

to 50 percent from a year ago.
tum.

Home sales have also continued to gain momen-

According to the Minneapolis Board of Realtors, January and February

home sales in Minneapolis and its suburbs were up 3^ percent from a year ago
compared with a 16 percent year-to-year gain in the fourth quarter.
In contrast

to

weakened in early 1 9 8 3 .
in their

retail and

home

sales, auto

sales appear to

have

Although several bank directors report that car sales

immediate areas

have

been good, regional

sales managers

for the

nation's two largest automobile manufacturers indicate that sales in January
and February were down from a year earlier
They

view

this

easing

showing considerable

as

temporary,

interest

(after being up in late

however,

because

in purchasing cars.

consumers

1982).

have

been

Early attendance at the

Greater St. Paul and Minneapolis Auto Show in mid-March, for example, was at
record levels.

Industrial Activity
Manufacturing, like consumer spending, has continued to gain momentum.

According to a University

turers, 38 percent

of Minnesota survey of Minnesota

of the respondents

reported

increases

manufac-

in new orders in

February compared with 27 percent reporting increases last November.
the

percentage

of

manufacturers

reporting

increases

rose,

the

While

percentage

reporting declines dropped to 2k percent in February from k6 percent in November.
Much of this pickup in manufacturing has come from the forest products

industries.

The revival

Montana lumber mills

in home construction continues to result

in

stepping up operations and Minnesota waferboard plants

adding

shifts.

One new waferboard plant

in Minnesota, which was completed

last year but never opened, now plans to start operations this spring.

In

addition, a director with the paper industry indicates that Minnesota paper
plants are now operating continuously instead of intermittently as they were
last year.
At our last writing, the recovery
confined to manufacturing.

in industrial activity had been

It is now spreading to metal mining.

Seven out of

Minnesota's eight taconite plants are scheduled to be operating in April.
but one plant had been shut down for extended periods since last spring.

All
Many

of the plants' operations will remain far below historical norms, however, and
their employment levels in April are projected to be down 50 percent from last
April.
While metal mining has started to show signs of reviving, petroleum
exploration has declined.
and North Dakota, down

In February, 6k oil rigs were operating in Montana

from 75 in December and 159 a year ago.

With the

recent oil price declines, the number of active rigs is almost sure to fall
further.

Agricultural Conditions
The district's farm sector has also begun to show the first distant
glimmerings of recovery.

Ag analysts in the district confirm our observation

in the last Redbook that the new Payment-in-Kind
some relief to district farmers.

(PIK) Program should bring

They feel that the worst may be over and

report that farmers are more optimistic about the future than they were prior
to PIK.

Several ag bankers support that contention, stating that land prices

appear to have stopped
increased.

falling and, in a few isolated instances, have even

An economist with a farm supply company also reports that

its

dealers appear less worried about credit problems than several months ago.
The executive secretary of the Retail Farm Equipment Association of Minnesota
and South Dakota states that farmers have started to show more interest in
purchasing

farm equipment.

Attendance at his organization's Northern Farm

Show in January was up considerably from a year ago.

Although these develop-

ments suggest that some relief is in sight, these individuals caution that the
road back to farm prosperity could be "long and bumpy."

State Governments
Despite signs of a strengthening recovery, district state governments
are struggling to obtain funds to maintain public services.

The recent reces-

sion seriously eroded revenues in Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, and South
Dakota, and

these

states

during the next few years.

are

not

anticipating

any

marked

revenue

rebound

In addition, recent declines in oil prices are ex-

pected to reduce state revenues in Montana and North Dakota during the next
biennium by $21+ and $35 million, respectively.
their

next

biennium

budgets,

general tax increases.
10 percent

Minnesota

and

To obtain revenues to fund

North

Dakota

are

resorting

to

In Minnesota, the governor has asked that a temporary

income tax surcharge and a 1 percent

sales tax increase be ex-

tended, and that state property tax relief be reduced.

In North Dakota, the

legislature has alreacty- enacted a 1 percent sales tax increase and is seeking
ways to raise another $150 million.
enact any general tax increases.

Montana and South Dakota have not had to

In

three

district

states,

well-intentioned

economic

programs are being promoted to offset the recession's severity.

development
These initia-

tives will, of course, require funding—and at a time when revenues for basic
public services are already tight in those states.

Minnesota's governor has

proposed a $75 million jobs program for those who have exhausted their unemployment benefits, a $30 million program to weatherize public buildings and
develop

alternative

energy

resources,

a

"New Minnesota

Enterprise Fund" to

finance small businesses, and a series of tax breaks to encourage small businesses to start up and stay in Minnesota.
"Build
trust

Montana"
fund

assistance

to
to

Program that would use 25 percent
assist

local

business,

and

tourist promotion efforts.
center and

has

Montana's governor is pushing a

recently

governments,

build

upgrade

state's

the

of the

highways,
economic

state's

coal tax

increase

capital

development

and

South Dakota hopes to become a financial service

enacted

legislation

allowing outstate bank

holding

companies to charter South Dakota state banks so that they can go into the
insurance business nationally.

Governor Janklow has stated that as many as 30

outstate bank holding companies may be interested in establishing South Dakota
banks for that purpose.

Financial Developments
For several months, our Redbooks have been reporting weak loan demand
and this trend continues.
has

Bank directors indicate that district bank lending

remained weak in early 1983, as it has nationally.

confirmed

ty loans outstanding

at

district

Their comments are

county banks, which were

tially unchanged between early January and early March.

essen-

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS CITY
Overview.

Tenth District business firms anticipate a quickening

recovery in the second half of 1983.

Inventories continue to be trimmed by

most producers, but are satisfactory at the retail level.

Mortgage lending

activity is strengthening and housing starts are increasing.

Winter wheat

conditions are good throughout the District, and livestock prices are
improving.

Loan demand at commercial banks is generally unchanged, while

deposit growth is strong because of the growth in money market deposit
accounts.
Retail Trade.

All respondents report nominal sales gains in the 5 to

10 percent range for January-February 1983 compared to January-February 1982.
Retailers attribute part of the recent gains to the mild winter this year;
they also indicate that sales of apparel have been strong and furniture and
appliance sales have recently improved.

Retail prices are stable and profit

margins are improved throughout the Tenth District.

Inventory levels at

retail outlets appear to be satisfactory as the spring buying season
approaches.

Most retailers expect continued improvement in sales throughout

1983, with gains accelerating in the last half of the year.
Purchasing Agents.

The outlook for manufacturers' input prices over

the next few months is favorable, despite a slight rebound in steel and raw
material prices.

The recently announced increase in the base price of steel

is not expected to stick due to weak demand, as purchasing agents anticipate
continued discounting from base prices.

Input prices overall are expected

to rise 2 to 5 percent in 1983, mainly in the second half of the year.
puts remain accessible and lead times short, with the exception of some

In-

lengthening of lead times for electrical components and lumber.

There is some

concern about input availability should the recovery be stronger than initially
anticipated, especially because of existing low inventory levels.

Yet almost

all firms are still trimming their inventories, and intend to continue to do so.
Housing and Housing Finance.

Homebuilders' associations report a boom

in housing starts with the biggest increases in single-family housing.
of new homes are excellent, with prices generally stable.

Sales

However, lumber

shortages are beginning to appear in some areas, and will probably result in a
gradual price rise for new homes.

Although starts are not expected to main-

tain their January-February pace, 1983 is expected to be a much better year
than 1982.
Savings and loan association officers report very high levels of savings
inflows due primarily to the introduction of the money market deposit account.
Most expect the positive inflow to continue, but at a somewhat slower rate.
Mortgage loan activity appears to be strengthening, with increases in both
applications and commitments.

Long-term fixed-rate mortgages at 12 5/8 to 13

percent are more popular with consumers than adjustable rate mortgages
currently offered at 11 1/4 to 11 3/4 percent.
Agriculture.

Good winter wheat conditions are reported throughout the

Tenth District, but there is little grazing of cattle on wheat pasture.

As

the signup deadline for the 1983 Payment-In-Kind program approached, District
bankers expected a high percentage—more than 50 percent—of farmer participation, although a range of 40 to 90 percent was reported, depending upon the
crop and the area.

Wheat farmer participation is expected to average around

40 percent, while corn farmer participation is expected to average close to

80 percent.

Most farmers in the Tenth District have been able to obtain

credit for their spring financial needs.

Livestock producers are doing

better than last year due to a mild winter and higher prices.

Production

costs for all farmers may decline somewhat in 1983 as a result of lower inflation, declining energy costs, lower interest rates, and acreage cutbacks for
major crops.

However, at least 25 percent of District bankers' farm customers

are experiencing severe financial stress this spring.

Without improved

economic conditions by yearend, District bankers estimate that 2 to 5 percent
of their farm customers may go out of business.
Banking.
from last month.

Tenth District banks report that loan demand is unchanged
Commercial and industrial lending is down slightly while

real estate lending is up slightly.

Although loan quality is generally stable

throughout the Tenth District, a few banks have tightened nonprice terms of
lending due to concern about quality.

The prime lending rate ranges from 10.5

to 12.5 percent with 11 percent the most common rate.

This represents a

decline from last month's rates of 11 to 13 percent with 11.5 percent most
common.

District banks report strong growth in deposits and substantial

shifts in the composition of deposits.

Demand deposits and large CD's are

down sharply from the previous month while conventional NOW accounts, money
market certificates, and small saver certificates are down slightly.
NOW accounts are still being opened, but not in large numbers.

Super-

In contrast,

all of the banks surveyed report significant growth in money market deposit
accounts (MMDA's).

While most of the growth is from depositors shifting out

of other types of accounts, net deposit inflows are a significant source of
MMDA growth.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS

The Eleventh District economy continues
recovery

primarily

from

gains

in

residential

to show some signs of

construction

and

related

sectors.

Weakness in the energy sector, however, is keeping unemployment

high

industrial

and

production

low.

Lending

at commercial banks and

savings and loans increased because of growth in construction loans.

Auto

sales are well above last year's level but below the robust monthly gains
reported in January.

Other retail sales are mixed; some areas are showing

gains in real terms, mainly in spring apparel and big ticket items, but
sales along the energy-dependent Gulf Coast and along the Mexican border
are weak.
The Texas unemployment rate climbed to 8.8 percent in February
from 8.2 percent in January.
industries

overshadowed

Layoffs in oil field equipment and related

gains

in

services

and

construction-related

industries.
Drilling

activity

continued

to

decline

although the rate of decline in early March slowed.

sharply

in

February,

Falling crude prices

on the spot market, uncertainty about an OPEC price agreement, the natural
gas glut, and seasonal factors contributed
rather

than drilling

reserves

from

for new reserves,

bankrupt

firms.

The

to the decline.

larger

recent

In addition,

oil companies

OPEC

agreement

are buying
has

reduced

uncertainty about oil prices, but drilling activity should continue to fall
as adjustments

are made

to

lower

oil

production

is

prices

and

the

excess

supply of

Oil

field

equipment

natural gas.
Manufacturing

production is still declining.

mixed.

Inventories have been greatly reduced, but

at current drilling rates, still exceed a year's supply.

Steel orders from

commercial construction continued down, but orders of flatroll steel for
auto production increased.
production.
wood

Strength in residential construction is pushing up lumber and

production

orders

Refinery production is stable, as is chemical

were

temporary.

as well

up,

as stone, clay, and glass output.

although

Orders

for

manufacturers
aluminum

are

products

capacity has not been brought on line.

concerned
increased

that

Electronics
this may

sharply,

but

be

idled

Producers are concerned that buyers

may be stockpiling before scheduled price increases take effect and labor
contracts expire.
Deposit growth at commercial banks picked up.

Declines in demand

and time deposits were more than offset by gains in MMDAs.
were reduced and are now at or below large CD rates.
now averaging just under $1 billion.
business loans weak.
in the near-term.
previous
modestly.

Rates on MMDAs

Weekly inflows are

Declines in the energy sector kept

Business loan demand is expected to remain sluggish

Real estate lending picked up, mainly from drawdowns on

commitments.

Seasonally-adjusted

consumer

loans

increased

A major bank lowered its credit card rate to 19.5 percent, and

other banks may follow.
At S&Ls, net deposit inflows from MMDAs continued.
for residential mortgages has slacked off recently.

Loan demand

Respondents

suggest

that a slight uptick in mortgage rates may have induced borrowers to wait
for lending rates to turn down again.
is

expected

to

be

strong

construction loans is high.

in

the

But demand for residential mortgages

second

quarter.

Demand

for

interim

Builders are increasing inventories to prepare

for the prime selling season.

Foreclosures have increased, especially in

Houston, but not by enough to cause concern.
New car sales

in February were substantially higher than last

year's but a little below the January

pace.

Dealers

expect a surge in

sales towards the end of March when discount financing plans are scheduled
to end.

Inventories generally are consistent with dealer plans, except in

Houston and San Antonio, where some dealers have an unusually large number
of 82's.

Used car sales picked up in late February and early March from

generally soft levels.
Texas cotton farmers are expected to plant 22 percent fewer acres
in 1983 than in 1982 because of heavy participation in acreage reduction
programs.

As

a

result,

cotton

prices

should

firm

later

this

February cattle marketings were the second highest in three years.

year.
If this

level continues, herds should be reduced enough by late spring to push up
cattle prices and increase profit margins.
Residential
recovery.

construction

is

the

dominant

force

in

Single-family housing starts and sales are booming.

the

Texas

Inventories

of new single-family homes should increase during the next two months as
January starts are completed.
before

beginning

Builders are no longer waiting for a sale

construction.

Multi-family

housing

construction

has

slowed, but still is unseasonally high.
Commercial construction activity is relatively stable.
indicate

that

the pace

of retail

month was even with January's.

and
Retail

office

building

construction

announcements on office building projects are slow.

is

Contacts

construction
strong,

but

last
new

TWELFTH DISTRICT ~

SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District economy appears to have moved out of the depths of
recession and into the early stage of recovery.
construction are leading the upturn.

Consumer spending and residential

Retail sales at department stores and auto

dealerships are improving, while the decline in mortgage interest rates continues to
spur a steady recovery in Western homebuilding and sales activity.

Manufacturing

and mining activity is picking up in a few important industries such as forest
products and nonferrous metals, but most of the region's industries continue to
experience extremely weak demand.

District banks are beginning to more actively

seek consumer loan business as an attractive investment for their large new inflow
of funds into the Money Market Deposit Account.
Consumer Spending
Retail sales appear to have strengthened in January and to have remained stable
in February despite abnormally inclement weather in some areas.

Major department

store chains in Southern California reported "excellent" sales results for both
months, with sales for January up nearly 10 percent from a year earlier and sales in
February recording a 9 percent year-to-year gain.

Even in the Pacific Northwest,

where sales had been extremely depressed, department stores are reporting strong
year-to-year increases.
be improving.

Sales of both nondurable and durable goods are reported to

The upturn in home sales is helping to spur sales of furniture and

other big ticket household items.

Interest rate concessions by automobile

manufacturers, and declining gasoline prices, have stimulated sales of automobiles
and recreational vehicles.

Inventories at retail outlets (non-auto) are very low

and it is evident that some re-stocking will have to take place soon if sales
continue to pick up.

Manufacturing and Mining
While manufacturing and mining activity is still extremely depressed, some
important Twelfth District industries are finally beginning to show some life.

In

the Pacific Northwest lumber industry, orders and prices have been rising in
response to the recovery in national homebuilding activity, enabling numerous mills
to reopen.

The aluminum industry also has reactivated some idle capacity.

In the

Intermountain states—Arizona, Nevada, Utah—some mining facilities also have been
re-opening as a result of some improvement in the demand for copper and other
nonferrous metals.
however.

Layoffs continue in a number of other important industries

In both California and Washington, the aerospace equipment manufacturing

industry has continued to cut back overall employment as growth in defense-related
payrolls has been insufficient to offset continued layoffs in commercial aircraft
and electronic equipment programs.

The move by Atari, Incorporated to move its

manufacturing operations from Northern California to Hong Kong and Taiwan to reduce
costs is indicative of the intense competitive pressures existent in the electronics
industry.

The decline in oil prices is depressing oil drilling activity and

revenues in Alaska and California and causing layoffs at Intermountain coal and
uranium mining sites.
Construction and Real Estate
The drop in mortgage interest rates continues to spur a further recovery in
homebuilding and sales activity.

Housing starts in the West are now running at more

than double the post-World War II low reached a year ago, and permit activity points
to still further gains in the months ahead.

Sales of new homes also are increasing,

but the inventory of unsold homes still remains high in some areas, particularly
Southern California.

Home prices are reported to be rising again.

In contrast,

commercial development and construction activity is clearly slowing, and the
completion of office buildings started earlier has led to a rise in unused office
space.

Agriculture
Rain storms and flooding have seriously damaged the California farm sector this
winter, causing crop losses estimated at around $300 million.
the state's normal winter wheat harvest has been lost.

About 20 percent of

Other important fruit and

vegetable crops such as lettuce, artichokes, asparagus and strawberries have
suffered serious damage, causing some increase in prices.

But the strongest

pressure on prices could come around May and June, because of delays in plantings of
processing tomatoes and an array of other vegetables.

Also, the storm is

threatening the tree fruit and nut crop by preventing pollination of blooming
orchards.

Despite recent price increases, District farmers and ranchers expect 1983

to be another difficult year, with net income showing little, if any, improvement
over 1982's depressed level.

The acreage cutback under the Federal payment-in-kind

program will help stabilize income for producers of grains and cotton, but only
permit them to "survive" for another year.
Financial Institutions
Loan growth at Twelfth District commercial banks remains weak.

Instead of

turning to banks, businesses are taking advantage of improved bond and equity
markets.

Mortgage lending remains weak, as the upturn in housing takes time to

translate into mortgage borrowing.
pickup however.

Consumer lending is showing some signs of a

Captive finance companies providing discount financing on auto

loans, for example, are experiencing a strong demand for credit, which in turn is
helping to boost auto sales.

One large California bank has already started offering

auto loan rates that are competitive with finance company rates.

Other banks appear

ready to more actively promote consumer loans, given their relatively high yield and
the need to invest the sizeable volume of new funds generated by the MMDA's.

With

the continued strong inflow of funds into MMDA's, these accounts now represent
nearly 20 percent of total domestic deposits of District banks.

